Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
North Carolina

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Photos courtesy of the NPS, David Libman, and Drew Getty, unless noted otherwise.

Draft
General Management Plan /
Environmental Impact Statement
April 2013

Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site
North Carolina

Archeological excavation at the earthwork fort (1950)

This page intentionally left blank.

Draft
General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
North Carolina
General management plans are long-term documents that establish and articulate a management
philosophy and framework for decision making and problem solving in the parks. Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site’s last planning effort was completed in 1964, however this Master Plan was
not prepared in conformance with the requirements of the National Parks and Recreation Act of
1978 (PL 95-625) and current management policies and guidelines. Since the 1964 Master Plan, the
boundary of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site has expanded as well as the interpretive mission that
includes peoples and individual’s whose lives and lifestyles span more than 420 years. Guidance is
needed to provide management direction and address issues associated with the national historic
site’s expanded boundary and themes. This general management plan provides management direction
for the park for the next 15 to 20 years.
This document examines three alternatives for managing Fort Raleigh National Historic Site. The
impacts of implementing each of the alternatives are also analyzed. One of the three alternatives
is Alternative A, the “no-action alternative” that reflects park current conditions and management
actions continued into the future. This alternative provides a baseline against which to compare
the other alternatives. The remaining alternatives differ mainly in the level of partnerships, extent
of research, the role of research in interpretation, level of trail development, and number of staff
proposed.
This general management plan / environmental impact statement has been distributed to other
agencies and interested organizations and individuals for their review and comment. The public
comment period for this document will last for 60 days after the Environmental Protection Agency’s
notice of availability has been published in the Federal Register. Readers are encouraged to comment.
Comments on this general management plan / environmental impact statement are welcome and
will be accepted during the 60-day public review and comment period. During the comment period,
comments may be submitted using one of the methods noted below.
Online: It is preferred that readers submit comments online through the park planning website http://
parkplanning.nps.gov/fora. This method will allow comments to be incorporated into the National
Park Service comment system. An electronic public comment form is provided through this website.
Mail:
Superintendent
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
General Management Plan
1401 National Park Drive
Manteo, NC 27954
Or
Hand delivery: Comments can be hand delivered to the public meetings the National Park Service will
hold regarding this general management plan / environmental impact statement. The public meetings
will be announced in the media following the release of this plan. Comments can also be hand
delivered to the above mailing address.
Before including your address, phone number, e-mail address, or other personal identifying
information in your comment, you should be aware that your entire comment—including your
personal identifying information—may be made publicly available at any time. Although you can ask
the National Park Service to withhold your personal identifying information from public review in
your comment, the National Park Service cannot guarantee your request will be granted.

i

This page intentionally left blank.

SUMMARY
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF FORT
RALEIGH NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE

addresses changing issues and conditions,
and incorporates new resource information.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site was
established by Secretarial Order on April
5, 1941, to preserve land declared to be
of national significance as a portion of
the colonial settlement or settlements
established in America by Sir Walter Raleigh
between 1587 and 1591. The national
historic site contains 513 acres that are
unique in the National Park Service (NPS)
system because of the preservation and
interpretation of the history of the first
English attempts at colonization in the
New World (from 1585 to 1587), and the
history of Native Americans, European
Americans and African Americans on
Roanoke Island. The national historic site
also preserves the amphitheater and support
facilities associated with the continuing
production of the nations’ first and longest
running outdoor symphonic drama, The
Lost Colony. The drama is entirely managed
and produced by the Roanoke Island
Historical Association, the NPS’s principal
partner in this continuing endeavor since
the establishment of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site.

Although a general management plan
provides the analysis and justification
for future funding, the plan in no way
guarantees that money will be forthcoming.
Requirements for additional data for legal
compliance and competing national park
priorities can delay implementation of
actions. Full implementation of a plan could
lie many years in the future.
MANAGEMENT ZONES
Management zones and prescriptions
indicate how different areas of the national
historic site would be managed. The
following four management zones were
created for the national historic site: Visitor
Services Zone, Administrative Zone,
Waterside Theatre Zone, and Resource
Preservation Zone. The Visitor Services
Zone includes areas where visitors are
introduced to the national historic site, and
receive information about its resources,
interpretive programming, and possible
activities. The Administrative Zone houses
administrative facilities such as maintenance
facilities; administrative offices; national
historic site staff housing; artifact research,
treatment, and storage facilities; and partner
offices and facilities. The Waterside Theatre
Zone includes the Waterside Theatre and
other facilities that accommodate and
support The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic
drama. The Resource Preservation
Zone is focused on the preservation and
protection of cultural resources and artifacts
discovered. Natural resources would
continue to be protected in accordance with
laws and policies.

PURPOSE OF THE GENERAL
MANAGEMENT PLAN /
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
STATEMENT
The National Parks and Recreation Act
of 1978 and NPS policy mandate the
development of general management
plan for each unit of the national park
system with the intention of establishing
future management direction. This general
management plan provides comprehensive
guidance for perpetuating natural systems,
preserving cultural resources, and providing
opportunities for quality visitor experiences
at Fort Raleigh National Historic Site. This
plan establishes the management framework
and direction for the national historic site,

ALTERNATIVES
The NPS developed all alternatives with
substantial public, interagency, and NPS
staff participation. Three alternatives have
been developed for managing visitor use and
iii

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

resources at Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site. Each alternative provides a different
management approach. The alternatives
were based on the park’s purpose and
significance, legal mandates, public views,
and information on visitor use and park
resources. The alternatives are: Alternative
A – the No-action Alternative, Alternative
B, and Alternative C (NPS Preferred
Alternative).

plan and environmental assessment
that is an element of all alternatives.
•

ACTIONS COMMON
TO ALL ALTERNATIVES

ALTERNATIVE A: NO-ACTION /
CONTINUE CURRENT MANAGEMENT

Several actions would be proposed under
all alternatives. These actions common to
all alternatives are as follows (see chapter 2
for additional information regarding these
actions):
•

New exhibits for the recently
repaired and renovated Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center would be
designed and installed.

•

The Prince and Beehive houses,
currently threatened by shoreline
erosion and no longer viable for
occupancy, would be removed from
the national historic site.

•

The national historic site has
proposed to prepare a shoreline
erosion management plan and
environmental impact statement to
present alternatives for addressing
shoreline conditions at the national
historic site, including lands and
facilities.

•

Catastrophic loss is defined by the
NPS as loss of resources or facilities
due to storms, floods, earthquakes,
fires, or other disasters of natural
or man-made origin. Ongoing
shoreline erosion is not considered
a catastrophic event. Resource
management decisions due to
shoreline erosion would be deferred
to the shoreline erosion management

Should shoreline erosion threaten
the integrity of the Dough Cemetery,
the NPS would initiate relocation
of the cemetery with prior approval
from the Dough family. Although
the Dough Cemetery is currently
protected by a rock revetment and a
shoreline erosion management plan
is proposed, relocation of the Dough
Cemetery may still be necessary.

Concept
Sections 1502.14 and 1508.25 of the
Council on Environmental Quality (1978)
regulations for implementing the National
Environmental Policy Act require that an
alternative of no-action be included in all
environmental evaluations. Accordingly,
the NPS developed a no-action alternative,
designated Alternative A. Alternative A is the
continuation of current management actions
and direction into the future; continuing
with the present course of action until that
action is changed. “No-action” does not
mean the national historic site does nothing.
Rather, Alternative A represents how
the national historic site would continue
to manage natural resources, cultural
resources, and visitor use and experience
if a new general management plan was not
approved and implemented.
Visitor Experience
The NPS would continue to centralize
orientation to the national historic site
at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages
and modestly expanded interpretive
themes would continue to occur through
films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad exhibits, through
wayside exhibits, and other methods.
iv

Summary

Facilities and Associated Visitor Activities
Under Alternative A, no new facilities would
be constructed by Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site or within the national historic
site boundary. The national historic site
would continue maintaining and operating
the current trail system.
Expanded Interpretive Mission
The national historic site would continue
to interpret the Roanoke Voyages and there
would be limited opportunities to address
expanded interpretive themes through
films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad exhibits, through
wayside exhibits, and other methods. The
small interpretive staff dedicated to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site would limit
increased interpretive activities. There
is currently one full-time permanent
interpreter, supplemented by seasonal staff
(NPS 2010a). Existing needs for interpretive
activities include staffing the visitor center,
presenting programs, conducting school
tours, presenting education programs in
local and area schools, roving the national
historic site, developing interpretive
products, and researching the history
and resources of the national historic
site. Visitors have expressed the desire to
see ranger-led programming expanded,
however this would not likely occur given
existing staffing levels.
Partnerships

•

Maintain existing landscaped areas
or convert them to low maintenance
plantings.

•

Allow natural processes such as
shoreline erosion to prevail in most
areas, including the pond area.
Excavate archeological resources
that are threatened.

•

Continue to protect the Waterside
Theatre area and Dough Cemetery
shorelines pending results of future
shoreline studies and environmental
analysis.

•

Implement the Outer Banks Group
Fire Management Plan.

•

Continue current resource
collections management efforts.

•

Continue current exotic plant
management practices.

•

Continue to conduct archeological
surveys in compliance with Section
110 of the National Historic
Preservation Act and the research
requirement of Public Law 101603. The NPS would continue to
coordinate with the First Colony
Foundation for on-going annual
surveying.

•

Continue natural resource
monitoring activities.

Response to Catastrophic Loss

The national historic site would maintain
existing partnerships with the Roanoke
Island Historical Association and the First
Colony Foundation. Expansion of existing
partnerships or development of new
partnerships would not likely occur.

Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS as
loss of resources or facilities due to storms,
floods, earthquakes, fires, or other disasters
of natural or man-made origin. Under
Alternative A, the NPS would continue
current management practices. Natural
processes would take precedence. However,
resource management decisions due to
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental assessment that is an element
of all alternatives.

Resource Conditions
Under Alternative A, the national historic
site would:

v

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Estimated Costs and Staffing

•

Emphasize a greater reliance
(than under current conditions)
on partnerships, cooperative
agreements, and on-site visitor
facilities and services to accomplish
interpretation of the Roanoke
Voyages. NPS interpretive focus
would be on the national historic
site’s other stories (Carolina
Algonquians, Civil War, Freedmen’s
Colony, Fessenden experiments).

•

Provide orientation to the national
historic site.

•

Evaluate the feasibility of an
expanded campus (new Roanoke
Island Historical Association
[partner]-funded visitor center/
indoor theater could be built near
the current NPS visitor center) for
partner-funded interpretation of
the Roanoke Voyages and The Lost
Colony outdoor symphonic drama.

•

The NPS would also address
compliance requirements for
ground disturbing projects such as
trails work, vegetation plantings,
expansion of parking at headquarters
(eight spaces), outdoor seating area,
signage and waysides, and removal of
the Prince and Beehive houses.

Costs identified are for comparative
purposes. The costs to implement
Alternative A would not differ from the
current annual costs for Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, with adjustments
for inflation. The estimates are presented in
year 2011 dollars, rounded to the nearest
hundred dollars, and include:
•

•

$871,900 annually for operations and
maintenance; and
$176,500 for one-time facility costs
(removal of Prince and Beehive
houses).

The total number of full-time equivalent
staff would remain relatively constant
at 4.95. The national historic site would
continue to share staff with Cape Hatteras
National Seashore and the Wright Brothers
National Memorial. Therefore, the number
of staff is not a whole number. Staff would
continue to include full-time and seasonal
interpretive and maintenance staff and law
enforcement rangers. NPS volunteers would
continue to provide important services at a
negligible cost.
ALTERNATIVE B
Concept

Many of the features of Alternative B would
be the same as those already described
for Alternative A. To reduce redundancy,
references will be made to features in
Alternative A and detailed descriptions
will be provided only for new or different
elements proposed for Alternative B.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
greatly expand the scope of its partnerships
through greater partner involvement in
interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages.
Use of a revised cooperative agreement or
other appropriate contract or mechanism
would permit the partner to take on this
responsibility. NPS staff would interpret
other national historic site stories. By
coordinating and expanding efforts among
The Elizabethan Gardens, Roanoke Island
Historical Association, and the NPS, visitors
would be inspired to spend more time in the
national historic site. Under Alternative B,
the national historic site would:

Visitor Experience
All the studies and planning efforts to
provide better access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be
the same as described in Alternative A. In
addition, under Alternative B the national
historic site would:

vi

Summary
•

Expand personal interpretive service
program efforts.

•

Inspire visitors to spend more
time on-site through expanded
interpretive efforts, facilities,
partnering, marketing, and
availability of food service (drinks
and snacks) at the national historic
site.

•

Evaluate the feasibility of an
expanded campus (new Roanoke
Island Historical Association
[partner]-funded visitor center/
indoor theater could be built near
the current NPS visitor center) for
partner-funded interpretation of
the Roanoke Voyages and The Lost
Colony outdoor symphonic drama.

•

Provide more emphasis on theatrical
skills classes through enhanced
partnerships and partner-funded
facilities.

•

Natural processes would take
precedence; however, the NPS
would take measures to protect
sensitive resources such as Dough
Cemetery and Waterside Theatre.

•

Establishment of a small outdoor
seating area to provide interpretive
programming near the reconstructed
earthworks.

•

An NPS partner would fund and
conduct a feasibility study and
assessment of a range of alternatives
for the design and construction of a
partner-funded and operated visitor
center annex. This annex would
be in proximity to the existing Fort
Raleigh visitor center and would
provide additional program space,
including, for example, exhibit
space, restrooms, offices, storage,
multipurpose rooms, and an indoor
theater.

Trails. Under Alternative B the national
historic site would extend the Roanoke
Island multi-use trail (“Bike Path”) into
the national historic site all the way to
The Elizabethan Gardens, the Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center, and to the Waterside
Theatre parking area. A trail would be
established parallel to the Freedom Trail or
a new trail would be established along the
entrance road that would complete the loop
between the Freedom Trail and Highway
64. Interpretive signage would be provided
and circulation patterns on trails would be
clarified.

Management Zoning, Facilities,
and Associated Visitor Activities
Under Alternative B, the maintenance
facility, employee residences, water
treatment plant, The Lost Colony
administration building, and national
historic site headquarters would be
designated as part of the Administrative
Zone. The Waterside Theatre and support
buildings, ticket booth, and theater parking
would fall within the Waterside Theatre
Zone. The picnic area, national historic site
entrance, Freedmen’s Colony Monument,
restrooms, Virginia Dare Monument,
Earthwork Fort, Freedom Trail trailhead,
and visitor center would all fall within the
Visitor Services Zone. The remainder of the
national historic site, including the Thomas
Hariot Nature Trail, would fall within the
Resource Preservation Zone.

Lindsay Warren Visitor Center. Under
Alternative B, the national historic site
would continue to maintain and staff the
Lindsay Warren Visitor Center; however,
the interpretive focus of that facility would
change. Instead of interpreting the full
array of the park’s themes, the NPS Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center would interpret the
Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s Colony,
Civil War, and Fessenden radio experiments.
The interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages

In addition, Alternative B would include the
following:

vii

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

themes would be done by a partner in a new
partner-constructed and operated annex
facility. The NPS partner would be required
to fund and conduct a feasibility study for
this new facility.

in order to minimize or screen the
view of vehicles from visitors as they
experience the nearby earthworks.
•

Expanded Interpretive Mission
Under Alternative B the national historic site
would:
•

Rely more upon Roanoke Island
Historical Association to tell the
story of the Roanoke Voyages. The
NPS would interpret other national
historic site stories, including
Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s
Colony, Civil War, and Fessenden
radio experiments.

•

Provide self-guided interpretive
opportunities using existing trails.

•

Explore the use of the NPS Artsin-Parks program. This program
is offered in various parks across
the country and invites visitors to
experience the wonder of the park in
combination with the wonder of the
arts.

Response to Catastrophic Loss
Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS
as loss of resources or facilities due to
storms, floods, earthquakes, fires, or other
disasters of natural or man-made origin.
Under Alternative B, the NPS would rebuild
and protect existing facilities in place
unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted
otherwise. However, resource management
decisions due to shoreline erosion would
be deferred to the shoreline erosion
management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all
alternatives.

Partnerships
Under Alternative B the national historic
site would maintain and enhance existing
partnerships and expand partnerships
for interpretive and theatrical education
purposes.

Estimated Costs and Staffing

Resource Conditions

The estimated costs to fully implement
Alternative B provide a relative sense of
the resources necessary to implement this
alternative. The cost estimate is in year 2011
dollars and each item has been rounded to
the nearest hundred dollars. The estimated
annual operating costs would be $1,312,300.
Staff costs would increase to address the
salary of 3.35 additional full-time equivalent
staff positions (for a total of 8.3 full-time
equivalent staff positions). Because these
positions would continue to be shared with

Many elements of resource conditions
would be the same as those described in
Alternative A. In addition to those described
under Alternative A, Alternative B would
include the following:
•

Conduct one additional
archeological investigation and data
recovery between Pear Pad Road
and the Heritage Point subdivision.
This area has not been investigated
to the extent that other areas of the
national historic site have and it has
the potential to yield information
about island historical themes apart
from the Roanoke voyages and the
Lost Colony. These themes include
the Native American culture, the
Antebellum period, the Civil War, the
Freedmen’s Colony, and the Works
Progress Administration camp.

Establish vegetative screening along
the road to the Waterside Theatre

viii

Summary

National Historic Site. Alternative C would
emphasize Section 3 of Public Law 101603 which states that the “Secretary, in
consultation with scholarly and other
historic organizations, shall undertake
research on the history and archeology of
the national historic site, and the associated
peoples and events.” The national historic
site would accomplish this by increasing
emphasis on research related to interpretive
themes and legislative mandates. By
coordinating and expanding efforts with
research organizations and agencies,
visitors would benefit by gaining increased
knowledge of the national historic site
and its multiple themes, both cultural and
natural. Under Alternative C, the national
historic site would:

Cape Hatteras National Seashore and the
Wright Brothers National Memorial they
represent a percentage of staff time at the
national historic site and are therefore not
a whole number. Additional staff would
include interpretive and maintenance staff,
and law enforcement rangers.
One-time NPS facility costs would be
approximately $931,300. This would include
the following:
•

Install new wayside exhibits in the
vicinity of the visitor center;

•

Install native vegetation plantings
to screen the maintenance area and
headquarters area;

•

Expand the parking at headquarters
(eight spaces);

•

Extend the bike trail from Highway
64 to Waterside Theatre and The
Elizabethan Gardens;

•

Modify the existing trail system to
make it accessible;

•

Establish an outdoor seating area
near the reconstructed earthworks;

•

Add signs and waysides for the trail
system north of Highway 64; and

•

Remove the Prince and Beehive
houses due to extreme shoreline
erosion.

•

Enhance its partnership with the
First Colony Foundation, a North
Carolina 501(c) (3) non-profit
organization dedicated to conducting
archeological and historical research,
combined with public education
and interpretation. The First Colony
Foundation is focused on research
and education relating to the story
of North Carolina and America’s
beginnings with the attempts by Sir
Walter Raleigh to establish English
colonies at Roanoke Island in the
1580s under his charter from Queen
Elizabeth I (First Colony Foundation
website 2011).

•

One-time, non-facility costs would include
one archeological investigation and data
recovery between Pear Pad Road and the
Heritage Point subdivision.

Establish partnerships with
organizations that focus on natural
and cultural resource topics.

•

Include archeology as a significant
aspect of the research program at the
national historic site.

ALTERNATIVE C
(NPS PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE)

•

Maintain the current visitor center
as the primary visitor orientation
facility.

•

Implement NPS researcher-in-thepark program.

Concept
Public Law 101-603, November 16, 1990
broadened the interpretive and resource
preservation purpose of Fort Raleigh
ix

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

Promote increased research use of
collections at the Museum Resource
Center.

•

Increase research efforts with regard
to the effects of climate change on
natural and cultural resources in the
national historic site.

treatment plant, The Lost Colony outdoor
symphonic production area, and national
historic site headquarters would be
designated in the Administrative Zone. The
Waterside Theatre and support buildings,
ticket booth, access roads, and theater
parking would be designated within the
Waterside Theatre Zone. The picnic area,
national historic site entrance, Freedmen’s
Colony Monument, restrooms, Freedom
Trail trailhead, and visitor center would
all fall within the Visitor Services Zone.
The remainder of the national historic site,
including the Thomas Hariot Nature Trail,
would be designated as part of the Resource
Preservation Zone.

Many of the features of Alternative C would
be the same as those already described for
Alternative A or Alternative B. To reduce
redundancy, references will be made to
features in those alternatives and detailed
descriptions will be provided only for new
or different elements in Alternative C.
Visitor Experience

Measures proposed to address shoreline
issues would be the same as described for
Alternative B. A small outdoor seating area
would be established to provide interpretive
programming near the reconstructed
earthworks as described in Alternative B.

All the studies and planning efforts to
provide better access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be
the same as described in Alternative A. In
addition, under Alternative C the national
historic site would:
•

Continue to centralize orientation
and exposure to the national historic
site’s expanded interpretive mission
in the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.

•

Provide opportunities for visitors to
interact in positive and meaningful
ways with archeologists, historians,
and researchers on-site.

•

Encourage visitors to experience
outlying resources of the site
independently through more formal
interpretive trails with themed areas.

•

•

Trails. Under Alternative C the national
historic site would determine the design,
route, and other features of an improved
loop trail in subsequent implementation
planning and analysis. As under Alternative
B, the national historic site would establish
a parallel trail to the Freedom Trail or
establish a new trail along the entrance road
that would complete the loop between the
Freedom Trail and Highway 64. Interpretive
signage would be improved and circulation
patterns on national historic site trails would
be clarified.
Lindsay Warren Visitor Center. Under
Alternative C the national historic site
would:

Enhance the visitor experience by
participating in partner programs
that offer interpretive programs at
other off-site locations on Roanoke
Island.
Management Zoning, Facilities, and
Associated Visitor Activities

Under Alternative C, the maintenance
facility, employee residences, water
x

•

Maintain the Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center as the primary orientation
and interpretation center of the
national historic site.

•

Upgrade or replace exhibits and
film(s), as funding allows, to
accommodate the national historic
site’s expanded interpretive themes.

Summary

Long-Range Interpretive Plan (NPS
2010a), which includes, among other
recommendations:

Expanded Interpretive Mission
The interpretive staff dedicated to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site would be
increased by 0.9 full-time equivalent staff
members that would allow for increased
interpretive activities. In addition, a full-time
historian would be hired to address research
needs. Existing needs for interpretive
activities include staffing the visitor center,
presenting programs, conducting school
tours, presenting education programs in
local and area schools, roving the national
historic site, developing interpretive
products, and researching the history and
resources of the national historic site.
Visitors have expressed the desire to see
ranger-led programming be expanded,
and this would be possible with expanded
staffing levels.
Under Alternative C the NPS would:
•

Expand upon partnerships
with other organizations and
agencies (such as the First Colony
Foundation, Roanoke Island Festival
Park, and North Carolina Maritime
Museum) to tell the various stories of
the area.

•

Use the results of expanded research
to enhance interpretive programs
and media on all national historic site
interpretive themes, both natural and
cultural.

•

Implement the NPS researcher-inthe park program.

•

Establish on-going archeological
excavations with partner
organizations.

Partnerships
Under Alternative C the national historic site
would:
•

Implement recommendations of the
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
xi

o

Improve partnership communication through regular
communications meetings;

o

Work more closely with the
Roanoke Island Historical Association to integrate
interpretive programming
throughout the site;

o

Work more closely with The
Elizabethan Gardens to integrate interpretive programming and educational efforts
on mutually suitable topics
such as native plants and
ecosystems;

o

Continue hosting the First
Colony Foundation for archeological research within
the national historic site and
exploring safe and appropriate ways to interpret these
activities for visitors; and

o

Establish regular communication between Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site and
Roanoke Island Festival Park
in advance of their seasonal
programming schedules to
share ideas for improving the
overall visitor experience on
Roanoke Island.

•

Expand partnerships with other
historical and tourism-oriented
organizations on Roanoke Island.

•

Continue and enhance the
partnership with the First Colony
Foundation, and others, for
interpretive, archival, and research
purposes.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

Response to Catastrophic Loss

Develop new partnerships with
research organizations, such as
the University of North Carolina
Coastal Studies Institute, that could
provide research efforts on other
national historic site cultural and
natural topics (beyond the Roanoke
Voyages).

Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS
as loss of resources or facilities due to
storms, floods, earthquakes, fires, or other
disasters of natural or man-made origin.
Under Alternative C, the NPS would rebuild
and protect existing facilities in place
unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted
otherwise. However, resource management
decisions due to shoreline erosion would
be deferred to the shoreline erosion
management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all
alternatives.

Resource Conditions
Many elements of resource conditions
would be the same as those described
for Alternative A. In addition to those
described under Alternative A, Alternative
C would reduce heavily landscaped and
maintained areas. The national historic site
would restore these areas back to more
natural conditions or convert them to low
maintenance plantings.

Estimated Costs and Staffing
The estimated costs to fully implement
Alternative C provide a relative sense of
the resources necessary to implement
this alternative. The cost estimate is in
year 2011 dollars and each item has been
rounded to the nearest hundred dollars.
Annual operating costs for Alternative C
are estimated to be $1,222,500. Operation
and maintenance costs would increase
compared to Alternative A because of the
need to maintain new facilities. Annual staff
costs would increase by the salary of 2.98
full-time equivalent staff positions. Because
these positions would continue to be shared
with Cape Hatteras National Seashore and
the Wright Brothers National Memorial
they represent a percentage of staff time at
the national historic site and are therefore
not a whole number. Additional staff would
include a new interpretive national historic
site guide, maintenance supervisor, law
enforcement ranger, and a historian.

Additional annual archeological
investigations and data recovery would
be conducted in the following locations:
between the Elizabethan Gardens and the
Dough Cemetery; between the Thomas
Hariot trail and the Elizabethan Gardens;
and at the Works Progress Administration
camp. These areas have been investigated
the least over the years and have the
potential to yield information about island
historical themes apart from the Roanoke
voyages and the Lost Colony. These themes
include the Native American culture, the
Antebellum period, the Civil War, the
Freedmen’s Colony, and the Works Progress
Administration camp. The national historic
site would partner with other organizations
to increase investigations, treatment, and
conservation of cultural resources.
Under Alternative C, the NPS would also
address compliance requirements for
ground disturbing projects such as trails
work, vegetation plantings, expansion of
parking at headquarters (eight spaces),
outdoor seating area, signage and waysides,
and removal of the Prince and Beehive
houses.

Other annual costs would include an annual
archeological survey in response to the
legislative mandate of Public Law 101-603
to undertake research on the history and
archeology of the national historic site. Over
time, some of this research may be funded
by various partner organizations. These
additional annual archeological surveys will
be focused on the following areas:
xii

Summary
•

Between the Elizabethan Garden and
the Dough Cemetery,

•

Between the Thomas Hariot Trail
and the Elizabethan Garden, and

•

At the Works Progress
Administration camp.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
The process of determining environmental
consequences included identifying the
regulations and policies applicable to each
impact topic, and then defining the methods
to conduct the analysis. Impact thresholds
for each impact topic are defined in terms
of negligible, minor, moderate and major;
and whether they would be short-term,
long-term or permanent, and adverse or
beneficial effects. Cumulative effects were
also assessed. The impact analysis compared
future conditions under potential new
types of management practices (action
alternatives) to future conditions that would
occur if current management practices were
to continue unchanged (Alternative A, Noaction). Climate change and weather related
conditions are addressed as part of the
affected environment.

The NPS would continue to coordinate
with the First Colony Foundation for ongoing annual surveying. The NPS would
seek other sources of funding including
grants, partners, and other sources to help
defray costs such as additional resource
investigations, research, and outreach
efforts.
One-time facility costs would include:
•

New exhibits in the vicinity of the
visitor center;

•

Native plantings to screen the
maintenance and headquarters areas;

•

Expansion of parking at
headquarters (eight spaces);

•

Modification of the existing trail
system north of Highway 64 with a
native surface;

•

Establishment of an outdoor
seating area near the reconstructed
earthworks;

•

Installation of additional signs and
waysides for the trail system north of
Highway 64; and

•

Removal of the Prince house and
the Beehive house due to extreme
shoreline erosion.

When compared to Alternative A, action
Alternatives B and C provide enhanced
protective measures by establishing
management zones, enhanced visitor
services and interpretation, opportunity for
limited new recreational and interpretive
trails, and increased partnering efforts that
would provide beneficial effects.
The following is a summary of impacts.
Future actions/ projects are subject
to compliance with the National
Environmental Policy Act, the National
Historic Preservation Act and other
appropriate laws and regulations. Future
project environmental reviews will be site
specific and address natural and cultural
resources, visitor experiences, and park
operations.
Impacts of Alternative A:
Although the Waterside Theatre area
and Dough Cemetery shorelines would
continue to be protected under Alternative
A, the overall impacts of Alternative A on
floodplains would result in long-term,

At this time, there are no anticipated nonfacility costs under Alternative C.

xiii

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

negligible, and adverse effects by allowing
natural processes such as shoreline erosion
to prevail in most areas, altering shoreline
and floodplain functions. Under Alternative
A, wetlands would benefit over the longterm due to protection as well as through
the development of the Outer Banks Group
shoreline erosion management plan and a
technical assistance request made through
the Natural Resource Program Center that
would both provide direction for future
wetland management. Continuation of
existing national historic site management
practices would benefit federally and state
listed species of concern over the long- and
short-term.

historic site management actions would
result in long-term beneficial impacts.
Under Alternative A, there would be longterm beneficial impacts to ethnographic
resources, the cultural landscape, and
museum collections. Under an approved
and funded project included in all
alternatives, new exhibits would be designed
and installed at the visitor center. These
exhibits and enhanced interpretation would
serve to strengthen associations of people to
ancestors connected to events and historical
eras. Furthermore, these improvements to
the display and interpretation of museum
collections would help ensure the “wellbeing” and long-term preservation of data
and archival materials while improving
the usefulness of the collection. An
ethnographic overview and assessment
would be completed to formally identify
and document the ethnographic resources
associated with the national historic site,
resulting in long-term, beneficial effects
associated with increased knowledge
concerning these resources. Possible
targeted shoreline erosion control measures
to protect Dough Cemetery and, possibly,
invasive species control measures would
benefit the cultural landscape.

Impacts of Alternative A on vegetation
communities would be both long-term
beneficial and long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, and adverse. Vegetation
resources would benefit from development
and implementation of management
plans which would improve management
efforts of the Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest
Significant Natural Heritage Area and other
natural communities. Invasive plant control
measures would also continue. However,
visitor-created trails and trampling of
vegetation are likely to occur near points
of interest, though these impacts would
be minimal and localized. Demolition of
the Prince and Beehive houses may cause
temporary adverse impacts to surrounding
vegetation, however these impacts would be
largely reduced as these areas are returned
over time to a more natural state.

Historic structures would be impacted in
both long-term, beneficial and permanent,
negligible, adverse ways. Historic structures
would generally remain as they exist now,
undergoing routine maintenance (to
arrest deterioration) with no substantial
impact to their historic fabric, integrity, or
character-defining features which would
be a benefit. However, historic structures
would be adversely affected by typical
effects of aging and natural processes,
and occasional disturbance from visitor
use at the reconstructed earthworks.
Past, on-going, and future NPS cultural
resource management plans, the long-range
interpretive plan, and other management
plans for the Outer Banks Group and for
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
continue to benefit historic structures by
providing park staff with the framework and

With continuance of existing management
practices into the future, two primary
factors—human actions and natural
processes—would contribute to permanent,
negligible to minor adverse effects on
the national historic site’s archeological
resources from loss of data and sites or
diminished site integrity. Adverse effects
would be permanent because cultural
resources are nonrenewable, and once
damaged or lost, cannot be restored.
Meanwhile, visitor education and national

xiv

Summary

maintenance, and enforcement to ultimately
reduce visitor impacts on vegetation and
natural communities.

guidance necessary to ensure continued,
proper identification, evaluation, treatment,
and interpretation of the historic structures
within the national historic site.

Similar to Alternative A, the continuance
of existing management practices into
the future, two primary factors—human
actions and natural processes—would
contribute to permanent, negligible to minor
adverse effects on the national historic
site’s archeological resources from loss of
data and sites or diminished site integrity.
Meanwhile, visitor education and national
historic site management actions would
result in long-term beneficial impacts.
Much of the national historic site would be
included in a Resource Preservation Zone,
which would provide for increased emphasis
on resource preservation by avoiding future
ground disturbance within the management
zone. Proposed project area(s) would
undergo collaborative cultural resource
investigations prior to ground-disturbance
and results of the investigations would help
guide precise locations and design of new
facilities to ensure resource protection.

The overall impact of Alternative A on
visitor use and experience would be longterm, minor to moderate, adverse. Although
management plans, ongoing programs
and events, and expanded interpretive
themes would be beneficial, traffic and
parking constraints would increase due
to popularity and interpretive activities
would be limited as there would be no
increases in interpretive staff. This would
continue to challenge the ability of the
existing staff to address this growing need.
Additionally, the current staffing level is
inadequate to conduct sufficient outreach
to potential partners and to subsequently
develop partnering agreements that would
increase and enhance resource protection
and interpretive programs, materials, and
signage. Continued management actions
under Alternative A would have an overall
long- and short-term, moderate, adverse
effect on national historic site operations
due to increased workload demands and
expectations on the current staffing level.

One additional archeological investigation
would be conducted at the national historic
site under Alternative B. These would lead
to long-term, beneficial impacts because
additional archeological sites could be
identified, and because subsequent research
and analyses could substantially add to both
the regional and national knowledge of the
people, places, and events associated with
the history of the area.

Impacts of Alternative B:
Under Alternative B, there would be longand short-term, negligible, adverse effects to
floodplains. Planned construction activities
would avoid floodplains where possible.
Mitigation measures would be applied if
other management considerations exist
which clearly favor locating an action in
a regulatory floodplain, such as shoreline
protection structures. There would be
long- and short-term beneficial impacts
to wetlands, species of concern, and
vegetation. These natural resources would
benefit from continued, existing resource
management efforts and establishment
of management zones that would reduce
adverse impacts caused by new trail and
facility development. Proposed increases in
national historic site staff under Alternative
B would allow for increased interpretation,

There would be long-term beneficial
impacts to ethnographic resources,
the cultural landscape, and museum
collections. Emphasis would be placed
on an expanded interpretive mission that
would likely strengthen existing linkages
and relationships of visitors to ancestors
connected to events and historical eras.
An ethnographic overview and assessment
would be completed to formally identify
and document the ethnographic resources
associated with the national historic site,
resulting in long-term, beneficial effects
xv

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

associated with increased knowledge
concerning these resources. Targeted
shoreline erosion measures to protect
Dough Cemetery would be included in
Alternative B resulting in a long-term,
beneficial impact to this contributing
element of the cultural landscape. Proposed
new construction projects under Alternative
B would neither affect topography nor
appreciably alter the landscape’s spatial
organization, land use patterns, historic
structures, circulation systems, or views
and vistas. Under an approved and funded
project, new exhibits for the visitor
center would be designed and installed.
These improvements to the display and
interpretation of museum collections would
help ensure the “well-being” and long-term
preservation of data and archival materials
while improving the usefulness of the
collection. In addition, the aforementioned
archeological investigations could increase
holdings within the collection.

Visitor use and experience would be
benefited over the long-term under
Alternative B. All the studies and planning
efforts to provide improved access, safety,
and visitor orientation on Roanoke Island
would be the same as described in Alterative
A. In addition, expanded interpretive efforts,
facilities, partnering, and availability of
food services would retain more visitors
on-site. Increased staffing levels, expanded
partnerships, and potential use of the Artsin-Parks program would provide increased
opportunities to improve and maintain
visitor satisfaction by addressing the issues
identified during scoping.
The establishment of management zones
under Alternatives B would provide effective
means to improve operations by aiding
national historic site staff in decisionmaking, resource management, and
enforcement. Additional staffing proposed
under Alternative B would provide the
necessary maintenance efforts to implement
resource plan recommendations resulting
in overall long- and short-term, beneficial
effects to park operations and facilities.

Similar to Alternative A, historic structures
would be impacted in both long-term
beneficial and permanent, negligible,
adverse ways. Historic structures would
generally remain as they exist now,
undergoing routine maintenance (to
arrest deterioration) with no substantial
impact to their historic fabric, integrity, or
character-defining features which would
be a benefit. However, historic structures
would be adversely affected by typical
effects of aging and natural processes, and
occasional disturbance from visitor use at
the reconstructed earthworks. Management
plans would continue to benefit historic
structures by providing park staff with
the framework and guidance necessary to
ensure continued, proper identification,
evaluation, treatment, and interpretation of
the historic structures within the national
historic site. Historic structures within the
Resource Preservation Zone would be
somewhat better protected from possible
effects of any future activity than under
Alternative A.

Impacts of Alternative C:
Alternative C would have long- and
short-term, negligible, adverse effects on
floodplains. Planned construction activities
would avoid floodplains where possible.
Mitigation measures would be applied if
other management considerations exist
which clearly favor locating an action in
a regulatory floodplain, such as shoreline
protection structures which must be located
in the floodplain.
There would be long-and short-term
beneficial impacts to wetlands, species of
concern, and vegetation. These natural
resources would benefit from continued,
existing resource management efforts and
establishment of management zones that
would reduce adverse impacts caused
by new trail and facility development.
Alternative C would also reduce heavily
landscaped and maintained areas, and
xvi

Summary

allow these areas to return back to
natural conditions or convert them to
low maintenance plantings. Proposed
increases in national historic site staff
under Alternative C would allow for
increased interpretation, maintenance,
and enforcement to ultimately reduce
visitor impacts on vegetation and natural
communities.

the area. It is anticipated that permanent,
adverse impacts to archeological resources
resulting from new construction activities
under Alternative C would be negligible to
minor. Known archeological sites would
continue to be monitored and on-going
archeological excavations with partner
organizations would be established
to broaden the national historic site’s
knowledge base and increase awareness
and stewardship. The addition of an NPS
historian would be beneficial to all cultural
resource areas.

Alternative C would emphasize research on
the history and archeology of the national
historic site and the associated peoples
and events. Alternative C would provide
a greater degree of protection of cultural
resources than Alternative A by enhancing
partnerships to collaboratively protect and
preserve these resources at a greater capacity
than the national historic site can do alone.
Under Alternative C, formalized programs
and directional signs would help reduce
the potential for creation of informal trails,
resulting in fewer incidents of unauthorized
collecting and erosion of off-trail areas.
Designation of the majority of the national
historic site as a Resource Preservation
Zone would provide for a greater emphasis
on resource preservation compared to
Alternative A by avoiding future ground
disturbance within the management zone.
The actions listed above would all have longterm, beneficial impacts on archeological
resources. Proposed project area(s) would
undergo collaborative cultural resource
investigations prior to ground-disturbance
and results of the investigations would
help guide precise locations and design
of these new facilities to ensure resource
protection; therefore, any new construction
activities may have permanent, negligible
to minor, adverse impacts on archeological
resources. Additional annual archeological
investigations would be conducted at the
national historic site under Alternative C.
These would lead to long-term, beneficial
impacts because additional archeological
sites could be identified, and because
subsequent research and analyses could
substantially add to both the regional and
national knowledge of the people, places,
and events associated with the history of

Under Alternative C, there would be
greater long-term beneficial impacts
to ethnographic resources, the cultural
landscape, and museum collections than
with Alternative A. Research on the history
and archeology of the national historic
site and the associated peoples and events
would be emphasized. A greater reliance on
partnerships and the addition of a historian
to the staff would provide opportunities to
create closer links with African Americans
and Native Americans who have cultural
ties to the area. An ethnographic overview
and assessment would be completed
to formally identify and document the
ethnographic resources associated with the
national historic site, resulting in long-term,
beneficial effects associated with increased
knowledge concerning these resources.
Possible targeted shoreline erosion measures
to protect Dough Cemetery would be
included in Alternative C resulting in a longterm, beneficial impact to this contributing
element of the cultural landscape. The
proposed construction of new walking
trails and a small outdoor seating area near
the reconstructed earthworks would not
appreciably alter overall vistas, historic
structures, or circulation patterns that are
included in the cultural landscape. Improved
signage and interpretive programs would
provide additional information to visitors
that would instill greater stewardship of
cultural resources. These actions would
result in long-term beneficial impacts to
the cultural landscape. Heavily landscaped
and maintained areas would be reduced in
xvii

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

size and affected areas would be restored
to natural conditions or converted to
low maintenance plantings; because this
would result in a reduction of Mission
66-era vegetative plantings, considered
a contributing element of the cultural
landscape, this action would have a
long-term, minor, adverse impact on the
cultural landscape. Under an approved
and funded project, new exhibits for the
visitor center would be designed and
installed. These improvements to the
display and interpretation of museum
collections would help ensure the “wellbeing” and long-term preservation of data
and archival materials while improving
the usefulness of the collection, providing
long-term benefits. In addition, planned
archeological investigations could increase
holdings within the collection. Expanded
education, research and interpretive activity
and increased partnering would improve
the use of the collections and sharing of
resources, knowledge and appreciation of
museum collections. These actions would
result in long-term benefits to these cultural
resources.

and interpretation of the historic structures
within the national historic site. However,
partnerships would provide additional
resources that would benefit historic
structures through enhanced stewardship
and increased educational awareness of
historic structures within the national
historic site.
Under Alternative C, there would be
long- and short-term beneficial impacts
to visitor use and experience as well as
park operations and facilities. Visitor
activities would continue to be centralized
at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Management plans, ongoing programs and
events, and expanded interpretive themes
would continue to provide benefits by
providing better access, safety, and visitor
orientation. There would be increased
opportunities for visitors to interact with
archeologists, historians, and researchers
at the national historic site via increased
research efforts and collaborative partnering
as well as increased NPS staffing. A small
outdoor seating area and creation of
interpretive trails with themed areas would
be established which would be a long- and
short-term benefit to visitor experience,
but would cause short-term, minor, adverse
impacts to national historic site staff during
construction activities.

Similar to Alternative A, historic structures
would be impacted in both long-term
beneficial and permanent, negligible,
adverse ways. Historic structures would
generally remain as they exist now,
undergoing routine maintenance (to
arrest deterioration) with no substantial
impact to their historic fabric, integrity, or
character-defining features which would
be a benefit. However, historic structures
would be adversely affected by typical
effects of aging and natural processes,
and occasional disturbance from visitor
use at the reconstructed earthworks.
Past, on-going, and future NPS cultural
resource management plans, the long-range
interpretive plan, and other management
plans for the Outer Banks Group and for
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
continue to benefit historic structures by
providing park staff with the framework and
guidance necessary to ensure continued,
proper identification, evaluation, treatment,

The establishment of management zones
under Alternatives C would provide effective
means to improve operations by aiding staff
in decision-making, resource management,
and enforcement, providing long-term
benefits. Increased opportunities within
the national historic site under Alternative
C would likely increase visitation. Thus,
visitor use of new trails would increase
maintenance and enforcement efforts over
the long-term. While construction of limited
new facilities (such as the expansion of
parking at headquarters [eight spaces]) and
demolition of the Prince and Beehive houses
would create a greater demand on staff in
the short-term, additional law enforcement
and maintenance staff would reduce
increased staffing demand associated with
xviii

Summary

of decision is prepared for the signature
of the NPS regional director documenting
the NPS selection of an alternative for
implementation. Although this document
provides the analysis and justification for
future proposals at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, this plan does not guarantee
future NPS funding. Many actions would be
necessary to achieve the desired conditions
for natural resources, cultural resources,
recreational opportunities, and facilities
as envisioned in this plan. The NPS would
seek funding to achieve these desired
conditions. Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site managers would continue to pursue
other options, including expanding the
service of volunteers, drawing upon existing
or new partnerships, and seeking alternative
funding sources, including the philanthropic
community. This general management plan
/ environmental impact statement provides
the framework from which these choices
and decisions would be made.

peak summer visitation and new facilities;
long-term maintenance demands would
be reduced, with long-term, beneficial
effects. Resources would be made available
to cooperatively address operational needs
through increased partnering with local
historical, research, and tourism-oriented
organizations.
THE NEXT STEPS
After distribution of this Draft General
Management Plan / Environmental Impact
Statement there is a 60-day public review
and comment period. After the comment
period ends, the NPS planning team will
evaluate all input received regarding the
draft plan and incorporate any resulting
changes into a Final General Management
Plan / Environmental Impact Statement.
Following distribution of the final plan
and a 30-day no-action period, a record

xix

This page intentionally left blank.

Table of Contents

CONTENTS
SUMMARY iii
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE AND NEED FOR A GENERAL MANAGEMENT PLAN 3
A guide to This Document 3
Introduction 4
Brief Description of the Park 4
Overview of the NPS Planning Process 8
Purpose of the Plan 9
Need for a General Management Plan 10
Foundation for Planning and Management 10
		

Park Purpose 11

		

Park Significance 11

		

Fundamental Resources and Values 13

		

Other Important Resources and Values 14

		

Interpretive Themes 15

		

Special Mandates and Administrative Commitments 21

		
		

Summary of NPS Legal and Policy Requirements / Servicewide Laws and 		
Policies 22

Public Scoping 23
		

General Management Plan Issues/Concerns to be Addressed 35

		

Issues and Concerns Not Addressed 35

Impact Topics (Including Topics Considered And Dismissed) 35
		

Impact Topics Considered and Analyzed in Detail 36

		

Impact Topics Considered but Not Analyzed in Detail 37

Relationship of Other Planning Efforts to This General Management Plan 41
		

Regional Plans 41

		

Other NPS Plans 41

Next Steps in the Planning Process 42
Implementation of The Plan 42
CHAPTER 2: ALTERNATIVES 47
Introduction 47
Formulation of Alternatives 48
Management Zones Used in the Action Alternatives 49
Visitor Services Zone 52
		

Desired Resource Conditions 52

		

Desired Visitor Experience 52

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Development 52
xxi

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Management Activity 52

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Visitor Activities 52

Administrative Zone 52
		

Desired Resource Conditions 52

		

Desired Visitor Experience 53

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Development 53

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Management Activity 53

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Visitor Activities 53

Waterside Theatre Zone 53
		

Desired Resource Conditions 53

		

Desired Visitor Experience 53

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Development 54

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Management Activity 54

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Visitor Activities 54

Resource Preservation Zone 54
		

Desired Resource Conditions 54

		

Desired Visitor Experience 54

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Development 54

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Management Activity 54

		

Appropriate Kinds and Levels of Visitor Activities 55

Applying Management Zones 55
Considering Relative Costs 55
		

Annual Costs and Staffing 56

		

One-Time Cost Estimates 56

Proposed Alternatives 56
Actions Common to All Alternatives 56
Alternative A: No-Action / Continue Current Management 57
		

Concept 57

		

Visitor Experience 60

		

Facilities and Associated Visitor Activities 60

		

Expanded Interpretive Mission 60

		

Partnerships 60

		

Resource Conditions 60

		

Response to Catastrophic Loss 61

		

Estimated Costs and Staffing 61

Alternative B 61
		

Concept 61

		

Visitor Experience 62
xxii

Table of Contents

		

Management Zoning, Facilities, and Associated Visitor Activities 62

		

Expanded Interpretive Mission 64

		

Partnerships 64

		

Resource Conditions 65

		

Response to Catastrophic Loss 65

		

Estimated Costs and Staffing 65

Alternative C (NPS Preferred Alternative) 66
		

Concept 66

		

Visitor Experience 66

		

Management Zoning, Facilities, and Associated Visitor Activities 67

		

Expanded Interpretive Mission 67

		

Partnerships 69

		

Resource Conditions 69

		

Response to Catastrophic Loss 70

		

Estimated Costs and Staffing 70

Consideration of Boundary Adjustments 71
User Capacity 71
		

Indicators and Standards 74

Long-Term Monitoring 76
Mitigation Measures 76
		

Cultural Resources 77

		

Natural Resources 77

		

Threatened and Endangered Species and Species of Concern 78

		

Visitor Safety and Experiences 80

Needed Future Studies and Plans 81
The Environmentally Preferable Alternative 82
Actions Considered But Dismissed 85
Alternative Comparison Tables 86
CHAPTER 3: AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 99
Introduction 99
Climate Change 99
		

Potential Present and Future Impacts of Climate Change 100

		

Sea Level Rise Impacts on North Carolina 100

Natural Resources 101
		

Floodplains 101

		

Wetlands 102

		

Species of Concern 107
xxiii

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

		

Vegetation 108

Cultural Resources 118
		

Archeological Resources 124

		

Ethnographic Resources 126

		

Cultural Landscape 127

		

Museum Collections 129

		

Historic Structures 130

Visitor Use and Experience 131
Park Operations and Facilities 134
		

Staffing 134

		

Park Infrastructure and Facilities 134

		

Roads and Parking 136

		

Partner/Cooperating Organizations and Associations 137

CHAPTER 4: ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES 143
Introduction 143
Summary of Laws and Policies 143
Impact Assessment Methods 144
Climate change 146
Cumulative Impact Analysis 146
Past Actions 146
Floodplains 148
Wetlands 152
Species of Concern 156
Methods 156
Vegetation 161
Cultural Resources 167
Archeological Resources 168
Ethnographic Resources 175
Cultural Landscape 178
Museum Collections 182
Historic Structures 184
Visitor Use and Experience 186
Park Operations and Facilities 191
Sustainability and Long-Term Management 197
Adverse Impacts That Cannot be Avoided 197
Relationship between Local Short-Term Uses and Long-Term Productivity 197
Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources 198
xxiv

Table of Contents

CHAPTER 5: CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION 201
Public Involvement 201
		

The Next Steps 202

Consultation With Other Agencies/Officials and Organizations 202
Agencies, Organizations, and Individuals Receiving a Copy of This Document or 		
Notification of Availability 204
		

Federal Agencies 204

		

American Indian Tribal Governments 204

		

Leadership and Officers of the North Carolina Legislature 204

		

Other State and Local Government Officials 204

		

State and Local Agencies 204

		

Organizations and Businesses 204

		

Media 204

List of Preparers 205
REFERENCES, GLOSSARY, AND INDEX 207
APPENDIX A PARK LEGISLATION 225
APPENDIX B SERVICEWIDE MANDATES AND POLICIES PERTAINING TO 		
FORT RALEIGH NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE 235
APPENDIX C AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT SUPPORTING INFORMATION 249
APPENDIX D AGENCY COORDINATION 269
REFERENCES 209
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 215
INDEX 221

xxv

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

FIGURES
Figure 1

Regional Location Map 5

Figure 2

Map of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site 7

Figure 3

Visitor Center and Surrounding Facilities 58

Figure 4

Alternative A 59

Figure 5

Alternative B 63

Figure 6

Alternative C 68

Figure 7

User Capacity Framework 72

Figure 8

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Floodplain Map 103

Figure 9

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Wetlands Map 104

Figure 10

Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest Primary

			

and Secondary Areas of Concern 116

TABLES
Table 1		
			
Table 2
Table 3
			

Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized
by Impact Topic 24
Management Zones for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site 50
Summary of User Capacity Indicators, Standards and Potential 		
Management Strategies 73

Table 4

Summary Comparison of the Alternatives 87

Table 5

Comparison of Staffing Levels by Alternative (Presented as Full-time

			

Equivalents) 91

Table 6

Summary Comparison of the Costs of the Alternatives 93

Table 7

Summary of Impacts of the Alternatives 94

Table 8

Wetland Types Occuring within Fort Raliegh National Historic Site 105

Table 9		

Species of Concern 109

Table 10

Archeological Resources 123

Table 11

Historic Structures 124

Table 12

Annual Visitors to Fort Raleigh National Historic Site, 2000-2010 131

Table 13

Total Monthly Visitors to Fort Raleigh National Historic Site, 2010 132

Table 14

Current Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Staff Levels 134

Table 15

2008 Interpretive Staff 135

Table 16

List of Preparers 205

xxvi

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE AND NEED FOR A GENERAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
A GUIDE TO THIS DOCUMENT
In this chapter...
• Park Description
• Purpose, Need, and Scope of
the Plan
• Foundation for Planning and
Management, including
the Park’s Purpose, Significance,
Fundamental Resources and Values,
and Interpretive Themes
• Future Plans and Next Steps

Organization of this document is
in accordance with the Council on
Environmental Quality’s implementing
regulations for the National Environmental
Policy Act and the National Park Service’s
(hereafter referred to as NPS) Director’s
Order on “Environmental Analysis”
(Director’s Order 12). Each of the five
chapters is briefly described below.
Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a
General Management Plan sets the
framework for this document. The chapter
provides a description of the national
historic site, why the plan is being prepared,
and what needs it must address. It gives
guidance for the alternatives considered,
which are based on the legislated purpose
of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site,
the significance of its resources, special
mandates and administrative commitments,
servicewide mandates and policies,
and other planning efforts in the area.
This chapter also details the planning
opportunities and issues raised during
public meetings and planning team efforts.
This chapter concludes with a statement
of the scope of the environmental impact
analysis — specifically, what impact topics
were or were not analyzed in detail.

Mitigation measures proposed to
minimize or eliminate the impacts of
some proposed actions are described just
before the discussion of future studies
and/or implementation plans that will be
needed. Evaluation of the environmentally
preferable alternative is followed by a
summary table of the alternative actions
and the environmental consequences of
implementing those alternative actions.
Chapter 3: Affected Environment
describes those areas and resources that
would be affected by implementing actions
in the various alternatives. The topics
addressed include cultural resources, natural
resources, visitor use and experience,
and national historic site operations and
facilities.
Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences
analyzes the impacts of implementing the
alternatives. Each impact topic described
in chapter 3 is analyzed. Methods used
for assessing the impacts in terms of the
intensity, type, and duration of each impact
topic are outlined.

Chapter 2: Alternatives, including the NPS
Preferred Alternative, begins by describing
the management prescriptions and zones
developed for future management of the
national historic site. An overview of how
the alternatives were developed and a
description of each alternative are provided.
Alternative A is the continuation of current
management and trends in the national
historic site (or the No-action Alternative).
Action Alternatives B and C respond to
issues identified during scoping of the
general management plan.

Chapter 5: Consultation and
Coordination describes the history of
public involvement and agency coordination
conducted during the planning effort.
Agencies and organizations that received
copies of the document are also listed.

3

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE PARK

The appendices present supporting
information for the document, along
with references, a glossary of terms,
legislation, and other pertinent technical
documentation.

The national historic site is located
on the north end of Roanoke Island,
situated between the coastal mainland of
northeastern North Carolina and the “Outer
Bank” or barrier island known as Bodie
Island (Figure 1). The national historic site’s
authorized boundary contains 512.93 acres
(stated throughout as a rounded value of 513
acres).

INTRODUCTION
This Draft General Management Plan /
Environmental Impact Statement presents
and analyzes two alternative directions for
future management and use of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site in addition to the
No-action Alternative. Alternative C is the
NPS Preferred Alternative. The potential
environmental impacts of all alternatives
have been identified and assessed.

The State of North Carolina deeded Fort
Raleigh State Park on the north end of
Roanoke Island to the United States on July
14, 1939, contingent upon its approval by
Assistant Secretary of the Interior Oscar L.
Chapman. The Secretarial Order of April
5, 1941, established Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site to preserve land declared to
be of national significance as a portion
of the colonial settlement or settlements
established in America by Sir Walter Raleigh
between 1587 and 1591. The Order also
recognized the agreement made between the
Roanoke Island Historical Association and
the United States for the annual presentation
of Paul Green’s symphonic drama, The Lost
Colony, in the open-air amphitheater at the
national historic site.

General management plans are intended
to be long-term documents that establish
and articulate a management philosophy
and framework for decision-making and
problem solving in national parks. General
management plans are intended to provide
guidance over a 15- to 20-year period.
The detailed actions directed by general
management plans or in subsequent
implementation plans are intended to be
accomplished over time. Implementation
of the approved plan will depend on future
funding and servicewide priorities. Approval
of this general management plan does not
guarantee that funding and staffing needed
to implement the plan will be forthcoming.
It is not likely that all proposed capital
improvements in this plan will be totally
implemented during the 15- to 20-year life
of the plan. Larger capital improvements
may be phased over several years, and full
implementation of this plan could be many
years into the future.

Secretarial Order of April 5, 1941,
established Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site to preserve land declared
to be of national significance.

The term park is used to refer to all units of
the National Park System, including national
historic sites.

4

5

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Today, more than 70 years after the 1941
Secretarial Order, this public/private
partnership continues with Roanoke Island
Historical Association managing all aspects
of The Lost Colony production while the
NPS owns and maintains the Waterside
Theatre, The Lost Colony administrative
building, and all the other support buildings,
facilities, paths, and parking areas.

The national historic site is unique in the
NPS system because of the preservation
and interpretation of the history of the first
English attempts at colonization in the New
World (from 1585 to 1587), and the history
of Native Americans, European Americans,
and African Americans on Roanoke Island.
The Carolina Algonquians existed on
Roanoke Island for nearly 1,000 years. Their
culture and way of life diminished after
contact with the English. Early colonization
efforts, sponsored by Sir Walter Raleigh,
ended with the disappearance of 116 men,
women, and children (including two that
were born in the New World). The fate
of this “lost colony” remains a mystery to
this day. Starting in 1862, Roanoke Island
Freedmen’s Colony was established as a
haven for a community of approximately
3,500 former slaves. It served as a living
classroom designed to prepare former slaves
for a new life of freedom, independence,
self-governance, and integration into
European-style community living. During
the Civil War, the lives and livelihood of the
people of Roanoke Island were affected by
military presence and control. Although
Roanoke Islanders were largely neutral
during the Civil War, they could not escape
its impacts, including war restrictions,
changes in land ownership, and the increase
in population due to the troops and
Freedmen’s Colony. Roanoke Island’s rich
history continued with the arrival in 1901 of
Reginald Fessenden, an inventive pioneer
who achieved his goal of quality wireless
transmission and reception. Roanoke Island
was selected as his base due to its central
location for his experiments that ultimately
changed the world forever.

The Secretarial Order of January 3, 1952
added two parcels to the national historic
site as defined in the 1941 Secretarial Order.
The Act of November 16, 1990 (Public
Law [PL] 101-603) further expanded the
authorized boundary of the national historic
site to include an additional 335 acres, of
which approximately 202 acres have been
acquired. The remainder of these acres
are either publicly owned by other state or
Federal agencies or privately owned and
the NPS has no authority to acquire private
properties except from willing sellers or
by donation. If future conditions made
acquisitions of property desirable, and
if donors or willing sellers and adequate
funding were available, then additional land
acquisition would be possible. The 1990 Act
also broadened the purpose of the national
historic site to include preservation and
interpretation of: (1) the first English colony
in the New World; and (2) the history of the
Native Americans, European Americans,
and African Americans who lived on
Roanoke Island, North Carolina. Most of
the land added to the park is forested and
undeveloped. However, portions of the
newly authorized area remain in private
ownership and have been developed into
a residential subdivision. The authorized
boundary defines that area from which
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site may
purchase land from willing private owners if
appropriated funds from Congress are made
available. A map of the national historic
site showing site boundaries is provided
as Figure 2, Map of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. Park legislation is provided in
Appendix A.

The grounds of the national historic
site include the physical location of
headquarters for the NPS Outer Banks
Group that consists of an administrative
grouping of the following three park
units: Cape Hatteras National Seashore,
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site, and
Wright Brothers National Memorial.
Because of this administrative grouping,
several of the facilities at the Fort Raleigh
6

7

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

National Historic Site and staff are shared
amongst the other units such as the
Museum Resource Center which provides
a secure environment for collections of
the Outer Banks Group; the Outer Banks
Group administrative building; and the
maintenance yard.

covering small repair costs necessary to the
theater, while the national historic site is
responsible for major infrastructure costs.
Theater productions of The Lost Colony
only occur during the summer season.
Approximately 300,000 visitors come to the
national historic site each year.
A residential development, called Heritage
Point Community, occurs within the
authorized national historic site boundary.
While residents, workers, and other visitors
must drive through the national historic site
to access the subdivision, the road is not
owned or maintained by the NPS.

The Outer Banks Group consists of...
•

Cape Hatteras National Seashore

•

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site

•

Wright Brothers National Memorial

OVERVIEW OF THE
NPS PLANNING PROCESS
The national historic site also preserves
the amphitheater and support facilities
associated with the continuing production
of the nations’ first and longest running
outdoor symphonic drama, The Lost
Colony. The drama is entirely managed
and produced by the Roanoke Island
Historical Association, the National Park
Service’s principal partner in this continuing
endeavor since the establishment of Fort
Raleigh National Historical Site. The
national historic site also works closely with
The Elizabethan Gardens, an internationally
known botanical organization whose
public gardens are surrounded by national
historic site lands. The Elizabethan Gardens
are not within the national historic site
boundaries but are accessible only by
driving through the national historic site.
The national historic site is responsible for
all roads, parking, security, etc. leading to
the gardens. While the Waterside Theatre
and the associated support buildings are
owned and maintained by the NPS, the
theater is operated by a private, not-forprofit organization (the Roanoke Island
Historical Association) and, like the
Elizabethan Gardens, is accessible only by
driving through the national historic site.
The agreement with the Roanoke Island
Historical Association provides for the
Roanoke Island Historical Association

The National Parks and Recreation Act
of 1978 (PL 95-625) and the Redwood
Amendment of 1978 (PL 95-250 Sec. 101(6)
(b)) require the preparation and timely
revision of general management plans
for each unit of the national park system.
The NPS Management Policies 2006 call
for each general management plan to “set
forth a management concept for the park
[and] establish a role for the unit within the
context of regional trends and plans for
conservation, recreation, transportation,
economic development, and other regional
issues.” Congress has also specifically
directed the NPS, as part of the planning
process, to address the following elements
(16 United States Code [USC] 1a-7[b]):

8

•

Measures for preservation of the
area’s resources;

•

Indications of types and general
intensities of development (including
visitor circulation and transportation
patterns, systems, and modes)
associated with public enjoyment
and use of the area, including general
locations, timing of implementation,
and anticipated costs;

•

Identification of an implementation
commitment for visitor carrying

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

capacities [now called user capacity
as detailed in chapter 2]; and
•

to implementation planning. The approved
general management plan will provide
guidance for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site managers for 15 to 20 years, assuming
that conditions affecting management and
operations remain relatively unchanged
during this period. The purposes of this
general management plan are as follows:

Indications of potential
modifications to the external
boundaries of the unit, and the
reasons therefore.

The plan also integrates requirements of
the National Environmental Policy Act into
a general management plan/environmental
impact statement. The process requires
early identification of issues associated with
proposed federal actions through a process
called “scoping,” a description of “existing
conditions” (a baseline described in chapter
3 used to evaluate effects of alternative
actions), and an assessment of the potential
adverse effects of the alternatives (detailed
in chapter 4), including the “No-action”
alternative. Mitigation measures to avoid,
minimize, or reduce potentially adverse
effects are also summarized in chapter 2. The
NPS integrates requirements of the National
Environmental Policy Act with the process
for completing a general management plan.
This process is defined under Director’s
Order 12.
The National Environmental Policy Act
was established to foster and promote the
general welfare, to create and maintain
conditions under which man and nature can
exist in productive harmony, and fulfill the
social, economic, and other requirements
of present and future generations of
Americans.

•

Confirm the purpose, significance,
and special mandates of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site.

•

Clearly define resource conditions
and visitor uses and experiences to
be achieved.

•

Provide a framework for national
historic site managers to use when
making decisions about how to
best protect national historic site
resources, how to provide quality
visitor uses and experiences, how to
manage visitor use, and what kinds
of facilities, if any, to develop in/near
the national historic site.

•

Ensure that this foundation for
decision-making has been developed
in consultation with interested
stakeholders and adopted by
NPS leadership after an adequate
analysis of the benefits, impacts, and
economic costs of alternative courses
of action.

Legislation establishing the NPS as an
agency and governing its management
provides the fundamental direction for the
administration of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site (and other units and programs
of the national park system). This general
management plan will build on these laws
and the legislation that established Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site to provide
a vision for the national historic site’s
future. The section entitled, “Servicewide
Mandates and Policies” within this chapter
calls the reader’s attention to topics
that are important to understanding the
management direction at the national

PURPOSE OF THE PLAN
The purpose of a general management plan
is to ensure that each park has a clearly
defined direction for resource preservation
and visitor use. General management
planning is the first tier of a staged planning
process. It focuses on why the park was
established and what resource conditions
and visitor experiences should be achieved
and maintained over time. Decisions about
park site-specific actions will be deferred
9

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

historic site. The alternatives in this general
management plan address the desired future
conditions that are not mandated by law and
policy and must be determined through a
planning process.

its relationships with the local population.
Today, the story of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site has expanded to include
peoples and individuals whose lives and
lifestyles span more than 420 years.

The general management plan does
not describe how particular programs
or projects should be prioritized or
implemented. Those decisions will be
addressed in future, more detailed, planning
efforts. All future plans will tier from the
approved general management plan.

This General Management Plan provides
broad direction for the national historic
site’s future. It is needed to assist site
managers in making purposeful decisions
based on a deliberate vision of the national
historic site. General management planning
is needed to:

This general management plan has been
developed in consultation with NPS
program managers; other federal agencies;
American Indian tribes; state, local, and
regional agencies; interested organizations
and individuals; and the general public (see
detailed description in chapter 5). It is based
on an analysis of existing and potential
resource conditions and visitor experiences,
environmental (including natural, cultural,
and socioeconomic) impacts, and costs of
alternative courses of action.

•

Clarify the levels of resource
protection and public use that must
be achieved for the national historic
site, based on the site-specific
purpose and significance, as well
as the body of laws and policies
directing national historic site
management.

•

Determine the best mix of resource
protection and visitor experiences
beyond what is prescribed by law
and policy based on the purposes
of the national historic site, the
range of public expectations and
concerns, resources occurring within
the national historic site, effects of
alternative management plans on
existing natural, cultural, and social
conditions, and long-term economic
costs.

•

Establish the degree to which the
national historic site should be
managed to preserve and enhance
its cultural and natural resources,
and provide appropriate visitor
experiences and recreation
opportunities.

NEED FOR A GENERAL
MANAGEMENT PLAN
A general management plan is needed to
meet the requirements of the National Parks
and Recreation Act of 1978 (PL 95-625) and
NPS policy, which mandate development of
a general management plan for each park.
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site has never
had a general management plan prepared in
conformance with the requirements of PL
95-625 and current management policies
and guidelines. The National Historic Site’s
1964 Master Plan does not address many
of the issues facing the national historic
site today. PL 101-603, November 16, 1990
broadened the boundaries and purposes
of the national historic site. Guidance is
needed to provide management direction
and address issues associated with a
national historic site much different than
that envisioned in the 1960s. Interpretive
and protective efforts up to 1990 focused
on the 16th century English colony and

FOUNDATION FOR
PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT
The general management planning
process begins with development of a
foundation statement based on the park’s
enabling legislation and documenting the
10

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

(1) the first English colony in the New
World; and
(2) the history of the Native Americans,
European Americans, and African
Americans who lived on Roanoke
Island, North Carolina.”

park purpose, significance, fundamental
resources and values, and interpretive
themes. The statement also includes a
summary of any relevant laws and executive
orders that apply to the national park system
or to the individual park unit.

Section 3 of Public Law 101-603 directs
the Secretary to undertake research on
the history and archeology of the park
in consultation with scholarly and other
historic organizations.

The foundation statement defines the legal
and policy requirements that mandate the
park’s basic management responsibilities,
and describes the resources and values that
are fundamental to achieving the national
historic site’s purpose as well as those that
are otherwise important. Although all
units of the national park system must be
managed in compliance with a large body
of federal laws and policies, each park has
its own specific purpose, established by
Congress or the president, which provides
the context for park management. The
foundation statement is therefore a vital
element of park planning and management.

Park Significance
Significance statements capture the essence
of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site’s
importance to the nation’s cultural and
natural heritage. Significance statements
describe the park’s distinctiveness and help
to place the park within its regional and
national contexts. Defining the significance
of the park’s resources helps managers
make decisions that preserve the resources
and values necessary to accomplish the
park’s purpose. The following statements
discuss why Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site’s resources and values are important
as a unit of the national park system. These
statements were developed by the NPS
planning team members during the course
of preparation of the general management
plan using available information. Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site is significant
because:

The following paragraphs provide a
summary of the elements of the foundation
statement for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, including park purpose, significance
statements, fundamental and other
important resources and values, interpretive
themes, special mandates and administrative
commitments that must be met, and a
summary of laws and policies that must be
considered.
Park Purpose

• The park protects and preserves

The park purpose defines the specific
reason(s) for its establishment. Statements of
the park’s purpose are based on a thorough
analysis of the park’s legislation, presidential
proclamation or executive order, and any
studies prepared prior to its authorization.
The park’s purpose may only be changed
by Congress. The purpose of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site was defined by
Congress in Public Law 101-603, November
16, 1990, as follows:

the site where English explorers
attempted to create England’s first
colonial settlement in the New
World (as well as the birthplace of
Virginia Dare, the first English child
born in the New World), preserves
archeological evidence of these
efforts, and provides for ongoing
archeological efforts to resolve the
mystery of the lost colony of 1587.

• The park is the site of the first

“The purpose of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site shall be the preservation and
interpretation of –

sustained interaction between

11

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Native Americans and the English;
this interaction resulted in the
first written cultural/ethnographic
information on the Algonquian
people and the first English-language
documentation of the North 			
Carolina coastal region.

• The park, as a unit of the

National Park System, is an active
educational resource offering
unique opportunities for visitors and
educational groups to learn about
past and present island geology and
ecology, environmental stewardship,
and preservation of natural and
cultural resources.

Ethnography, part of cultural
anthropology, is concerned with the peoples
associated with parks, with their cultural
systems or ways of life, and with the related
technology, sites, structures, other material
features, and natural resources.
(NPS Director’s Order 28)

• The park has a Significant Natural

Heritage Area within its boundaries:
a maritime deciduous forest.
Significant Natural Heritage Areas
are lands listed by the State of North
Carolina Natural Heritage Program
as being important for conservation
of the state’s biodiversity. Significant
Natural Heritage Areas contain one
or more Natural Heritage elements
– high-quality or rare natural
communities, rare species, and
special animal habitats.

• The park is the birthplace and

home of The Lost Colony theatrical
production, the nation’s first outdoor
and longest-running symphonic
drama, produced and performed
by Roanoke Island Historical
Association since 1937.

• The park was listed on the National

Register of Historic Places in 1966.
Contributing elements of this
designation include the Fort Raleigh
Reconstructed Earthwork Fort,
the Raleigh Colony/Virginia Dare
Monument, the F.D.R. [Franklin
Delano Roosevelt] Marker, Dough
Cemetery headstones, and the
Franklin D. Roosevelt Theater
Marker.

• The park surrounds and partners

with The Elizabethan Gardens, an
internationally known botanical
organization that expands Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site’s
English colonial themes with
replicated 16th century English
gardens.

• The park interprets Roanoke

Island as the site of an innovative
Freedmen’s Colony settled by 3,500
former slaves during and after the
United States Civil War (18611865) and was listed as a National
Underground Railroad Network to
Freedom site in 2002.

The National Register of Historic Places is
the official list of the Nation’s historic places
worthy of preservation. Authorized by the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966,
the National Park Service’s National Register
of Historic Places is part of a national
program to coordinate and support public
and private efforts to identify, evaluate, and
protect America’s historic and archeological
resources.

• The park preserves the site of

early wireless radio experiments
(including the first quality wireless
transmission and reception) by
Reginald Fessenden on the north
end of Roanoke Island between 1901
and 1902.
12

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

Fundamental Resources and Values
Fundamental resources and values are
systems, processes, features, visitor
experiences, stories, and scenes that
warrant primary consideration during
planning and management because they are
critical to achieving the park’s purpose and
maintaining its significance. These resources
and values maintain the park’s purpose
and significance, and if these resources are
allowed to deteriorate, the park’s purpose
and/or significance could be jeopardized.
The following list of fundamental and other
important resources and values is presented
in no particular order of importance.
Archeological Resources & Museum
Collections
Currently known archeological resources
provide information and artifacts that are
important to understanding the national
historic site’s significance. The preservation,
protection, and interpretation of these
objects are critical to understanding the
national historic site’s prehistory and history.
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site’s as yet
undiscovered archeological resources have
the capacity to reveal further insights about
the cultures and people that have occupied
the national historic site’s boundaries.
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is, in
essence, a significant archeological site with
incomplete survey; consequently, the extent
of the archeology is unknown, yet incredibly
important to protect. Known and recovered
resources include the following:
•

Location of Ganz’s Lab within the
national historic site.

•

Preeminent artifacts found on the
site include:

o

Algonquian – elongated clay pot

o

Roanoke Voyages – red clay tile/
shingle

o

Roanoke Voyages – large broadaxe

o

Roanoke Voyages – barrel well

o

Roanoke Voyages – concave brick

o

Roanoke Voyages – aglet

o

Roanoke Voyages* – copper necklace
(*possible, but unproven link; could
be from later contact)

o

Civil War – minie balls, bullets

The Lost Colony Drama

Implements from Ganzs Lab,
crucibles, weights, glassware, and
other artifacts.

•

The Lost Colony drama, created
by Paul Green, is the first outdoor
symphonic drama in the United
States.

•

The history of the production and
the resulting museum collections,
including a festival and a movie, are
housed at the park.

•

Strong ties to the community, State of
North Carolina, and actors’ lineage
are present and have persevered
- continuing production despite
hurricanes, fires, and suspension of
the program during World War II.

•

The Waterside Theatre and
associated buildings and structures.

The Story of the Civil War, Underground
Railroad, and the Freedmen’s Colony

Ganz’s Lab
•

•

Ganz’s Lab location and the
associated archeological resources
indicate a scientific interest in North
America by the first English colony at
Roanoke Island.

•

13

The stories of African Americans,
including the Underground Railroad
and Freedmen’s Colony on Roanoke
Island.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

The stories of Civil War-related
activities on Roanoke Island.

•

Records and accounts that document
the stories.

•

Archeological resources, museum
collections, and scientific value of
the park that may pertain to these
stories.

Other Important Resources and Values
Other important resources and values
that may not be fundamental to the
park’s purpose and significance but are
nevertheless determined to be particularly
important considerations for general
management planning are summarized
in this section. Resources and values
addressed include natural and cultural
resources, recreational opportunities, and
partnerships.

Freedmen’s Colony
•

Items from recently donated
collection (slate pencils, buttons,
etc.).

Natural Resources
•

The Story of Reginald Fessenden
•

Boiler foundation.

•

Stories of Fessenden’s
experimentation.

Salt Marsh: Portions of the park
include productive salt marsh
habitats that are important as nursery
and spawning grounds for various
types of commercially important
fish and shellfish, as a well as many
species of birds, mammals, and other
animals.

The Story of the First Attempted English
Settlement in the New World
•

The stories of the first attempts at
English colonization in the New
World (commercial ventures, search
for northwest passage, lumber, gold).

•

The mystery surrounding the fate
of the Roanoke voyages colonists,
including Virginia Dare.

•

The stories and resources relating
to the first contact and interactions
between Native Americans and
English explorers and impact on
both cultures (including the John
White drawings and religious
beliefs).

•

Proximity of the Roanoke voyages
colony and the characteristics and
topography of the park that were
chosen to attempt “colonization.”

•

The impacts that English contact had
on the Algonquian population locally
and regionally.

Great Egret (Casmerodius albus)
•

14

Swamp Forest: This is a type of
highly diverse and productive
forested wetland that is part of the
mosaic of interrelated wetland and
upland habitats on Roanoke Island.

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
•

•

Atlantic Coast Intracoastal Marine
Environment: This includes
extensive shallow water tidal
channels, mud flats, and aquatic
habitats teeming with fish and
shellfish that serve as important
feeding habitat for marine mammals
and birds.

Recreational Opportunities

Maritime Evergreen Forest: This is
an extremely rare natural community
dominated by oak and pine trees
that occurs only in the most stable,
sheltered parts of barrier islands.
The area within and adjacent to
the Thomas Hariot Nature Trail of
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
is being designated as a Significant
Natural Heritage Area by the North
Carolina Natural Heritage Program,
which describes the forest as “one of
the best maritime evergreen forests
in the region.”

•

Night Sky.

•

Natural Soundscape.

Works Progress Administration
campsites.

•

Dough Cemetery.

•

Civilian Conservation Corps
campsites, Camp Wirth.

•

F.D.R. [President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt] Marker.

•

Franklin D. Roosevelt Theater
Marker (viewing of The Lost Colony
production).

•

Raleigh Colony/Virginia Dare
Monument.

•

First Light of Freedom Memorial.

Trails: The national historic site
includes several trails (Thomas
Hariot Nature Trail, Freedom Trail)
that allow visitors to view and
experience a wide variety of coastal
North Carolina wetland, upland, and
aquatic habitats.

•

Shoreline activities: The national
historic site provides opportunities
to visit the shoreline of Roanoke
Island, and view and experience a
variety of coastal habitats.

•

Nature viewing: Visitors can view
wildlife in a variety of wetland,
upland, and aquatic habitats.

Partnerships
•

Roanoke Island Historical
Association.

•

The Elizabethan Gardens.

Interpretive Themes

Cultural Resources
•

•

Interpretive themes are ideas, concepts,
or stories central to the park’s purpose,
significance, identity, and visitor experience.
The interpretive themes define concepts that
every visitor should have the opportunity to
learn. themes also provide the framework
for the park’s interpretive and educational
programs, influence visitor experience, and
provide direction for planners and designers
of the park’s exhibits, publications,
and audiovisual programs. Subsequent
interpretive planning may elaborate on these
themes. Interpretive themes are related to
the general management planning process in
the following ways:
•

15

Help form the basis for alternatives
and management zones that
prescribe resource conditions and
visitor experiences.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

Provide the foundation on which the
park’s educational and interpretive
program is based.

•

Lead to the identification of services,
resources, and experiences that
should be accessible to visitors and
the public.

•

Help focus orientation services by
identifying important experiences
and resources that support themes.

•

Lead to recommendations for
interpretive and educational
facilities, media, and services
that are core to park purpose and
facilitate emotional and intellectual
connections with park resources and
values.

•

Guide the development of
interpretive media and programs
that help visitors connect tangible
and intangible park resources and
experiences to larger ideas, meaning,
and values.

•

the Roanoke Island region, one in
1584 and one in 1585.
Roanoke Island is the location of
England’s first, and failed, attempt at
colonization (including families) in
North America in 1587.

•

These colonizing efforts resulted in
the first extended contact between
Native Americans and English
people.

•

Two significant accomplishments
of the Roanoke Voyages are the
first extensive survey of the natural
resources of the New World and the
only first-hand, contemporary record
of the Carolina Algonquian culture
and people of the Roanoke Island
region.

•

Archeological evidence,
supplemented by primary documents
associated with the national historic
site, increases our understanding of
English activities on Roanoke Island,
including English efforts to discover
and profit from the region’s natural
resources (plants, animals, minerals/
metals).

•

The ethnographical observations
of Thomas Hariot and the detailed
watercolor paintings by John White
imprinted on many Europeans the
first concept of native peoples of the
New World.

•

Although searched for in 1590, 1602,
and intermittently over the next four
centuries, little evidence has been
found regarding the disappearance
of the Roanoke voyages colonists of
1587, making it one of the greatest
mysteries of American history.

•

Virginia Dare was the first child born
to English parents in the New World.

Provide a framework for shared
perspectives among visitors,
stakeholders, and the public.

The following is a summary of the
interpretive themes for the national historic
site based on the Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site Long -Range Interpretive Plan
(NPS 2010a):
English Colonization. The 16th century
voyages to Roanoke Island and the
associated human losses were among
England’s first steps, and failures, in the
European race to increase power and wealth
by capitalizing on the unknown resources of
the New World in hopes of determining the
course of Europe’s political and economic
power.
•

•

With the intent to gain a foothold in
North America, England sent two
scouting and exploration voyages to
16

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
•

To make room on his ships for the
1586 settlers return to England, Sir
Francis Drake may have unloaded
several hundred black and Central
American Indian slaves – the fate of
these people is yet unknown.

The Carolina Algonquians. The Carolina
Algonquian, a unique and viable culture that
had existed for nearly 1,000 years, fell victim
to both intended and unintended impacts of
the European race to capitalize on the New
World, to the point that the culture and its
people were eventually extirpated except
for archeological evidence and Roanoke
Voyages-related narrative, ethnography, and
art.
•

•

•

After contact with the English, the
Carolina Algonquian culture and way
of life was diminished, largely due to
disease and social disorder.
The Carolina Algonquians’ way
of life, family structure, physical
appearance, style of dress,
philosophical/religious beliefs, social
structure, farming techniques, and
land use, as well as their views of
the English newcomers, have been
preserved by the ethnographical
observations of Thomas Hariot and
the detailed watercolor paintings by
John White.
Continuing archeological and
historical research on Roanoke
Island confirms and builds upon
the information gathered by Hariot,
White, and others regarding Native
American cultures, Native/English
interactions, and cross-cultural
influences.

The Lost Colony Drama. The Lost Colony
drama, nurtured and treasured by the people
of Roanoke Island since its inception, has
endured as a dramatic commemoration of
the Roanoke Voyages and as the nation’s
longest-running outdoor symphonic drama.

17

•

The Lost Colony, which was created
in 1937 to memorialize the 1587
colony, is the nation’s first and
longest-running outdoor symphonic
drama.

•

Authored by Pulitzer Prize winner
Paul Green, the play is itself of
historical interest as it mirrors the
attitudes, fears, and beliefs of the
Great Depression.

•

Community efforts by grassroots
organizations such as the Roanoke
Island Historical Association led to
the creation of the play, the building
of the Waterside Theatre, and the
sustained continuation of the drama
through the decades.

•

Founders of The Elizabethan
Gardens, inspired by The Lost
Colony, developed The Elizabethan
Gardens as a living memorial to
the Roanoke Voyages colonists on
property leased by the Roanoke
Island Historical Association.

•

Working with local leaders, the
federal government’s Depressionera Works Progress Administration
and Civilian Conservation Corps
provided substantial funding
and work crews to construct the
Waterside Theatre and other
buildings housing The Lost Colony
production.

•

The Lost Colony symphonic drama
occupies a notable place in the
history of theater, music, and fine
arts created for memorialization,
remembrance, or commemoration.

•

Today, The Lost Colony is a formal
and informal training ground for
young actors, costume designers, and
theatrical students throughout the
nation.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Freedmen’s Colony residents remain
on Roanoke Island and help shape its
culture.

The Freedmen’s Colony. The Roanoke
Island Freedmen’s Colony was a living
classroom designed to prepare former slaves
for a new life of freedom, independence,
self-governance, and integration into
European-style community living.
•

Starting in 1862, Roanoke Island
became a refuge for former slaves
from throughout the region.

•

In 1863, a formal Freedmen’s
Colony was established on Roanoke
Island by the Bureau of Refugees,
Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands
to train and educate the former
slaves for a free and independent
community.

•

•

•

•

The Civil War. As Civil War battles and
activities associated with command of
eastern North Carolina encroached
upon the Outer Banks, the physical and
philosophical isolation initially provided
by the remoteness of Roanoke Island was
broken, and the lives and livelihood of the
people of Roanoke Island were impacted by
military presence and control.

The Freedmen’s Colony on Roanoke
Island, which by 1865 became a
community of 3,500 men, women,
and children, was a model colony
because of its initial success as a fully
functioning, planned community
with a school, nuclear-family
housing, skilled craftsmen, a boating
and fishing economy, agriculture,
local governance, places of worship,
and more.
The Colony was the collective effort
of many individuals, black and white,
including numerous freedmen who
served the Union Army in the North
Carolina Colored Troops, their
families, the Congregational minister
Horace James, teachers from the
American Missionary Association,
and donors and supporters who sent
clothes, books, and other supplies.
A vital aspect of the Freedmen’s
Colony was the education of former
slaves, including reading, writing,
math, and trade skills, which
provided them with the tools needed
to be truly free and independent.

•

The Union Army targeted Roanoke
Island in its strategy to take the Outer
Banks from the Confederates, close
the sounds and inlets to commerce,
and destroy railroad lines between
Wilmington, North Carolina and
Richmond, Virginia.

•

After the Battle of Roanoke Island,
the Union Army formed regiments
of the U.S. Colored Troops from
members of the local Freedmen’s
Colony.

•

Although Roanoke Islanders were
largely neutral in the Civil War, they
could not escape its impacts on
their lives, such as war restrictions,
changes in land ownership, and the
increase in population due to the
troops and Freedmen’s Colony.

•

The history of Civil War-era
Roanoke Island is enriched by the
stories of military regiments like
the Zouaves and individuals such
as soldier artists, Confederate
prisoners, and relic-hunting Union
soldiers.

Reginald Fessenden. The large lowlying expanse of water and land and the
childhood dream of voice over the air
brought Reginald Fessenden to Roanoke
Island, where, with perseverance and
original experimentation, this inventive
pioneer achieved his goal of quality wireless

Though the Colony was disbanded
in 1867, many descendents of
18

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

transmission and reception; what he did
here changed the world forever.
•

•

•

•

Roanoke Island. The natural systems and
processes of Roanoke Island, such as the
“mother vine” from which the island’s
culture and stories grew, greatly impacted
human success or failure here.

The U.S. Weather Bureau hired
Fessenden to improve wireless
communication so as to provide
better early storm warnings for ocean
going vessels.
Fessenden moved his family to
Manteo while conducting his
wireless radio experiments for 18
months from 1901 to 1902.
Fessenden tested signal
transmissions from a tower he
erected on Roanoke Island to two
of his other towers (one on Cape
Henry, Virginia, and the other on
Cape Hatteras, North Carolina);
Roanoke Island was selected as his
base because it was the center-point
location.
Fessenden’s success in sending
and receiving a continuous wave
voice radio transmission between
Roanoke Island and Cape Hatteras
in 1902 was crucial in developing
a new technology to regulate
electromagnetic signals – called
amplitude modulation or AM –
that eventually enabled clear voice
transmissions over the airwaves.

•

Roanoke Island is part of a natural
system with distinct ecological
communities of plants and animals
and geologic processes characterized
by change.

•

The changing shoreline and forces of
nature upon the island’s north end
have both defined and complicated
the research and understanding of
the various stories of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site.

•

The national historic site contains
valued maritime evergreen forests
and maritime deciduous forests that
are important for conservation of the
state’s biodiversity.

•

The north end of Roanoke Island
has served as the historic habitation
area for humans due to the higher
elevation.

•

Buffered from the forces of the
Atlantic Ocean’s wave energy and
salinity, Roanoke Island offers a
viable habitation zone for several
species of hardwood trees, mammals,
fresh water reptiles, birds, and flora.

•

Roanoke Island is an important stopover for migratory birds along the
Atlantic Coastal Flyway.

Archeology. Tangible evidence unearthed
through archeology serves as connections
to the stories of past cultures and peoples of
Roanoke Island, helps us more accurately
place pieces in the national historic site’s
multiple puzzles, and provides hope in the
resolution of long-standing mysteries.
Reginald Fessenden, pioneer of wireless
communication.

•

19

Archeological projects (excavations
or surveys) attempting to uncover

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

built to protect the science center or
Grenville’s fifteen men.

evidence of the Roanoke Voyages
colonists at Fort Raleigh have
occurred intermittently at the
national historic site from 1887 to the
present day.
•

Talcott William of the University of
Pennsylvania completed the earliest
archeological work at the national
historic site in 1887 and 1895.

•

Archaeological investigation by
Jean C. Harrington (considered by
many to be the “Father of Historical
Archeology”) from 1947 to 1950,
and again in 1953, provided the first
archeological survey completed
in the national historic site, and
the discovery, confirmation, and
construction of the earthwork
believed at the time, but never
confirmed, to be “Lane’s Fort.”

•

Additional archeological
investigation by Jean C. Harrington
from 1963 to 1965 led to the
discovery of a 16th-century
“outwork” of unknown purpose.

•

Archeological investigation by the
NPS Southeast Archeological Center
from 1981 to 1985 was inconclusive
in locating the settlement site, but
determined that the “outwork” was
not the main fortification.

•

•

•

Recent archeological investigations
conducted by the First Colony
Foundation resulted in the discovery
of one of the earliest (17th century)
permanent English-use sites yet
found on the Outer Banks. This was
provided through technological
scans and assessments of national
historic site grounds, and yielded
objects from circa 800 A.D. to circa
1607.

•

These archeological investigations
have unearthed objects associated
with other national historic site
stories: Native Americans, Civil War,
and early colonial times.

•

The historical context, form, and
function of the “Fort Raleigh”
earthworks are subject to
reevaluation and reinterpretation
as developments progress by
archeologists and ongoing research.

Preservation and Stewardship.
Preservation and stewardship of Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site’s natural and
cultural resources is critical so that future
generations can access, enjoy, value, and
learn from these valued resources.

Archeological investigation from
1991 to 1993 by Ivor Noel-Hume of
the Virginia Company Foundation
and the NPS Southeast Archeological
Center led to discovery of the 15851586 “science center.” This led to
speculation that the English colony
settlement site is now beneath the
sound, and led most researchers
to conclude that the reconstructed
earthwork is not “Lane’s Fort.”
Archeological investigation by
Nicholas Lucchetti in 1995 suggested
that the earthworks were possibly
20

•

The national historic site’s vital
archeological resources require
preservation and stewardship by the
national historic site, its partners,
and the local community.

•

Preservation and stewardship
are accomplished through wise
management practices, dedicated
national historic site staff,
cooperating partnerships, and
national historic site neighbors
who instill appreciation, pride, and
responsibility in today’s visitors for
the national historic site’s resources.

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
•

The public is encouraged to support
stewardship of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site by becoming educated
about its natural and cultural
resources and informed on national
historic site issues as well as by
providing comments during national
historic site planning processes.

•

Preservation and maintenance
programs for the national historic
site’s cultural resources are
complemented by partner and public
involvement.

•

All people, especially those in the
local community, can be stewards
and help make a positive impact on
the national historic site.

•

The national historic site is a unit
of the National Park System, which
preserves and protects our nation’s
cultural and natural heritage and
special places.

Association coordination. The
facilities are used by Roanoke Island
Historical Association for several
months (approximately from the
first of May to late August) for The
Lost Colony production. In addition
to continuing to produce The
Lost Colony, the Roanoke Island
Historical Association produces
and presents a variety of theatrical,
musical, interpretive, and educational
programs on-site in order to inspire,
educate, and entertain the public;
to enhance public awareness and
support of the Roanoke Island
Historical Association and The
Lost Colony; and to generate the
revenues necessary to support
their primary production, The
Lost Colony. Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site would continue to
work with Roanoke Island Historical
Association under their cooperative
agreement (H5191100020; United
States Department of Interior 2010)
regarding NPS-use of the Waterside
Theatre and the associated buildings.

Special Mandates and
Administrative Commitments
•

Special mandates are park-specific legislative
or judicial requirements that expand upon
or modify the park’s basic mission and
purpose. The following are two special
mandates that apply to the Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site:
•

The Secretarial Order of April
5, 1941 that established Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site
also recognized the agreement
made between the Roanoke Island
Historical Association and the
United States to continue the
annual presentation of Paul Green’s
symphonic drama, The Lost Colony,
in the open-air amphitheater at the
national historic site. To meet this
mandate, the Waterside Theatre
and the associated buildings are
owned and maintained by the NPS
with Roanoke Island Historical

Section 3 of PL 101-603 directs the
Secretary of the Interior (through the
NPS) to undertake research on the
history and archeology of the historic
site and its associated peoples and
events, in consultation with scholarly
and other historical organizations.

Administrative commitments are generally
defined as agreements that have been
reached through formal, documented
processes with other federal or state
agencies that refer to the co-management of
specific natural or cultural resources. There
are no administrative commitments at Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site that meet this
definition.

21

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the Endangered Species Act, the National
Historic Preservation Act, and Executive
Order 11990 that addresses the protection of
wetlands (see Appendix B).

Summary of NPS Legal
and Policy Requirements /
Servicewide Laws and Policies
This section (expanded in Appendix B)
identifies what must be done at Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site to comply with
federal laws and policies of the NPS. Many
park management directives are specified
in laws and policies guiding the NPS and
are, therefore, not subject to alternative
approaches. For example, there are laws
and policies about managing environmental
quality (such as the Clean Air Act, the
Endangered Species Act, and Executive
Order 11990 “Protection of Wetlands”);
laws governing the preservation of cultural
resources (such as the National Historic
Preservation Act); and laws about providing
public services (such as the Americans
with Disabilities Act), to name only a few.
NPS management framework identified in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §2
provides regulations regarding resource
protection, public use, and recreation. In
other words, a general management plan
is not needed to decide, for instance, that
it is appropriate to protect endangered
species, control exotic species, protect
archeological sites, conserve museum
collections, or provide for handicap access.
Laws and policies are already in place for
those types of issues. Although attaining
some conditions set forth in these laws
and policies may have been temporarily
deferred in the national historic site because
of funding or staffing limitations, the NPS
will continue to strive to implement these
requirements with or without a new general
management plan.

The NPS Organic Act (16 USC §1)
established the NPS and provides the
fundamental management direction for all
units of the national park system:
The service thus established shall promote
and regulate the use of the Federal areas
known as national parks, monuments, and
reservations…by such means and measure
as conform to the fundamental purpose of
said parks, monuments and reservations,
which purpose is to conserve the scenery
and the natural and historic objects and
the wild life therein and to provide for the
enjoyment of the same in such manner and
by such means as will leave them unimpaired
for the enjoyment of future generations.
The National Park System General
Authorities Act (16 USC §1a-1, et seq.)
affirms that while all national park system
units remain “distinct in character,” they are
“united through their interrelated purposes
and resources into one national park
system as cumulative expressions of a single
national heritage.” The act makes it clear that
the NPS Organic Act and other protective
mandates apply equally to all units of the
system. Further, NPS management of park
units should not “derogat[e]…the purposes
and values for which these various areas
have been established.”
The NPS also established policies for all
units under its stewardship. These are
identified and explained in a guidance
manual entitled NPS Management Policies
2006. The “action” alternatives (Alternatives
B and C) considered in this document
incorporate and comply with the provisions
of these mandates and policies.

Some of these laws and executive orders
are applicable solely or primarily to units of
the national park system. These include the
1916 NPS Organic Act that created the NPS,
the General Authorities Act of 1970, the Act
of March 27, 1978, relating to management
of the national park system, and the
National Parks Omnibus Management Act
(1998). Other laws and executive orders
have much broader application, such as

Public Law 95-625, the National Park and
Recreation Act, requires preparation and
timely revision of a general management
plan for each unit of the national park
system. Section 604 of the National Park and
22

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

Recreation Act outlines several requirements
for general management plans, including
measures for the protection of the area’s
resources and “indications of potential
modifications to the external boundaries
of the unit and the reasons therefore.” NPS
Management Policies 2006 adopted in 2006
reaffirm this legislative directive.

conflict, or problem regarding the use
or management of public lands. Issues
identified during scoping are used by NPS
to determine the impact topics that need
to be analyzed and to develop a reasonable
set of alternatives to address these issues
and concerns. A list of impact topics
is provided in the next section, Impact
Topics (Including Topics Considered and
Dismissed). The scoping process undertaken
during development of this document is
described in “Chapter 5: Consultation and
Coordination”.

To understand the implications of an
alternative, it is important to combine
the servicewide mandates and policies
with the management actions described
in an alternative. Table 1 shows some of
the most pertinent servicewide mandates
and policy topics related to planning and
managing Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site. Across from each topic are the desired
conditions the staff is striving to achieve for
that topic; therefore, the table is written in
the present tense. Appendix B expands on
this information by citing the law or policy
directing these actions and giving examples
of the types of actions being pursued by
NPS staff. The alternatives in this general
management plan address the desired future
conditions not mandated by law and policy,
and must be determined through a planning
process.

The Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
planning team completed the initial
scoping phase of the planning process by
meeting or corresponding with federal
agencies, American Indian tribes, state and
local agencies, and a variety of partners,
stakeholders, and other interested
parties. The result was a wide-ranging
list of concerns and suggestions for NPS
to consider in developing the general
management plan. The full list was analyzed
and issues and concerns identified during
scoping that are carried forward for further
analysis in the general management plan
/ environmental impact statement as well
as those that will not be addressed are
presented in the sections that follow.

PUBLIC SCOPING
The National Environmental Policy Act
requires that federal agencies engage in
identification of issues with interested
parties prior to initiating any project, such
as preparation of a general management
plan, which qualifies as a “major federal
action.” Scoping is the solicitation of
comments from agency staff, the public,
and other government entities to identify
significant issues related to the proposed
action. An issue is defined as an opportunity,

The primary goal of scoping is to
identify issues and determine the range
of alternatives to be addressed.  During
scoping, the NPS staff provides an overview
of the proposed project, including purpose
and need and alternatives. The public is
asked to submit comments, concerns, and
suggestions relating to these goals.

23

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
TOPIC

Desired Conditions

Relations with
Private and Public
Organizations,
Owners of
Adjacent Land,
and Governmental
Agencies

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is managed as
part of a greater ecological, social, economic, and
cultural system.
Good relations are maintained with adjacent landowners, surrounding communities, and private
and public groups that affect, and are affected by,
the national historic site. The national historic site
is managed proactively to resolve external issues
and concerns and ensure that national historic
site values are not compromised.

Applicable Laws and Policies
NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
40 CFR 1500 (regulations for
implementing National Environmental
Policy Act), sections 1502.16, 1506.2(d))
Director’s Order 17: Tourism
Director’s Order 75A: Civic Engagement
and Public Involvement

Because the national historic site is an integral
part of a larger regional environment, the NPS
works cooperatively with others to anticipate,
avoid, and resolve potential conflicts, protect
national historic site resources, and address mutual interests in the quality of life for community
residents. Regional cooperation involves federal,
state, and local agencies, neighboring landowners, and all other concerned parties.
Natural Resources
Soils

The NPS actively seeks to understand and preserve
the soil resources of Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, and to prevent, to the extent possible, the
unnatural erosion, physical removal, or contamination of the soil, or its contamination of other
resources.
Natural soil resources and processes function in
as natural a condition as possible, except where
special considerations are allowable under policy.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Polices 2006
Coastal Zone Management Act
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113A: Pollution Control and Environment
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
139: Soil and Water Conservation Districts
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

24

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Hydrology/Water
Quality

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Surface water and groundwater are protected,
and water quality meets or exceeds all applicable
water quality standards.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006

Federal Water Pollution Control Act [The
NPS and NPS-permitted programs and facilities
Clean Water Act of 1972 (as amended in
are maintained and operated to avoid pollution of
1977)]
surface water and groundwater.
Executive Order 11514: Protection and
Enhancement of Environmental Quality
Executive Order 11990: Protection of
Wetlands
Executive Order 12088: Federal
Compliance with Pollution Control
Standards
Director’s Order 83: Public Health
Title 15 A, Subchapter 4B and Subchapter
06H of the North Carolina Administrative
Code
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113: Conservation and Development
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management
Floodplains

Natural floodplain values are preserved or
restored.
Long-term and short-term environmental effects
associated with the occupancy and modifications
of floodplains are avoided.
When it is not practicable to locate or relocate
development or inappropriate human activities
to a site outside the floodplain or where the
floodplain will be affected, the NPS:
• Prepares and approves a statement of findings
in accordance with Director’s Order 77-2.
• Uses nonstructural measures as much as
practicable to reduce hazards to human life
and property while minimizing impacts on the
natural resources of floodplains.
• Ensures that structures and facilities are designed to be consistent with the intent of the
standards and criteria of the National Flood
Insurance Program (44 CFR 60).

25

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Clean Water Act Section 404
Federal Coastal Zone Management Act
Executive Order 11990: Protection of
Wetlands
Executive Order 11988: Floodplain
Management
Director’s Order 77-2: Floodplain
Management
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Coastal Processes

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Natural shoreline processes (such as erosion,
deposition, overwash, shoreline migration) will be
allowed to continue without interference. Where
human activities or structures have altered the
nature or rate of natural shoreline processes, the
NPS will, in consultation with appropriate state
and federal agencies, investigate alternatives
for mitigating the effects of such activities or
structures and for restoring natural conditions.
The NPS will comply with the provisions of
Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management)
and North Carolina coastal zone management
plans prepared under the Coastal Zone
Management Act.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972
Executive Order 11988: Floodplain
Management
Director’s Order 77-2: Floodplain
Management
North Carolina Coastal Area Management
Act of 1972
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

Any shoreline manipulation measures proposed
to protect cultural resources may be approved
only after an analysis of the degree to which such
measures would impact natural resources and
processes, so that an informed decision can be
made through an assessment of alternatives.
Wetlands

The natural and beneficial values of wetlands are
preserved and enhanced. The NPS implements
a “no net loss of wetlands” policy and strives
to achieve a longer-term goal of net gain of
wetlands across the national park system through
the restoration of previously degraded wetlands.
The NPS avoids to the extent possible the longand short-term adverse impacts associated with
the destruction or modification of wetlands
and avoids direct or indirect support of new
construction in wetlands wherever there is a
practicable alternative.
The NPS compensates for remaining unavoidable
adverse impacts on wetlands by restoring
wetlands that have been previously degraded.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Clean Water Act Section 404
Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972
Executive Order 11514: Protection and
Enhancement of Environmental Quality
Executive Order 11990: Protection of
Wetlands
Executive Order 11988: Floodplain
Management
Director’s Order77-1: Wetland Protection
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113: Conservation and Development
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

26

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Endangered and
Threatened Plants
and Animals and
their Habitats

Desired Conditions
Federal and state-listed threatened and
endangered species and their habitats are
protected and sustained.
Native threatened and endangered species
populations that have been severely reduced in or
extirpated from Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
are restored where feasible and sustainable.

Applicable Laws and Policies
NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Endangered Species Act of 1973
40 CFR 1500 (regulations for
implementing the National Environmental
Policy Act)
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113: Conservation and Development
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113A: Pollution Control and Environment
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

Fire Management

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site fire
management programs are designed to meet
resource management objectives prescribed for
the various areas of the national historic site and
to ensure that the safety of firefighters and the
public are not compromised.
All wildland fires are effectively managed,
considering resource values to be protected and
firefighter and public safety, using the full range
of strategic and tactical operations as described in
an approved fire management plan.

General Natural
Resources/
Restoration

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy
(January 2001)
Director’s Order 18
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113: Conservation and Development
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

Native species populations that have been
NPS Organic Act
severely reduced in or extirpated from Fort Raleigh
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Historic Site are restored where feasible
and sustainable.
Directors Order 77: Wetland Protection
Populations of native plant and animal species
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
function in as natural condition as possible except 113: Conservation and Development
where special considerations are warranted.
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
Migratory birds are important components of
113A: Pollution Control and Environment
biological diversity. They are also important
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
economically, and recreational activities associated
Management
with migratory birds contribute to the support of
many communities. It is important for the NPS to: Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918
1) focus on bird populations; 2) focus on habitat
Memorandum of Understanding between
restoration where actions can benefit specific
the U.S. Department of the Interior
ecosystems and the migratory birds dependent on
National Park Service and the U.S. Fish
them; 3) focus on reducing the effects of climate
and Wildlife Service to Promote the
change on migratory birds and their habitats; and
Conservation of Migratory Birds, April 12,
4) recognize that actions that may provide long2010
term benefits to migratory bird populations as a
whole may result in short-term negative impacts
on individual birds.

27

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Ecologically Critical
Areas or other
Unique Natural
Resources

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

The NPS will maintain, as parts of the natural
ecosystems of the national historic site, all plants
and animals native to the national historic site’s
ecosystems.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Directors Order 77: Wetland Protection
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113: Conservation and Development
North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter
113A: Pollution Control and Environment
Reference Manual 77: Natural Resource
Management

28

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable
Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
TOPIC

Cultural
Resources
TOPIC
Archeological
Resources

Desired Conditions
(Continued)

Applicable Laws and Policies

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Archeological sites are identified and inventoried
and their National Register of Historic Places
significance is determined and documented.
Archeological sites are protected in an
undisturbed condition unless it is determined
through formal processes that disturbance or
natural deterioration is unavoidable. When
disturbance or deterioration is unavoidable, the
site is professionally documented and excavated
and the resulting artifacts, materials, and records
are curated and conserved in consultation with
the North Carolina State Historic Preservation
Office. Mitigation may include a variety of
measures ranging from avoidance to data
recovery. Artifacts, materials, and records resulting
from data recovery are curated and conserved as
provided for in 36 CFR 79. Some archeological
sites that can be adequately protected may be
interpreted to the visitor.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Historic Preservation Act
National Environmental Policy Act
The Antiquities Act of 1906
Archeological and Historic Preservation
Act; Standards and Guidelines for Federal
Agency Historic Preservation Programs
pursuant to the National Historic
Preservation Act (63 FR 20495-20508)
Archeological Resources Protection Act
Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act
Executive Order 11593
Executive Order 13007
36 CFR 800
36 CFR 79
Director’s Order 4: Diving Management
Director’s Order 12: Conservation
Planning, Environmental Impact
Analysis, and Decision-making and its
accompanying Handbook
Director’s Order 28: Cultural Resource
Management Guideline
Programmatic agreement among the
National Park Service, the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, and the
National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers (2008)
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and
Guidelines for Archeology and Historic
Preservation (1983)
North Carolina General Statutes Chapter
70: Indian Antiquities, Archeological
Resources and Unmarked Human Skeletal
Remains Protection

29

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Ethnographic
Resources

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Appropriate cultural anthropological research is
conducted in cooperation with groups associated
with Fort Raleigh National Historic Site.
All ethnographic resources determined eligible
for listing or listed on the National Register of
Historic Places are protected. If disturbance of
such resources is unavoidable, formal consultation
with the state historic preservation officer, the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and
with American Indian tribes as appropriate, is
conducted.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Historic Preservation Act
Archeological Resources Protection Act
National Environmental Policy Act
Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act
American Indian Religious Freedom Act
Programmatic agreement among the
National Park Service, the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, and the
National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers (2008)
Director’s Order 28B: Ethnography
Program
North Carolina General Statutes Chapter
70: Indian Antiquities, Archeological
Resources and Unmarked Human Skeletal
Remains Protection

Cultural
Landscapes

Cultural Landscape Inventories are conducted to
identify landscapes potentially eligible for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places, and
to assist in future management decisions for
landscapes and associated resources, both cultural
and natural.
Cultural Landscape Reports are prepared to
minimize loss of significant characteristics,
features, and materials when existing information
about the physical history and condition of a
cultural landscape is inadequate to address
anticipated management objectives, when
impending development alternatives could have
adverse effects, or to record actual treatment.
The management of cultural landscapes focuses
on preserving the landscape’s physical attributes,
biotic systems, and uses when those uses
contribute to its historical significance.
Treatments are based on sound preservation
practices for the preservation, rehabilitation,
restoration, or reconstruction of cultural
landscapes is undertaken in accordance with
the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines
for the Treatment of Cultural Landscapes.

30

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Historic Preservation Act
Executive Order 11593
36 CFR 800
Director’s Order 28: Cultural Resource
Management Guideline
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
the Treatment of Historic Properties with
Guidelines for Treatment of Cultural
Landscapes (1992)
Programmatic agreement among the
National Park Service, the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, and the
National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers (2008)

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Museum
Collections

Desired Conditions
All museum collections (prehistoric and
historic objects, artifacts, works of art, archival
documents, and natural history specimens)
are identified and inventoried, catalogued,
documented, preserved, and protected, and
provision is made for access to and use of items
in the collections for exhibits, research, and
interpretation in consultation with traditionally
associated groups.
The qualities that contribute to the significance
of collections are protected in accordance with
established standards.

Applicable Laws and Policies
NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Museum Properties Management Act
of 1955 as amended, 16 USC 18f,18f2—18f-3
American Indian Religious Freedom Act
Archeological and Historic Preservation
Act
Archeological Resources Protection Act
Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act
36 CFR 79 – Curation of Archaeological
Collections
36 CFR 800 – Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation Regulations for the Protection
of Historic Properties
Director’s Order 24: NPS Museum
Collections Management (2008)
Director’s Order 28: Cultural Resource
Management Guideline (1998)
NPS Museum Handbook, Parts I, II and III
Programmatic agreement among the
National Park Service, the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, and the
National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers (2008)
ICMS User Manual

31

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Historic Structures

Historic structures are inventoried and their
significance and integrity are evaluated under
National Register of Historic Places criteria. The
qualities that contribute to the listing or eligibility
for listing of historic structures on the National
Register of Historic Places are protected in
accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards and Guidelines for Archeology and
Historic Preservation.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Historic Preservation Act
National Environmental Policy Act
The Antiquities Act of 1906
Archeological and Historic Preservation
Act; Standards and Guidelines for Federal
Agency Historic Preservation Programs
pursuant to the National Historic
Preservation Act (63 FR 20495-20508)
Executive Order 11593
Executive Order 13007
36 CFR 800
Director’s Order 4: Diving Management
Director’s Order 28: Cultural Resource
Management Guideline
Programmatic agreement among the
National Park Service, the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation, and the
National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers (2008)
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and
Guidelines for Archeology and Historic
Preservation (1983)

Other Topics
Utilities and
Communication
Facilities

Neither Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
resources nor public enjoyment of the national
historic site are denigrated by nonconforming
uses. No new nonconforming use or rightsof-way are permitted through the national
historic site without specific statutory authority
and approval by the director of the NPS or his
representative, and are permitted only if there
is no practicable alternative to such use of NPS
lands. Telecommunication structures may be
permitted in the national historic site to the extent
that they do not jeopardize the national historic
site’s purpose and resources.

32

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Telecommunications Act
16 USC 5
16 USC 79
23 USC 317
36 CFR 14
Directors Order 53 and Reference Manual
53, Special Park Uses

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Transportation to
and within the
Park

Desired Conditions
Visitors have reasonable access to the national
historic site, and there are connections from
the site to regional transportation systems as
appropriate. Transportation facilities in the
national historic site provide access for the
protection, use, and enjoyment of site resources.
They provide integrity of the surroundings, respect
ecological processes, protect national historic site
resources, and provide the highest visual quality
and a rewarding visitor experience.
The NPS participates in transportation planning
forums that may result in links to the national
historic site or impact site resources. Working
with federal, tribal, state, and local agencies
on transportation issues, the NPS seeks
reasonable access to the national historic site,
and connections to external and alternative
transportation systems. When participating in
transportation planning forums, NPS considers
and evaluates the potential impacts of any
proposed actions on the natural and cultural
soundscape resources of the national historic site.

33

Applicable Laws and Policies
NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Park System General Authorities
Act
Directors Order 87, A, B, and D

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table 1: Desired Conditions and Applicable Laws and Policies Summarized by Impact Topic
(Continued)
TOPIC
Visitor Use and
Experience

Desired Conditions

Applicable Laws and Policies

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site resources are
conserved “unimpaired” for the enjoyment of
future generations. Visitors have opportunities for
types of enjoyment that are uniquely suited and
appropriate to the superlative natural and cultural
resources found in the national historic site. No
activities occur that would cause derogation of
the values and purposes for which the national
historic site was established.
For all zones, districts, or other logical
management divisions within Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, the types and levels of
visitor use are consistent with the desired resource
and visitor experience conditions prescribed for
those areas consistent with the unit’s purpose.
National historic site visitors will have
opportunities to understand and appreciate the
significance of the national historic site and its
resources, and to develop a personal stewardship
ethic by directly relating to the resources.
To the extent feasible, programs, services, and
facilities in the national historic site are accessible
to and usable by all people, including those
with disabilities within an inviting atmosphere
accessible to every segment of American society.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
National Park System General Authorities
Act
Americans with Disabilities Act
Architectural Barriers Act of 1968
Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines (2004)
Director’s Order 12: Conservation
Planning, Environmental Impact Analysis,
and Decision Making
Director’s Order 42: Accessibility for
Visitors with Disabilities in National Park
Service Programs and Services
28 CFR, Part 36
43 CFR, Part 17 - Nondiscrimination
in Federally Assisted Programs of the
Department of the Interior. Subpart
B: Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
Handicap
Title 36 CFR
Draft Final Accessibility Guidelines for
Outdoor Developed Areas (2009)

Public Health and
Safety

While recognizing that there are limitations on
its capability and constraints imposed by the
NPS Organic Act to not impair resources, the
service and its concessionaires, contractors,
and cooperators will seek to provide a safe and
healthful environment for visitors and employees.
The national historic site staff will strive to identify
recognizable threats to safety and health and
protect property by applying nationally accepted
standards. Consistent with mandates and
nonimpairment, the national historic site staff will
reduce or remove known hazards and/or apply
appropriate mitigative measures, such as closures,
guarding, gating, education, and other actions.

NPS Organic Act
NPS Management Policies 2006
Council on Environmental Quality
Regulations as part of the National
Environmental Policy Act
OSHA 29 CFR
Director’s Order 30 and RM-30: Hazard
and Solid Waste Management
Director’s Order 50 and RM-50: Safety and
Health
Director’s Order 51 and RM-51:
Emergency Medical Services
Director’s Order 58 and RM-58: Structural
Fire Management
Director’s Order 83 and RM-83: Public
Health

34

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

General Management Plan Issues/
Concerns to be Addressed

expanded authorized boundary is either
being developed as private residential
subdivisions or is part of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service property on the southwest
side of Highway 64 that has subsequently
been developed for its administrative and
visitor center facilities. During scoping, the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service suggested
a partnership to have a combined visitor
center/administrative facility at the location;
however, major enhancements to the
existing NPS administrative and visitor
center facilities at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site and establishment of a U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service facility eliminated that
proposal from further consideration.

The NPS received approximately 122
comments and suggestions during scoping.
Many of the comments and suggestions fell
into the following 12 categories:
•

Adequacy of administrative and
visitor facilities.

•

Management and coordination
with Roanoke Island Historical
Association on The Lost Colony
production.

•

Interpretation of the historical
Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad stops at Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site.

•

•

Not all issues or concerns raised by the
public are included in this document.
Some issues raised by the public were not
considered because they:

Cultural resource management in the
form of archeological research.
Management of the landscape at
Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, including its boundaries and
shorelines.

•

Are already prescribed by law,
regulation, or policy.

•

Would be in violation of laws,
regulations, or policies.

•

Were at a level that was too detailed
for a general management plan and
are more appropriately addressed in
subsequent planning documents.

•

Partnerships.

•

The Elizabethan Gardens.

•

Interpretation, programs, special
events.

IMPACT TOPICS (INCLUDING TOPICS
CONSIDERED AND DISMISSED)

•

African American history.

•

Research needs.

•

Shoreline erosion.

•

Commercial services.

Discussions during the early planning
phases of preparation of this General
Management Plan / Environmental
Impact Statement identified the range of
potential cultural and natural resources
and elements of the human environment
that might be of concern or might be
affected by implementation of the plan.
This review led to the selection of impact
topics to be analyzed. The impact topics that
were retained and dismissed, along with
rationales, are presented in the following
paragraphs. Relevant laws, regulations,
and policies for each impact topic retained

Issues and Concerns Not Addressed
Questions raised during scoping regarding
possible expansion of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site were considered. The boundary
was legislatively expanded by the 1990
legislation and much of the land under that

35

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

are described in Appendix B and are
summarized in Table 1. The impact topics
are described in accordance with Council
on Environmental Quality guidelines for
implementing the National Environmental
Policy Act and NPS Management Policies
2006.

and the shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser
brevirostrum) would not be affected by
management actions proposed in this
general management plan. While these
marine species of concern may have been
historically known, presently known, or
potentially occur in or near the national
historic site, actions proposed under this
general management plan would not directly
or indirectly affect these listed species or
adversely modify designated critical habitat
of these special status species. Therefore,
these species were not retained for further
analysis. Additional information on
dismissed species of concern is provided
in Appendix C. State listed species are
addressed.

Impact Topics Considered and Analyzed
in Detail
The range of planning issues and concerns
that were discussed with the national
historic site staff, stakeholders, and the
general public during the planning process
include those described as follows:
Floodplains – Construction of new facilities
in floodplains could affect floodplain
functions and values. These activities could
include trail construction or maintenance
activities, or other minor construction
activities.

Visitor Use and Experience – The
proposed action would afford important
new recreational opportunities and would
have a measurable beneficial effect on visitor
use and experience.

Wetlands – Freshwater and saltwater
wetlands are located within national historic
site boundaries and, therefore, could
potentially be affected by management
alternatives involving construction of new
facilities. Avoidance of wetland impacts
would be required.

Important Scientific, Archeological, and
Other Cultural Resources, Including
Historic Properties Listed or Eligible
for the National Register of Historic
Places (40 CFR 1508.27) – This impact
topic is subdivided as follows: archeological
resources, ethnographic resources, cultural
landscapes, museum collections, and
historic structures. Actions associated
with management alternatives could affect
these resources. Any actions, including
archeological investigations, that have the
potential to affect cultural resources listed
on or eligible for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places would be
undertaken after appropriate consultations
with the NPS Regional Archeologist, the
North Carolina State Historic Preservation
Office, any American Indian tribes
traditionally associated with park lands,
other interested agencies or organizations,
and the general public.

Vegetation – Alteration to vegetation
may occur where ground disturbance
occurs, such as during trail construction or
maintenance activities, expansion of parking
at headquarters (eight spaces), or other
minor construction activities.
Endangered or Threatened Plants and
Animals and Their Habitats (including
those proposed for listing, or on state
lists) (40 CFR 1508.27) – Management
alternatives involving construction
activities have a potential to affect these
resources. Several marine species that are
federally listed in or near Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, including the West
Indian manatee (Trichechus manatus),
loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta),

Urban Quality, Historic and Cultural
Resources, and Design of the Built
Environment (40 CFR 1502.16) - The
National Environmental Policy Act and NPS
36

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

impacts would be negligible. Existing
conditions include human-made noise
such as sounds from rehearsals and during
productions of The Lost Colony, electric
saws and other set construction activities,
vehicle-related noises, speakers, etc. The
existing environment has routine human
disturbances to the natural and cultural
soundscape. These disturbances are not
expected to change during the next 15
to 20 years as the production of The Lost
Colony continues into the future and
support activities for this production
would also continue into the foreseeable
future. The natural soundscape consists
primarily of bird calls, the wind, and water
lapping along the shoreline. The cultural
soundscape consists primarily of sounds
from rehearsals and during productions of
The Lost Colony, electric saws and other set
construction activities, etc. The management
actions proposed would not change
existing conditions over the long term.
Similarly, the minor expansions in footprint
proposed (i.e., expansion of parking lot
at headquarters [eight spaces]) are not
expected to change existing conditions over
the long term. Only negligible to minor
effects would be likely to the natural and
cultural soundscapes. Therefore, these
impact topics were not further assessed.

Director’s Order 12 require that this impact
topic be included in all environmental
impact statements. Cultural resources are
addressed as identified above.
Park Operations and Facilities – Park
operations in terms of proposed personnel
and facilities would change as a result of
the proposed action. There is potential
for impacts to park operations under the
proposed alternatives.
Energy Requirements and Conservation
Potential (40 CFR 1502.16); Natural or
Depletable Resource Requirements and
Conservation Potential (40 CFR 1502.16)
- The National Environmental Policy Act
requires that this impact topic be included
in all environmental impact statements.
The NPS reduces energy costs, eliminates
waste, and conserves energy resources by
using energy-efficient and cost-effective
sustainable technologies. Energy efficiency
is incorporated into the decision-making
process during the design and acquisition
of buildings, facilities, and transportation
systems that emphasize the use of renewable
energy sources. Actions proposed are minor
in nature and require minimal commitment
of depletable resources.
Impact Topics Considered
but Not Analyzed in Detail

Hydrology and Water Quality – Limited
construction would result in a very limited
amount of ground-disturbing activity and
the associated potential for soil erosion
and storm water runoff. Best management
practices would be implemented to avoid
potential effects to water quality and
hydrology. Only negligible to minor effects
would be likely.

Some impact topics commonly considered
during the planning process were not
relevant to the development of the general
management plan because: (a) implementing
the alternatives would have no effect,
beneficial effects, or a negligible effect on
the topic or resource, or (b) the resource
does not exist in the park. The impact topics
considered, but not analyzed in detail are
listed below with a brief rationale for each
topic.

Wildlife – Wildlife may avoid areas during
periods where disturbances would occur
during construction, play production, or
noises associated with human activity.
Where ground disturbance would
occur, such as during trail construction
or maintenance activities, expansion of
parking at headquarters (eight spaces)or
other minor construction activities, wildlife

Natural Soundscape/Cultural
Soundscape/Noise – Minor, temporary
impacts to the natural soundscape
would occur during any construction
activity; however, long-term adverse
37

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

may temporarily move away from activity
conducted. Best management practices
would ensure that wildlife was protected.
Impacts would be considered temporary
and negligible. Therefore, the wildlife impact
topic was dismissed from further analysis.

impact natural resources and processes,
so that an informed decision can be made
through an assessment of alternatives.
Impacts to cultural resources are addressed
under the appropriate cultural resources
impact topics.

Coastal Processes – In general, natural
shoreline processes (such as erosion,
deposition, overwash, shoreline migration)
will be allowed to continue without
interference by national historic site
management activities. There would be
alteration of the coastal environment related
to storms, hurricanes, other natural events,
and climate change. Where human activities
or structures have altered the nature or
rate of natural shoreline processes, the
NPS will, in consultation with appropriate
state and federal agencies, investigate
alternatives for mitigating the effects of such
activities or structures and for restoring
natural conditions. The NPS will comply
with the provisions of Executive Order
11988 (Floodplain Management) and
North Carolina coastal zone management
plans prepared under the Coastal Zone
Management Act. As defined by the Coastal
Zone Management Act, the actions subject
to the enforceable polices of approved state
management programs are any actions that
(1) cause changes in the manner in which
land, water, or other coastal zone natural
resources are used, (2) cause limitations on
the range of uses of coastal zone natural
resources, or (3) cause changes in the quality
or quantity of coastal zone natural resources.

As climate changes occur over the coming
decades, the globally averaged sea level
may rise between 0.19 and 0.58 meters (7.5
inches and 1.9 feet) by the year 2100 (Meehl
et al. 2007; Karl et al. 2009). Sea level rise in
the vicinity of the Outer Banks is estimated
to be 3 millimeters per year (USOCS 2011).
The effects of climate change are addressed
by impact topic in Chapter 3, “Affected
Environment.”
Aquatic Resources – Aquatic resources
in the adjacent estuary would not be
adversely affected by construction activities
or management actions associated with
the proposed alternatives. The NPS would
implement erosion and sediment control
measures and use best management
practices to control runoff from any soil
disturbing activities. Management actions
proposed would not adversely affect aquatic
resources. (See also Coastal Processes.)
Wilderness - There are no designated or
potential wilderness lands at Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site. Therefore, this impact
topic was dismissed from further analysis.
Ecologically Critical Areas, Wild and
Scenic Rivers, or Other Unique Natural
Resources (40 CFR 1508.27) – The majority
of the national historic site has pending
classification as a North Carolina designated
Significant Natural Heritage Area. The
North Carolina designated Significant
Natural Heritage Area and habitat is
assessed under the impact topic, Vegetation.
Existing facilities are located within the draft
boundaries of this area. There are no Wild
and Scenic Rivers or other unique natural
or ecologically critical resources identified
within the national historic site.

Additional studies would be required to
comprehensively address coastal processes
in the national historic site. A separate
evaluation of coastal erosion and the
processes that cause erosion is needed to
address this impact topic, and are included
under future plans proposed by the national
historic site.
Any shoreline manipulation measures
proposed to protect cultural resources
may be approved only after an analysis of
the degree to which such measures would
38

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

the Waterside Theatre. These conditions
are expected to continue into the future
in support of park operations, visitor
access, and production of The Lost Colony.
Implementation of management actions
proposed would not adversely alter existing
conditions or cause additional effects to the
natural lightscape. Therefore, this impact
topic was dismissed from further analysis.

Land Use – Management actions proposed
are consistent with local land use plans
as described under the Regional Plans
subsection of this chapter. Therefore, this
impact topic was dismissed from further
analysis.
Geology – No significant or unique geologic
features are located in or near the national
historic site; therefore, there is no potential
to affect geological resources.

Sacred Sites (Executive Order 13007) –
There are no sacred sites recorded in the
national historic site or in the immediate
vicinity. Therefore, this impact topic was
dismissed from further analysis.

Soils – Soils conditions would be changed
where ground disturbance occurs, such as
during trail construction or maintenance
activities, expansion of parking at
headquarters (eight spaces), or other minor
construction activities. Best management
practices would ensure that soil resources
were protected and soil losses were
negligible, therefore this impact topic was
dismissed from further analysis.

Indian Trust Resources (ECM95–2) –
Indian trust assets are owned by American
Indians but held in trust by the United
States. Indian trust assets do not occur
within the national historic site or in the
vicinity. Therefore, this impact topic was
dismissed from further analysis.

Air Quality – The management alternatives
involve minor and temporary construction
activities and no change in air quality would
result. Therefore, this impact topic was
dismissed from further analysis. Under the
alternatives, limited or no new facilities
would be constructed and limited increases
in staff are proposed. Emission sources at
the national historic site would primarily
be associated with operation of NPS
vehicles, secondary emissions associated
with operations of the Outer Banks Group
Administrative Headquarters, visitor center
facilities, and operation of the Waterside
Theatre and support buildings. Greenhouse
gas emissions occurring as a result of
management actions under the alternatives
have small potential effects. Therefore, the
management alternatives contribution to
greenhouse gas emissions was dismissed
from further analysis.

Concessioners and Contracts – The
management actions proposed would
not impact potential concessioners and
contracts at Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site as there are no current or planned NPS
concessions within the national historic site.
Therefore, this impact topic was dismissed
from further analysis.
Public Health and Safety (40 CFR
1508.27) – Management actions proposed
in this general management plan would
have negligible impacts on public health
and safety. Impacts associated with traffic
management during peak summer visitation
are assessed under Park Operations. There
were no public health and safety concerns
raised during public and internal scoping
for the general management plan. Over
the past several years, the national historic
site has had a few incidents with people
tripping over uneven sidewalk sections or
other constructed elements such as ramps
and stairs. All these incidents resulted in
repairs and replacements to correct the
safety hazard. The average annual number of
incidents requiring some type of aid is one

Natural Lightscape (Night Sky) – There
would be no adverse impacts to the natural
lightscape over baseline conditions as a
result of management actions. The existing
conditions include lighting in the vicinity
of national historic site facilities and at
39

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

per year. Therefore, this impact topic was
dismissed from further analysis.

1996). None of the alternatives would have
disproportionate health or environmental
effects on populations of concern. Impacts
on the socioeconomic environment due to
the implementation of actions proposed
in the alternatives would be negligible and
such impacts would not be expected to
substantially alter the physical or social
structure of nearby communities in Manteo
or Roanoke Island. Therefore, this impact
topic was dismissed from further analysis.

Economics and Socioeconomics –
Economic and socioeconomic effects of
implementation of management actions
proposed would not have a measurable
impact on the local or regional economy.
Local labor and resources would be used for
projects during implementation of this plan,
but the scale of the proposed construction is
such that any impacts would be short-term
and negligible or shor-term and beneficial.
Therefore, this impact topic was dismissed
from further analysis.

Accessibility for Individuals with
Disabilities – In the context of activities
and park operations, facilities and services
would be required to meet the guidelines
under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
No appreciable effects to Americans with
disabilities would be anticipated under
any of the alternatives. Beneficial effects
would result from addressing handicapped
parking for any new parking spaces
allocated associated with the expansion of
parking at headquarters (eight spaces), as
well as consideration of access for those
with disabilities during trail design and
construction. Therefore, this impact topic
was dismissed from further analysis.

Transportation – Local and regional
transportation would not be affected by
management actions proposed. Visitors
have reasonable access to the national
historic site, and the site would coordinate
with local transportation providers for
connections from the national historic
site to regional transportation systems
as appropriate. Parking facilities in the
national historic site provide access for
the protection, use, and enjoyment of
resources at the national historic site.
The NPS will continue to participate in
transportation planning forums that may
result in links to the national historic site
or impact resources at the national historic
site. Working with federal, state, and local
agencies on transportation issues, the NPS
would continue to seek reasonable access to
the national historic site, and connections
to external and alternative transportation
systems. Therefore, this impact topic is
dismissed from further consideration.

Mineral and Agricultural Resources –
The lands within the Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site area are not available for
farming or mineral extraction; no adverse
impacts on these resources are predicted.
Therefore, this impact topic was dismissed
from further analysis.
Prime and Unique Agricultural Lands
(40 CFR 1508.27) – Prime farmland has the
best combination of physical and chemical
characteristics for producing food, feed,
forage, fiber, and oilseed crops. Lands in the
vicinity of the Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site do not meet the definition of prime and
unique agricultural lands. Therefore, this
impact topic was dismissed from further
analysis.

Socially or Economically Disadvantaged
Populations (see Environmental
Justice Executive Order 12898 for more
information) – Executive Order 12898,
“General Actions to Address Environmental
Justice in Minority Populations and LowIncome Populations,” requires that all
federal agencies address the effects of
policies on minorities and low-income
populations or communities as defined in
the Environmental Justice Guidance (July
40

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan

RELATIONSHIP OF OTHER
PLANNING EFFORTS TO THIS
GENERAL MANAGEMENT PLAN

This general management plan is consistent
with the Dare County Land Use Management
Plan.

Many projects and plans that the NPS and
other organizations have in place, are in
progress, or planned for the near future,
may affect the management direction and
resulting actions proposed in this general
management plan. The general management
plan may also have an effect on other local,
state or federal government plans being
implemented in the surrounding area
and region. As part of the analysis and
consideration of potential impacts, the
planning team, therefore, identified the
following relevant planning efforts. The
list is not comprehensive, but provides an
overview to show the connection between
this general management plan and other
pertinent planning efforts.

Dare County Community Transportation
Service Plan: The plan is prepared under a
partnering agreement between Dare County
and the North Carolina Department of
Transportation. The purpose of the plan
is to ensure community transportation
systems in North Carolina make strategic
responses to the future mobility needs of the
general public and targeted populations in
their service areas. The plan documents the
unique transportation-related challenges
associated with Dare County’s coastal
area; identifies, evaluates, develops, and
recommends strategies that enhance the
mobility options for targeted populations
and the general public; and reviews the
current performance and organizational
direction of the public transportation system
and recommends alternative operational or
managerial strategies that increase mobility
options for passengers, and improves
the efficiency and effectiveness of the
organization and transportation services
(Dare County 2010b).

Regional Plans
Dare County Land Use Management Plan
(Approved in 2011): The State of North
Carolina requires all local governments
within the twenty county coastal region to
prepare and periodically update land use
plans for use in the review and issuance of
the Coastal Area Management Act major
permit applications and federal consistency
reviews. The Dare County Land Use Plan is
a policy document intended to be used by
the Dare County Board of Commissioners,
Dare County Planning Board, and Dare
County Planning Department to guide
growth and development in unincorporated
Dare County. The land use plan contains a
vision statement and general objectives for
the community, policies and implementation
strategies to support the vision statement
and objectives, demographic information
and population projections, associated maps
of existing land use patterns, and desired
future land use patterns. The Dare County
Land Use Plan applies to the unincorporated
portions of Dare County (Hatteras Island,
Mainland, Colington, Martins Point, and
Roanoke Island outside the boundaries for
the Town of Manteo) (Dare County 2010a).

The NPS participates in transportation
planning forums that may result in links to
the national historic site or impact national
historic site resources. Working with federal,
state, and local agencies on transportation
issues, the NPS seeks reasonable access to
the national historic site, and connections
to external and alternative transportation
systems. Implementation of the management
actions proposed would not conflict with
the Dare County Community Transportation
Service Plan.
Other NPS Plans
Outer Banks Fire Management Plan:
Prepared in 2001, this plan addresses
management of fires in the Outer Banks
Group (Cape Hatteras National Seashore,
Wright Brothers National Memorial, and
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site). NPS
Management Policies 2006 require that
41

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

all NPS areas with vegetation capable of
supporting fire develop a Fire Management
Plan. Resource Management Plans for
Cape Hatteras National Seashore (1984),
Wright Brothers National Memorial (1996),
and Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
(1998) address the use of fire to achieve
resource management objectives. The Fire
Management Plan implements the selected
management actions from the appropriate
national historic site’s Resource Management
Plan or Resource Stewardship Strategy
coupled with guidance provided by the
general management plan for each area.
The purpose of the Fire Management Plan
is to outline actions that will be taken by
the Outer Banks Group in meeting the fire
management goals established for the area
(NPS 2001).

and natural history stories. Achievement of
the plan’s recommendations depends on
management support, NPS funding, and the
positive initiative of both the NPS and its
partners.
NEXT STEPS IN
THE PLANNING PROCESS
The Draft General Management Plan /
Environmental Impact Statement will include
a 60-day public review and comment period
after which the NPS planning team will
evaluate comments from other federal, state,
and local agencies, American Indian tribes,
organizations, businesses, and individuals
regarding the draft plan and incorporate
appropriate changes into a Final General
Management Plan /Environmental Impact
Statement. The final plan will include letters
from governmental agencies, any substantive
comments on the draft document, and
NPS responses to those comments.
Following distribution of the final plan
and a 30-day no-action period, a record
of decision is prepared for the signature
of the NPS regional director documenting
the NPS selection of an alternative for
implementation. With the signing of the
record of decision, the plan can then be
implemented.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Historic Resources Management Plan:
This plan was prepared in 1977 and updated
in 1979. It provides a plan for management
of historic resources in the national historic
site. The plan describes the historical setting
of the national historic site, procedures for
management of historic scene and resources,
a schedule for management actions, a
program of special management projects,
an historical studies plan, and a summary of
research proposals.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site LongRange Interpretive Plan: This plan is
required for each national park and was
prepared in 2010. The Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site Long-Range Interpretive Plan
is one of three documents that comprise
a national historic site’s Comprehensive
Interpretive Plan, the other two being the
Annual Interpretive Implementation Plan
and the Interpretive Database. The Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site Long-Range
Interpretive Plan helps guide national
historic site management for a period of
five to seven years in reaching the realistic
vision of the future for interpretive services
and media. It guides the interpretive staff in
their efforts to orient visitors to the national
historic site and interpret the site’s human

The implementation of the approved plan
will depend on future funding. The approval
of a plan does not guarantee that the funding
and staffing needed to implement the plan
will be forthcoming. Full implementation of
the approved plan could be many years in
the future.
Implementation of the approved plan also
could be affected by other factors. Once
the general management plan has been
approved, additional feasibility studies and
more detailed planning and environmental
documentation would be completed, as
appropriate, before any proposed actions
can be carried out. For example:

42

Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for a General Management Plan
•

Appropriate permits would be
obtained before implementing
actions that would impact wetlands.

•

Appropriate federal and state
agencies would be consulted
concerning actions that could affect
threatened and endangered species.

•

The state historic preservation office,
American Indian tribes traditionally
associated with park lands, other
interested agencies or organizations,
and the general public would be
consulted concerning actions that
could affect cultural resources.

•

Appropriate National Environmental
Policy Act documentation would be
prepared.

The general management plan does
not describe how particular programs
or projects should be prioritized or
implemented. Those decisions will be
addressed during the more detailed
planning associated with strategic plans,
implementation plans, etc. All of those
future, more detailed plans will tier from the
approved general management plan and will
be based on the goals, future conditions, and
appropriate types of activities established
in the approved general management plan.
Actions directed by general management
plans or in subsequent implementation
plans are accomplished over time. Budget
restrictions, requirements for additional data
or regulatory compliance, and competing
national park system priorities could prevent
immediate implementation of many actions.
Major or especially costly actions could
be implemented 10 or more years into the
future.

43

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER
2
Alternatives

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 2: ALTERNATIVES
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter...

A general management plan focuses on
what is most important about a park and
prescribes the desired resource conditions
and associated opportunities for visitor
experiences. The plan then defines the kinds
and levels of management, development,
and access appropriate to achieving the
desired resource conditions and visitor
opportunities. As noted in chapter 1, many
aspects of the desired conditions of Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site are defined
in the establishing legislation, the national
historic site’s purpose and significance
statements, and the servicewide mandates
and policies that apply to all units of
the national park system. Within these
parameters, the NPS planning team solicited
input regarding desired conditions from
the public, NPS staff, government agencies,
and other organizations. Because there is
a range of approaches to achieving desired
conditions, this plan considers a range of
alternatives. The alternatives are:
•

Consistent with the park’s purpose
and significance;

•

Focused on its fundamental and
other important resources and
values; and

•

•
•
•
•

Alternatives and Proposed
Management Zones
Mitigation Measures
Future Plans Needed
Dismissed Actions

The main focus of this chapter is the actions
that would differ between the management
alternatives. The management alternatives
are intended to be specific enough to
provide clear management direction for
park staff, while still allowing flexibility to
adapt to changing future conditions and
situations. They outline alternate visions of
the future that would guide management of
the national historic site. Implementation of
the NPS Preferred Alternative as described
in this general management plan will depend
on future funding, resource protection
priorities, and fulfillment of environmental
and cultural resource compliance
requirements. Larger capital improvements
may be phased in over several years, and full
implementation of the general management
plan could be many years into the future.
Three alternatives were analyzed…

Reflective of the range of
stakeholders’ interests in the park
and the desirability of providing for a
variety of visitor experiences.

•
•
•

In accordance with requirements of the
National Environmental Policy Act, one of
the alternatives must be no-action / continue
current management. The alternative of noaction / continue current management is the
baseline against which the other alternatives,
collectively called “the action alternatives,”
are compared. There are two action
alternatives presented, Alternatives B and C.

Alternative A: No-action Alternative
Alternative B: Enhanced Visitor
Experience
Alternative C: Enhanced Focus on
Research

This chapter describes the alternatives
and how they were developed, including
the definition of proposed management
zones. Each alternative includes the concept
of management zones and estimated
costs. The NPS-preferred alternative and
environmentally preferable alternative
are identified and tables are presented
47

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

that highlight the differences between the
alternatives and summarize their impacts.
Indicators, standards, monitoring strategies,
and potential management strategies for
each management zone are described in
terms of user capacity. This chapter also
identifies mitigation measures that would be
applied regardless of the alternative selected;
future plans that would be needed; and
alternatives or actions not included in either
alternative with explanations of why they
were dismissed.

organizations and agencies and
increase the national historic site’s
emphasis on research related to
interpretive themes and legislative
mandates.
Both general management plan action
alternatives represent a different approach
to managing the national historic site. To
develop the draft alternatives, the general
management plan team considered the
following questions:

FORMULATION OF ALTERNATIVES
Sections 1502.14 and 1508.25 of the
Council on Environmental Quality (1978)
regulations for implementing the National
Environmental Policy Act require that the
alternative of no-action be included in all
environmental evaluations. Accordingly,
the NPS developed a no-action alternative,
designated Alternative A, under which
current management would continue.
The no-action alternative is included as a
baseline for comparing the consequences
of implementing each action alternative.
The two action alternatives present
different ways to manage resources and
visitor use, and to improve facilities and/
or infrastructure at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. A management concept was
first developed for each action alternative.
Consistent with its general concept, each
action alternative was then designed to meet
all NPS general management planning goals
and objectives and would facilitate meeting
servicewide mandates and policies.

•

Why did Congress establish the
national historic site, and what is its
purpose? What makes the national
historic site significant? Why is it
important when compared to other
national park units?

•

What are the hopes, interests,
and concerns for the future of the
national historic site that citizens
shared during public meetings and
through written comments?

•

How can the national historic site be
operated efficiently and effectively?

•

How can the NPS best manage the
national historic site to provide for
visitor enjoyment while still meeting
all requirements of laws and NPS
policy?

Management zones identify desired
conditions for national historic site
resources and visitor experiences in
different areas of the national historic site.
Collectively, management zones include the
complete range of potential, appropriate
resource conditions, visitor experiences,
and facilities within the scope of the national
historic site’s purpose, significance, and
special mandates.

Within this framework:
•

•

Alternative B would emphasize a
greater reliance on partnerships
and on-site visitor facilities and
services to accomplish the expanded
interpretive mission of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site.

Each management zone employs a
different approach for administering
resources or uses in a specified area based
on the desired outcomes for natural and
cultural resource conditions and visitor

Alternative C (the NPS Preferred
Alternative) would coordinate
and expand efforts with research
48

Chapter 2: Alternatives

opportunities. To achieve these outcomes,
management approaches include target goals
or objectives for the resource conditions;
visitor experiences; and appropriate kinds
and levels of management, access, and
development.
There are multiple ways to achieve the
national historic site’s purpose, maintain its
significance, and preserve its fundamental
resources and values. Within these
boundaries, the action alternatives embody
the range of what the public and the NPS
want to see accomplished with regard to
managing resources and addressing planning
issues for natural and cultural resource
conditions, visitor use and experience, and
NPS management and operations.

•

Management zones are applied
to different areas in different
alternatives.

•

Management zoning is not part
of the alternative of no-action /
continue current management.

Four management zones were developed for
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site. Each action alternative consists of a combination of
the management zones described below. The
management zones specify the cultural and
natural resource conditions, visitor experiences, and kinds and levels of management,
access, and development desired in the
national historic site.
The four management zones used in the
action alternatives are:

Actions considered but not incorporated
into either of the alternatives, are discussed
later in this chapter under “Alternatives and
Actions Considered but Dismissed from
Further Consideration.”
The following sections contributed to and
were all part of the process for developing
the alternatives for Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site.

•

Visitor Services;

•

Administrative;

•

Waterside Theatre; and

•

Resource Preservation.

Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of
each management zone. These include:

MANAGEMENT ZONES USED
IN THE ACTION ALTERNATIVES
Management zones are descriptions of
desired conditions for the resources and
visitor experiences in different areas of the
national historic site. Management zones
are determined for each national park
system unit; however, management zones
for one unit will likely not be exactly the
same for any other national park system
unit. Management zones identify the widest
range of potential appropriate resource
conditions, visitor experiences, and facilities
for the national historic site that fall within
the scope of the national historic site’s
purpose, significance, and special mandates.
Placement, or mapping of management
zones, depends on the concept expressed in
each alternative.

•

Desired resource conditions;

•

Desired visitor experience;

•

Appropriate kinds and levels of
development;

•

Appropriate kinds and levels of
management activities; and

•

Appropriate kinds and levels of
visitor activities.

A brief summary of each management zone
is provided in the subsections that follow.

49

50

DESIRED
VISITOR
EXPERIENCE

DESIRED
RESOURCE
CONDITIONS

CATEGORY

ADMINISTRATIVE ZONE
Non-historical elements such as
maintenance facilities, administrative offices, national historic
site housing, cultural resources
research, treatment and storage
facilities, and potential partner
offices and facilities would
predominate in this type of
zone. Minimizing the impacts
of these facilities on the natural
and cultural resources of the
national historic site would be a
high priority. A moderate level
of native, non-invasive landscape plantings such as grass,
shrubs, small trees, flowers,
and ground covers could be
introduced and maintained to
improve the visual appeal of the
structures.

Visitors would not typically
enter this zone. Should they
enter, either unintentionally or
to obtain information or assistance, they might encounter
maintenance or administrative
buildings, equipment, machinery in operation, loud sounds,
national historic site staff, and
partner organization staff. Minimizing adverse impacts on the
visitor experience through facility design and location as well
as through operational procedures would be a high priority.

VISITOR SERVICES
ZONE

Necessary visitor facilities in this
zone would be placed in an
appropriate setting. The area
would be modified for visitor
access and park operations in
a way that aesthetically blends
with the natural and cultural
environment. Minimizing the
impacts of these facilities on the
natural and cultural resources of
the national historic site would
be a high priority. An appropriate level of native, non-invasive
landscape plantings such as
grass, shrubs, small trees, flowers, and ground covers would
be installed and maintained to
improve the visual appeal of the
structures to a higher standard
than in the administrative zone.

This area would provide for a
high level of visitor activity and
support operations. In this zone,
visitors would enter the national
historic site and they would
have opportunities to receive
orientation and information,
personal safety guidance and instruction, interact with national
historic site staff and other visitors, and experience and learn
about the national historic site’s
resources, interpretive themes,
and partner activities.

Visitors would attend The Lost
Colony symphonic drama and
attend and participate in appropriate community and cultural
events.

The environment of the zone
would be modified to accommodate The Lost Colony
outdoor symphonic drama. The
impacts of these modifications
on the natural and cultural
resources of the national historic
site would be minimized.

WATERSIDE THEATRE
ZONE

Table 2: Management Zones for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site

Observation, education,
reflection, and learning would
be the primary visitor experiences desired. Interpretive
programs could occur in this
zone. Visitors would also find
the opportunity for solitary,
individual exploration and
discovery, quiet, and reflective
experiences.

Cultural and natural resources
and discoveries will be preserved and protected.

RESOURCE PRESERVATION ZONE

51

APPROPRIATE
KINDS
& LEVELS
OF VISITOR
ACTIVITIES

APPROPRIATE
KINDS
& LEVELS OF
MANAGEMENT
ACTIVITIES

APPROPRIATE
KINDS
& LEVELS OF
DEVELOPMENT

CATEGORY

ADMINISTRATIVE ZONE
The facilities found in this zone
could include maintenance
buildings, vehicle storage
structures, national historic site
offices, national historic site
housing, parking areas, utilities, cultural resources research,
treatment and storage buildings, and partner offices, facilities, and housing. Standards of
design to minimize negative impacts would be a high priority.
Moderate to intensive management in this zone by NPS and
its partners would be directed
toward maintenance of buildings and grounds, fire response
(wildland/urban interface,
prescribed burns), as well as
staging and preparation for
maintenance and resource research and protection activities
in other zones. National historic
site administrative activities
would predominate in this
zone.
Visitors would typically enter
this zone to obtain information
or assistance, obtain permits,
conduct research, and attend
special events.

VISITOR SERVICES
ZONE

Visitor facilities with restrooms,
auditoriums, bookstores, drinking water fountains, museums,
fee-collection facilities, parking,
and walkways are the types of
facilities that could be found in
this zone.

Management activities would
include regular maintenance of
both the structural and landscape elements in the zone,
law enforcement, interpretive
programs, fire response (wildland/urban interface, prescribed
burns), and special events.

Visitor activities would include
entering the national historic
site grounds, receiving orientation to the resources and programs of the national historic
site and partner facilities and activities, attending special events,
and participating in interpretive
and other programs.

Management activities that
could occur in this zone
include general maintenance,
preservation, restoration,
stabilization, visitor protection
and law enforcement, fire
response (wildland/urban interface, prescribed burns), and
archeological investigations.

Typical visitor activities would
include walking, hiking, fishing, participating in interpretive programs, viewing
resources and interpretive
displays, photography, and
similar pursuits.

Attend The Lost Colony outdoor
symphonic drama and other
community and cultural events,
attend interpretive programs,
and purchase souvenirs and
refreshments.

The minimum development
necessary for visitor access,
safety, resource protection,
and interpretive purposes
would occur in this zone.
Such development could include signage, trails, pathways
and benches or other seating,
but would not include permanent enclosed structures,
restrooms, or other types of
buildings.

RESOURCE PRESERVATION ZONE

Management in this zone would
include ticket sales, maintenance of grounds and infrastructure, fire response (wildland/urban interface, prescribed
burns), as well as activities
associated with drama production and other events.

The development in this zone
would include buildings and
infrastructure to accommodate
The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic drama and facilities for
commemorating the history of
the drama.

WATERSIDE THEATRE
ZONE

Table 2: Management Zones for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

VISITOR SERVICES ZONE

law enforcement, interpretive programs,
fire response (wildland/urban interface,
prescribed burns), and conducting and
supporting special events.

Desired Resource Conditions
Visitor Services Zone would blend the
built environment in a setting in context
with surrounding natural and cultural
resources. Minimizing the impact of
facilities on cultural and natural resources
of the national historic site would be a high
priority. An appropriate level of native,
non-invasive plants such as ground covers,
shrubs, wildflowers, and small trees would
be installed to improve the visual appeal of
structures and walkways where appropriate.

Appropriate Kinds and Levels
of Visitor Activities
This management zone includes areas
where visitors are introduced to the national
historic site. Visitors enter the national
historic site in this management zone, may
receive information about the national
historic site and its resources, attend
interpretive programs or learn where these
programs are being held, and learn about
what activities are possible in the national
historic site. Information about partners’
facilities and activities would be provided.
Special events may be conducted in this
management zone as well as other routine
interpretive programs.

Desired Visitor Experience
This management zone would be a busy
area where much of the visitor activity and
support operations occur. It may be noisy
from the sounds of human activity and
visitors entering the national historic site,
walking paved walkways, and participating
in interpretive activities. Visitors would
use this area for orientation, interpretive
programs, and special events. Visitors would
have the opportunity to interact with NPS
staff and other visitors, and experience
and learn about the national historic
site’s resources through participation in
interpretive activities and partner-led
activities.

ADMINISTRATIVE ZONE
Desired Resource Conditions
Administrative facilities would be located in
this management zone, such as maintenance
facilities; administrative offices; national
historic site staff housing; research,
treatment, and storage facilities; and partner
offices and facilities. (Research, treatment,
and storage facilities house artifacts and
other resources including ethnographic
materials, oral histories, and archival
materials associated with cultural sites/
cultural landscapes and other resources.)
These areas would be intended primarily
for use by official visitors, researchers,
participants in special events, groups and
individuals conducting business with the
national historic site, as well as NPS staff.

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Development
Facilities would include restrooms,
auditoriums, bookstores, museums, drinking
water fountains, fee-collection facilities,
parking area, and walkways.
Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Management Activity

Facilities such as buildings, parking lots,
and storage areas would support national
historic site and partner operations and
management. They would be designed
to complement surrounding topography
and environmental conditions and would
take advantage of energy efficiency and

Management efforts required to support
visitor services would include maintenance
of structural and landscape elements in the
management zone. Facilities named above
would be maintained in good condition.
Other management efforts would include
52

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Management Activity

sustainable design standards. Minimizing
impacts to natural and cultural resources
would be a high priority. A moderate level
of native landscape plantings would be
appropriate in this management zone,
including ground covers to minimize
erosion, and shrubs, wildflowers, and
trees to improve the visual appeal of the
structures.

Moderate to intensive management efforts
would be required in the Administrative
Zone by NPS and its partners. Efforts would
be directed toward maintenance of buildings
and grounds, fire response (wildland/urban
interface, prescribed burns), as well as
staging and preparation for maintenance
and resource research and protection
activities to be conducted throughout Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site. Facilities
would be maintained in good condition.
Administrative activities would predominate
in this management zone.

Desired Visitor Experience
The Administrative Zone would be a busy
area for NPS staff where support operations
occur. Visitors would typically be present
in this management zone when they were
conducting research, seeking assistance,
information, permits, or attending special
events. Should visitors enter this zone,
they might encounter maintenance or
administrative buildings, equipment,
machinery in operation, national historic
site staff, and partner organization staff
conducting rehearsals or productions. It
may be noisy from the sounds of human use
associated with events or projects. The NPS
would consider aspects of design; location,
level, and time of activities; and buffers to
minimize adverse effects that structures
and activities might have on the visitor
experience.

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Visitor Activities
This management zone would be primarily
where NPS staff would be present. Visitors
would typically enter this management
zone when they were conducting research,
seeking assistance, information, permits, or
attending special events.
WATERSIDE THEATRE ZONE
Desired Resource Conditions
This zone would include the Waterside
Theatre and other facilities that
accommodate and support The Lost Colony
outdoor symphonic drama. Visitors would
use this area to attend The Lost Colony
production and other community and
cultural events. Noise levels and use of this
management zone would vary with The Lost
Colony production schedule, which varies
seasonally.

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Development
Facilities that could occur in this
management zone would be those that
support national historic site operations,
including: maintenance buildings; vehicle
and equipment storage structures; national
historic site offices; national historic site
housing; parking areas; utilities; research,
treatment and storage buildings; and partner
offices, facilities, and housing. Sustainable
designs would be considered, along with
other measures to minimize impacts
associated with the built environment.

Desired Visitor Experience
The Waterside Theatre Zone would be
where visitors would come expecting to
attend The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic
drama and other events. Sights and sounds
of the dramatic production would be
anticipated. Lighting would make the stage
and actors visible and lighted pathways
53

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

would be expected. Visitors would expect
to see other people and enjoy events held
within this management zone.

RESOURCE PRESERVATION ZONE

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Development

The primary focus of this management
zone would be the preservation and
protection of cultural resources and artifacts
discovered. Archeological research would
provide additional insights into Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site resources that would
improve the overall body of knowledge and
areas where protective measures would be
necessary. Natural resources would continue
to be protected in accordance with NPS
policies and other mandates.

Desired Resource Conditions

Facilities that could occur in this
management zone would be buildings
and infrastructure needed to support the
Waterside Theatre and The Lost Colony
outdoor symphonic drama and that help
commemorate the history of the drama and
its production at the national historic site.
Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Management Activity

Desired Visitor Experience

Management efforts in this management
zone would include ticket sales, maintenance
of grounds and infrastructure, fire response
(wildland/urban interface, prescribed
burns), as well as activities associated with
The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic drama.

Primary desired visitor experiences would
entail observation, education, reflection,
and learning. The types of activities that
would be appropriate would be interpretive
walks, talks, and programs. Visitors would
find opportunities for solitary, individual
exploration and discovery with quiet and
reflective experiences.

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Visitor Activities

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Development

The types of visitor activities in this
management zone would primarily
be attending The Lost Colony outdoor
symphonic drama, other cultural or
community events, or NPS interpretive
programs. Visitors would be able to purchase
souvenirs and refreshments.

Minimal facilities would be appropriate
in the Resource Preservation Zone. The
types of facilities considered appropriate
would be those that support visitor access,
safety, resource protection, and interpretive
activities. This would include outdoor
signage, trails, walkways, benches, or other
seating. Permanent enclosed structures,
restrooms, or other types of buildings
would not be considered appropriate in the
Resource Preservation Zone.
Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Management Activity
Management activities in this management
zone would include general maintenance,
preservation, restoration, stabilization,
visitor protection and law enforcement, and
archeological investigations. Fire response

High summer visitation is primarily
associated with The Lost Colony productions
held at the national historic site’s Waterside
Theatre.

54

Chapter 2: Alternatives

CONSIDERING RELATIVE COSTS

(wildland/urban interface, prescribed
burns) activities may be necessary for safety
reasons.

The purpose of the cost estimate in a general
management plan is to provide a sense of the
relative costs to implement each alternative.
The presentation of costs in this plan is
based on the types and general intensities
of development in each alternative,
staffing levels that would be required to
fully implement the alternative, and other
projects and plans, including resource
management activities.

Appropriate Kinds and
Levels of Visitor Activities
Typical visitor activities that would be
appropriate in the Resource Preservation
Zone would include walking, hiking, fishing,
bird watching, participating in interpretive
programs, viewing cultural resources and
interpretive displays, photography, and
similar pursuits.

The cost figures shown in the summary
table at the end of this chapter were
developed using NPS and industry cost
estimating guidelines to the extent possible.
The estimated annual and one-time costs
are presented for each alternative and
summarized at the end of this chapter.
Project-specific costs will be determined
in subsequent, more detailed planning
and design exercises, and will consider
the design of facilities, identification of
detailed resource protection needs, and
changing visitor experience goals. Actual
costs to the NPS will vary, depending on if
and when actions are implemented, and on
contributions by partners and volunteers.
Implementation of the approved plan would
depend on future NPS funding levels and
servicewide priorities, and on partnership
funds, time, and effort.

APPLYING MANAGEMENT ZONES
Management concepts are different for
each alternative. They broadly define
the character of a park unit in terms of
particular kinds of resource conditions
and associated visitor experiences (the
features of management zones). Different
management concepts provide different
approaches to addressing general
management plan-level issues.
In formulating the alternatives, the
management zones were placed in different
locations or configurations on the map,
according to the concept of each alternative.
That is, the management alternatives
represent different ways to apply the
management zones to the national historic
site.

The actual cost of implementing the
approved general management plan will
ultimately depend on future funding and
servicewide priorities over the life of the
plan, as well as the ability to partner with
other agencies or groups. The approval
of a general management plan does not
guarantee that funding and staffing needed
to implement the plan will be forthcoming.
Funding for capital construction
improvements is not currently shown
in NPS construction programs. It is not
likely that all capital improvements will be
totally implemented during the life of the
plan. Larger capital improvements may be
phased over several years. Because of the
generalized nature of these cost estimates,

In some cases, the assignment of
management zones was guided by the
locations of existing facilities. For example,
the maintenance area and employee
residences contain parking lots, buildings,
and other features that already support
administrative services. Therefore, these
areas were assigned to the administrative
zone in both of the action alternatives.

55

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

costs in this general management plan are
presented only in general categories. All
costs were rounded to the nearest hundred
dollars.

resources not related to facilities, the
development of visitor use tools not related
to facilities, and other national historic site
management activities that would require
substantial funding above national historic
site annual operating costs.

Annual Costs and Staffing
Annual costs are the total outlay of funds for
maintenance and operations associated with
each alternative. These include, but may not
be limited to, utilities, supplies, staff salaries
and benefits, and materials. Cost and staffing
estimates assumed each alternative was fully
implemented as described in this plan. The
cost estimates were developed using year
2011 dollars.

PROPOSED ALTERNATIVES
Alternative A, the No-action Alternative, and
two action alternatives, Alternative B and
the NPS Preferred Alternative, Alternative
C, are presented in the subsections that
follow. Certain actions considered common
to all the alternatives are presented below
to avoid redundancy, such as design and
installation of exhibits at the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center and assessment of shoreline
conditions.

Full-time equivalent salaries and benefits
were included in the annual costs. Total fulltime equivalent employees are the number
of staff required to maintain the assets
of the national historic site at an effective
level, provide acceptable visitor services,
protect resources, and administer the
national historic site. Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site managers would also explore
opportunities to work with partners,
volunteers, and other federal agencies to
address management needs in an effective
and efficient manner.

ACTIONS COMMON
TO ALL ALTERNATIVES
Several actions would be proposed under
all alternatives. These actions common to all
alternatives are described in the paragraphs
that follow and are not repeated under each
alternative.
Under all alternatives, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site will continue to
identify and inventory archeological sites in
compliance with Section 110 of the National
Historic Preservation Act and the research
requirement of Public Law 101-603.

One-Time Cost Estimates
Facility costs in this category are rough
estimates, and were developed based on
the average cost of similar facilities. Actual
costs may be higher or lower, depending
on the final design, site conditions, and
contracting agency. These cost estimates do
not include all items that would be listed in
more inclusive estimates to be developed in
subsequent implementation planning efforts
when more site specific project information
is available. In Alternative A, the no-action
alternative, one-time costs include only
those costs already planned within existing
programs and with an approved funding
source.

Under an approved and funded project, Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site would design
and install new exhibits for the recently
repaired and renovated Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center. Modern, interactive exhibits
that meet current NPS and Americans with
Disabilities Act standards for accessibility
quality, scope, content, and design would
be in accordance with recommendations of
the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site LongRange Interpretive Plan, which was approved
in May 2010.

One-time non-facility costs include actions
for the preservation of cultural or natural

The Prince and Beehive houses are two
residential structures on the north shore of
56

Chapter 2: Alternatives

the national historic site that have been used
for housing for The Lost Colony cast and
crew (Figure 3). Both of these structures are
threatened by shoreline erosion and are no
longer viable for occupancy. The Prince and
Beehive houses would be removed from the
national historic site. Housing for The Lost
Colony production cast and crew would
be provided in another area of the national
historic site or possibly located outside the
national historic site.

catastrophic event. Resource management
decisions due to shoreline erosion would
be deferred to the shoreline erosion
management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all
alternatives.
Should shoreline erosion threaten the
integrity of the Dough Cemetery, the NPS
would relocate the cemetery with prior
approval of the Dough family. Although the
Dough Cemetery is currently protected by
a rock revetment and the shoreline erosion
management plan is planned, relocation of
the Dough Cemetery may still be necessary.

The entire shoreline of Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site on the northern
and western ends of Roanoke Island is
affected by currents, storms, tides, and
winds associated with Roanoke, Albemarle,
and Croatan Sounds in both easterly and
westerly directions. Shoreline erosion is
dramatically apparent in areas not hardened
by rock revetment, groins, breakwaters,
and/or offshore sills (these terms are each
defined in chapter 3).

ALTERNATIVE A: NO-ACTION /
CONTINUE CURRENT MANAGEMENT
Concept
Sections 1502.14 and 1508.25 of the
Council on Environmental Quality (1978)
regulations for implementing the National
Environmental Policy Act require that the
alternative of no-action be included in all
environmental evaluations. Accordingly,
the NPS developed a no-action alternative,
designated Alternative A. Alternative A is the
continuation of current management actions
and direction into the future; continuing
with the present course of action until that
action is changed. “No-action” does not
mean the national historic site does nothing.
Rather, Alternative A represents how
the national historic site would continue
to manage natural resources, cultural
resources, and visitor use and experience
if a new general management plan was
not approved and implemented. Key
visitor facilities presented in Figure 3 and
Alternative A are represented in Figure 4.

In 2010, the NPS commissioned a study
to evaluate baseline shoreline conditions
and develop emergency stabilization
recommendations to control rapid, soundside shoreline erosion that poses an
immediate threat to culturally significant
sites in the national historic site. Areas
of concern include the Dough Cemetery
and the Waterside Theatre (NPS 2011a).
The study was not designed to be an
implementation plan; recommendations
resulting from the study indicate the need
for additional evaluation of conditions and
other contributing factors, and the need
for public input. Accordingly, the national
historic site has proposed to prepare a
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental impact assessment to
present alternatives for addressing shoreline
conditions at the national historic site,
including lands and facilities.

The national historic site’s enabling
legislation, PL 87-147, August 17, 1961,
(expanded the boundary by 125 acres), PL
101-603, November 16, 1990 (expanded
the authorized boundary by 335 acres and
expanded the interpretive and research
missions of the national historic site), and
NPS Management Policies 2006 would

Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS as
loss of resources or facilities due to storms,
floods, earthquakes, fires, or other disasters
of natural or man-made origin. Ongoing
shoreline erosion is not considered a
57

58

59

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

continue to provide guidance for all
alternatives. The national historic site would
continue to be managed as it is today, with
no major change in management direction.

and resources of the national historic
site. Visitors have expressed the desire to
see ranger-led programming expanded;
however, this would not likely occur given
existing staffing levels.

Visitor Experience

Partnerships

The NPS would continue to centralize
orientation to the national historic site
at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages
and modestly expanded interpretive
themes would continue to occur through
films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad exhibits, through
wayside exhibits, and other methods.

The national historic site would maintain
existing partnerships with the Roanoke
Island Historical Association and the First
Colony Foundation. Expansion of existing
partnerships or development of new
partnerships would not likely occur.
Resource Conditions
•

Under Alternative A, the national
historic site would:

•

Maintain existing landscaped areas
or convert them to low maintenance
plantings.

•

Allow natural processes such as
shoreline erosion to prevail in most
areas, including the pond area.
Excavate archeological resources
that are threatened.

•

Continue to protect the Waterside
Theatre area and Dough Cemetery
shorelines pending results of future
shoreline studies and environmental
analysis.

•

Implement the Outer Banks Group
Fire Management Plan.

•

Continue current resource
collections management efforts.

•

Continue current exotic plant
management practices.

•

Continue to conduct archeological
surveys in compliance with Section
110 of the National Historic
Preservation Act and the research
requirement of Public Law 101603. The NPS would continue to
coordinate with the First Colony

Facilities and Associated Visitor Activities
Under Alternative A, no new facilities would
be constructed by Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site or within the national historic
site boundary.
Trails. Under Alternative A the national
historic site would continue maintaining and
operating the current trail system.
Expanded Interpretive Mission
The national historic site would continue
to interpret the Roanoke Voyages and there
would be limited opportunities to address
expanded interpretive themes through
films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad exhibits, through
wayside exhibits, and other methods. The
small interpretive staff dedicated to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site would limit
increased interpretive activities. There
is currently one full-time permanent
interpreter, supplemented by seasonal staff
(NPS 2010a). Existing needs for interpretive
activities include staffing the visitor center,
presenting programs, conducting school
tours, presenting education programs in
local and area schools, roving the national
historic site, developing interpretive
products, and researching the history
60

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Foundation for on-going annual
surveying.
•

•

Continue natural resource
monitoring activities.

The total number of full-time equivalent
staff would remain relatively constant
at 4.95. The national historic site would
continue to share staff with Cape Hatteras
National Seashore and the Wright Brothers
National Memorial. Therefore, the number
of staff is not a whole number. Staff would
continue to include full-time and seasonal
interpretive staff, maintenance staff, and law
enforcement (see Table 5 at the end of this
chapter). NPS volunteers would continue
to provide important services at a negligible
cost.

Response to Catastrophic Loss
Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS as
loss of resources or facilities due to storms,
floods, earthquakes, fires, or other disasters
of natural or man-made origin. Under
Alternative A, the NPS would continue
current management practices. Natural
processes would take precedence. However,
resource management decisions due to
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental assessment that is an element
of all alternatives.

ALTERNATIVE B
Concept

Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS as
loss of resources or facilities due to storms,
floods, earthquakes, fires, or other disasters
of natural or man-made origin. Catastrophic
events are relatively sudden in nature (e.g.,
hurricanes, earthquakes, superstorms).

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
greatly expand the scope of its partnerships
through greater partner involvement in
interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages.
Use of a revised cooperative agreement or
other appropriate contract or mechanism
would permit the partner to take on this
responsibility. NPS staff would interpret
other national historic site stories. By
coordinating and expanding efforts among
The Elizabethan Gardens, Roanoke Island
Historical Association, and the NPS, visitors
would be inspired to spend more time in the
national historic site. Under Alternative B,
the national historic site would:

Resource management decisions due to
shoreline erosion, a slow, incremental
natural process, would be deferred to
the shoreline management plan and
environmental assessment that is an
element of all alternatives.
Estimated Costs and Staffing
•

Costs identified in this section are for
comparative purposes. The costs to
implement Alternative A would not
differ from the current annual costs
for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, with adjustments for inflation.
The estimates are presented in year
2011 dollars, rounded to the nearest
hundred dollars, and include:

•

$871,900 annually for operations and
maintenance; and

$176,500 for one-time facility costs
(removal of Prince and Beehive
houses).

•

61

Emphasize a greater reliance
(than under current conditions)
on partnerships, cooperative
agreements, and on-site visitor
facilities and services to accomplish
interpretation of the Roanoke
Voyages. NPS interpretive focus
would be on the national historic
site’s other stories (Carolina
Algonquians, Civil War, Freedmen’s
Colony, Fessenden experiments).

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

Provide orientation to the national
historic site.

•

Expand personal interpretive service
program efforts.

•

Evaluate the feasibility of an
expanded campus (new Roanoke
Island Historical Association
[partner]-funded visitor center/
indoor theater could be built near
the current NPS visitor center) for
partner-funded interpretation of
the Roanoke Voyages and The Lost
Colony outdoor symphonic drama.

•

Inspire visitors to spend more
time on-site through expanded
interpretive efforts, facilities,
partnering, marketing, and
availability of food service (drinks
and snacks) at the national historic
site.

•

Evaluate the feasibility of an
expanded campus (new Roanoke
Island Historical Association
[partner]-funded visitor center/
indoor theater could be built near
the current NPS visitor center) for
partner-funded interpretation of
the Roanoke Voyages and The Lost
Colony outdoor symphonic drama.

•

Provide more emphasis on theatrical
skills classes through enhanced
partnerships and partner-funded
facilities.

•

•

Evaluate the feasibility of an
expanded “Waterside Theatre
campus” to possibly include a new
visitor center annex. The feasibility
study would be funded by partner(s)
and would address compliance
requirements (to include:
archeological surveys, natural
resource surveys, landscaping
requirements, etc.).
The NPS would also address
compliance requirements for ground
disturbing projects such as trails
work, vegetation plantings, parking
area, outdoor seating area, signage
and waysides, and removal of the
Prince and Beehive houses.

Management Zoning, Facilities,
and Associated Visitor Activities
Management zoning for Alternative B
is shown in Figure 5. Under Alternative
B, the maintenance facility, employee
residences, water treatment plant, The
Lost Colony administration building, and
national historic site headquarters would
be designated as part of the Administrative
Zone. The Waterside Theatre and support
buildings, ticket booth, and theater parking
would fall within the Waterside Theatre
Zone. The picnic area, national historic site
entrance, Freedmen’s Colony Monument,
restrooms, Virginia Dare Monument,
Earthwork Fort, Freedom Trail trailhead,
and visitor center would all fall within the
Visitor Services Zone. The remainder of the
national historic site, including the Thomas
Hariot Nature Trail, would fall within the
Resource Preservation Zone.

Many of the features of Alternative B would
be the same as those already described
for Alternative A. To reduce redundancy,
references will be made to features in
Alternative A and detailed descriptions
will be provided only for new or different
elements proposed for Alternative B.
Visitor Experience
All the studies and planning efforts to
provide better access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be
the same as described in Alternative A. In
addition, under Alternative B the national
historic site would:

62

63

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Alternative B would include the following:
•

Natural processes would take
precedence; however, the NPS
would take measures to protect
sensitive resources such as the
Dough Cemetery and Waterside
Theatre.

•

Establishment of a small outdoor
seating area to provide interpretive
programming near the reconstructed
earthworks.

•

An NPS partner would fund and
conduct a feasibility study and
assessment of a range of alternatives
for the design and construction of a
partner-funded and operated visitor
center annex. This annex would
be in proximity to the existing Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site visitor
center and would provide additional
program space, including, for
example, exhibit space, restrooms,
offices, storage, multipurpose rooms,
and an indoor theater.

Lindsay Warren Visitor Center; however,
the interpretive focus of that facility would
change. Instead of interpreting the full
array of the park’s themes, the NPS Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center would interpret the
Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s Colony,
Civil War, and Fessenden radio experiments.
The interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages
themes would be done by a partner in a new
partner-constructed and operated annex
facility. The NPS partner would be required
to fund and conduct a feasibility study for
this new facility.
Expanded Interpretive Mission
Under Alternative B the national historic site
would:

Trails. Under Alternative B the national
historic site would:
•

Extend the Roanoke Island multi-use
trail (“Bike Path”) into the national
historic site all the way to The
Elizabethan Gardens, the Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center, and to the
Waterside Theatre parking area.

•

Establish a parallel trail to the
Freedom Trail or establish a new trail
along the entrance road that would
complete the loop between the
Freedom Trail and Highway 64.

•

•

Rely more upon Roanoke Island
Historical Association to tell the
story of the Roanoke Voyages. The
NPS would interpret other national
historic site stories, including
Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s
Colony, Civil War, and Fessenden
radio experiments.

•

Provide self-guided interpretive
opportunities using existing trails.

•

Explore the use of the NPS Artsin-Parks program. This program
is offered in various parks across
the country and invites visitors to
experience the wonder of the park in
combination with the wonder of the
arts.

Partnerships
Under Alternative B, the national historic
site would maintain and enhance existing
partnerships and expand partnerships
for interpretive and theatrical education
purposes.

Improve interpretive signage and
clarify circulation patterns on
national historic site trails.

Lindsay Warren Visitor Center. Under
Alternative B, the national historic site
would continue to maintain and staff the
64

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Resource Conditions

Estimated Costs and Staffing

Many elements of resource conditions
would be the same as those described in
Alternative A. In addition to those described
under Alternative A, Alternative B would
include the following:

The estimated costs to fully implement
Alternative B provide a relative sense of
the resources necessary to implement this
alternative. The cost estimate is in year 2011
dollars and each item has been rounded to
the nearest hundred dollars.

•

•

Establish vegetative screening along
the road to the Waterside Theatre
in order to minimize or screen the
view of vehicles from visitors as they
experience the nearby earthworks.

The estimated annual operating costs would
be $1,312,300. Staff costs would increase to
address the salary of 3.35 additional fulltime equivalent staff positions (for a total
of 8.3 full-time equivalent staff positions).
Because these positions would continue
to be shared with Cape Hatteras National
Seashore and the Wright Brothers National
Memorial they represent a percentage
of staff time at the national historic site
and are therefore not a whole number.
Additional staff would include interpretive
and maintenance staff and law enforcement
rangers (see Table 5 at the end of this
chapter).

One additional archeological
investigation and data recovery
would be conducted between Pear
Pad Road and the Heritage Point
subdivision. This area has not been
investigated to the extent that other
areas of the national historic site
have and it has the potential to yield
information about island historical
themes apart from the Roanoke
voyages and the Lost Colony. These
themes include the Native American
culture, the Antebellum period,
the Civil War, the Freedmen’s
Colony, and the Works Progress
Administration camp. The NPS
would continue to coordinate with
the First Colony Foundation for ongoing annual surveying.

One-time NPS facility costs would be
approximately $931,300. This would include
the following:
•

New wayside exhibits in the vicinity
of the visitor center;

•

Native vegetation plantings to
screen the maintenance area and
headquarters area;

•

Expansion of parking at
headquarters (eight spaces);

•

Extend the bike trail from Highway
64 to Waterside Theatre and The
Elizabethan Gardens;

•

Modify the existing trail system to
make it accessible;

•

Establish an outdoor seating area
near the reconstructed earthworks;

•

Add signs and waysides for the trail
system north of Highway 64; and

Response to Catastrophic Loss
Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS
as loss of resources or facilities due to
storms, floods, earthquakes, fires, or other
disasters of natural or man-made origin.
Under Alternative B, the NPS would rebuild
and protect existing facilities in place
unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted
otherwise. However, resource management
decisions due to shoreline erosion would
be deferred to the shoreline erosion
management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all
alternatives.

65

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
•

Remove the Prince and Beehive
houses due to extreme shoreline
erosion.

One-time non-facility costs would include:
•

One additional archeological
investigation and data recovery
between Pear Pad Road and the
Heritage Point subdivision.

ALTERNATIVE C
(NPS PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE)
Concept
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
emphasize Section 3 of PL 101-603,
November 16, 1990, which states that the
“Secretary, in consultation with scholarly
and other historic organizations, shall
undertake research on the history and
archeology of the historic site, and the
associated peoples and events.” The national
historic site would accomplish this by
increasing emphasis on research related to
interpretive themes and legislative mandates.
By coordinating and expanding efforts
with research organizations and agencies,
visitors would benefit by gaining increased
knowledge of the national historic site
and its multiple themes, both cultural and
natural. Under Alternative C, the national
historic site would:
•

•

Establish partnerships with
organizations that focus on natural
and cultural resource topics.

•

Include archeology as a significant
aspect of the research program at the
national historic site.

•

Maintain the current visitor center
as the primary visitor orientation
facility.

•

Implement NPS researcher-in-thepark program.

•

Promote increased research use of
collections at the Museum Resource
Center.

•

Increase research efforts with regard
to the effects of climate change on
natural and cultural resources in the
national historic site.

Many of the features of Alternative C would
be the same as those already described for
Alternative A or Alternative B. To reduce
redundancy, references will be made to
features in those alternatives and detailed
descriptions will be provided only for new
or different elements in Alternative C.
Visitor Experience
All the studies and planning efforts to
provide better access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be
the same as described in Alternative A. In
addition, under Alternative C, the national
historic site would:

Enhance its partnership with the
First Colony Foundation, a North
Carolina 501(c) (3) non-profit
organization dedicated to conducting
archeological and historical research,
combined with public education
and interpretation. The First Colony
Foundation is focused on research
and education relating to the story
of North Carolina and America’s
beginnings with the attempts by Sir
Walter Raleigh to establish English
colonies at Roanoke Island in the
1580s under his charter from Queen
Elizabeth I (First Colony Foundation
website 2011).
66

•

Continue to centralize orientation
and exposure to the national historic
site’s expanded interpretive mission
in the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.

•

Provide opportunities for visitors to
interact in positive and meaningful
ways with archeologists, historians,
and researchers on-site.

Chapter 2: Alternatives
•

Encourage visitors to experience
outlying resources of the site
independently through more formal
interpretive trails with themed areas.

•

Enhance the visitor experience by
participating in partner programs
that offer interpretive programs at
other off-site locations on Roanoke
Island.

or establish a new trail along the
entrance road that would complete
the loop between the Freedom Trail
and Highway 64.
•

Lindsay Warren Visitor Center. Under
Alternative C the national historic site
would:

Management Zoning, Facilities,
and Associated Visitor Activities

•

Management zoning for Alternative C is
shown in Figure 6. Under Alternative C, the
maintenance facility, employee residences,
water treatment plant, The Lost Colony
outdoor symphonic production area, and
national historic site headquarters would be
designated in the Administrative Zone. The
Waterside Theatre and support buildings,
ticket booth, access roads, and theater
parking would be designated within the
Waterside Theatre Zone. The picnic area,
national historic site entrance, Freedmen’s
Colony Monument, restrooms, Freedom
Trail trailhead, and visitor center would
all fall within the Visitor Services Zone.
The remainder of the national historic site,
including the Thomas Hariot Nature Trail,
would be designated as part of the Resource
Preservation Zone.

The interpretive staff dedicated to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site would be
increased by 0.9 full-time equivalent staff
members that would allow for increased
interpretive activities. In addition, a full-time
historian would be hired to address research
needs. Existing needs for interpretive
activities include staffing the visitor center,
presenting programs, conducting school
tours, presenting education programs in
local and area schools, roving the national
historic site, developing interpretive
products, and researching the history and
resources of the national historic site.
Visitors have expressed the desire to see
ranger-led programming be expanded,
and this would be possible with expanded
staffing levels.
Under Alternative C the NPS would:

Trails. Under Alternative C the national
historic site would:
Determine the design, route, and
other features of an improved loop
trail in subsequent implementation
planning and analysis.

•

As under Alternative B, establish a
parallel trail to the Freedom Trail

Maintain the Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center as the primary orientation
and interpretation center of the
national historic site.

Expanded Interpretive Mission

Measures proposed to address shoreline
issues would be the same as described for
Alternative B. A small outdoor seating area
would be established to provide interpretive
programming near the reconstructed
earthworks as described in Alternative B.

•

Improve interpretive signage and
clarify circulation patterns on
national historic site trails.

67

•

Expand upon partnerships
with other organizations and
agencies (such as the First Colony
Foundation, Roanoke Island Festival
Park, and North Carolina Maritime
Museum) to tell the various stories of
the area.

•

Use the results of expanded research
to enhance interpretive programs

68

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Historic Site and Roanoke Island
Festival Park in advance of their
seasonal programming schedules to
share ideas for improving the overall
visitor experience on Roanoke
Island.

and media on all national historic site
interpretive themes, both natural and
cultural.
•

Implement the NPS researcher-inthe park program.

•

Establish on-going archeological
excavations with partner
organizations.

Partnerships

•

Expand partnerships with other
historical and tourism-oriented
organizations on Roanoke Island.

•

Continue and enhance the
partnership with the First Colony
Foundation, and others, for
interpretive, archival, and research
purposes.

•

Develop new partnerships with
research organizations, such as
the University of North Carolina
Coastal Studies Institute, that could
provide research efforts on other
national historic site cultural and
natural topics (beyond the Roanoke
Voyages).

Under Alternative C the national historic site
would:
•

Implement recommendations of
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Long-Range Interpretive Plan (NPS
2010a), which includes, among other
recommendations:
o

Improve partnership
communication through
regular communications
meetings;

o

Work more closely with the
Roanoke Island Historical
Association to integrate
interpretive programming
throughout the site;

o

o

•

Resource Conditions
Many elements of resource conditions
would be the same as those described
for Alternative A. In addition to those
described under Alternative A, Alternative
C would reduce heavily landscaped and
maintained areas. The national historic
site would restore these areas back to
natural conditions or convert them to low
maintenance plantings.

Work more closely with
The Elizabethan Gardens
to integrate interpretive
programming and
educational efforts on
mutually suitable topics
such as native plants and
ecosystems;

Additional annual archeological
investigations and data recovery would
be conducted in the following locations:
between the Elizabethan Gardens and the
Dough Cemetery; between the Thomas
Hariot trail and the Elizabethan Gardens;
and at the Works Progress Administration
camp. These areas have been investigated
the least over the years and have the
potential to yield information about island
historical themes apart from the Roanoke
voyages and the Lost Colony. These themes
include the Native American culture, the

Continue hosting the First
Colony Foundation for
archeological research
within the national historic
site and exploring safe and
appropriate ways to interpret
these activities for visitors;
and

Establish regular communication
between Fort Raleigh National
69

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Antebellum period, the Civil War, the
Freedmen’s Colony, and the Works Progress
Administration camp. The historic site
would partner with other organizations
to increase investigations, treatment, and
conservation of cultural resources.

they represent a percentage of staff time at
the national historic site and are therefore
not a whole number. Additional staff would
include a new interpretive national historic
site guide, maintenance supervisor, law
enforcement ranger, and a historian (see
Table 5 at the end of this chapter).

Under Alternative C, the NPS would also
address compliance requirements for
ground disturbing projects such as trails
work, vegetation plantings, parking area,
outdoor seating area, signage and waysides,
and removal of the Prince and Beehive
houses.

Other annual costs would include additional
annual archeological survey in response to
the legislative mandate of Public Law 101603 to undertake research on the history and
archeology of the national historic site. Over
time, some of this research may be funded
by various partner organizations. These
additional annual archeological surveys will
be focused on the following areas:

Response to Catastrophic Loss
Catastrophic loss is defined by the NPS
as loss of resources or facilities due to
storms, floods, earthquakes, fires, or other
disasters of natural or man-made origin.
Under Alternative C, the NPS would rebuild
and protect existing facilities in place
unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted
otherwise. However, resource management
decisions due to shoreline erosion would
be deferred to the shoreline erosion
management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all
alternatives.

•

Between the Elizabethan Garden and
the Dough Cemetery

•

Between the Thomas Hariot Trail
and the Elizabethan Garden, and

•

At the Works Progress
Administration camp.

The NPS would continue to coordinate
with the First Colony Foundation for ongoing annual surveying. The NPS would
seek other sources of funding including
grants, partners, and other sources to help
defray costs such as additional resource
investigations, research, and outreach
efforts.

Estimated Costs and Staffing
The estimated costs to fully implement
Alternative C provide a relative sense of
the resources necessary to implement this
alternative. The cost estimate is in year 2011
dollars and each item has been rounded to
the nearest hundred dollars.

One-time facility costs would include:

Annual operating costs for Alternative C
are estimated to be $1,222,500. Operation
and maintenance costs would increase
compared to Alternative A because of the
need to maintain new facilities. Annual staff
costs would increase by the salary of 2.98
full-time equivalent staff positions. Because
these positions would continue to be shared
with Cape Hatteras National Seashore and
the Wright Brothers National Memorial
70

•

New exhibits in the vicinity of the
visitor center;

•

Native plantings to screen the
maintenance and headquarters areas;

•

Expansion of parking at
headquarters (eight spaces);

•

Modify the existing trail system
north of Highway 64 with a native
surface;

Chapter 2: Alternatives
•

Establish an outdoor seating area
near the reconstructed earthworks;

•

Install additional signs and waysides
for the trail system north of Highway
64; and

•

•

There are no proposed boundary
adjustments at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site under this general management
plan.

Remove the Prince and Beehive
houses due to extreme shoreline
erosion.

USER CAPACITY

At this time, there are no anticipated nonfacility costs under Alternative C.

The foundations for making user capacity
decisions in this general management
plan are the purpose, significance, special
mandates, and management zones
associated with the national historic site. The
purpose, significance, and special mandates
define why the national historic site was
established and identify the most important
resources, values, and visitor opportunities
that would be protected and provided. The
management zones in each action alternative
describe the desired resource conditions and
visitor experiences, including appropriate
types of activities and general use levels,
for different locations throughout the
national historic site. The zones, as applied
in the alternatives, are consistent with, and
help the NPS achieve, its specific purpose,
significance, and special mandates. As part
of the NPS’s commitment to implement user
capacity, the national historic site staff would
abide by these directives for guiding the
types and levels of visitor use that would be
accommodated while sustaining the quality
of national historic site resources and visitor
experiences consistent with the purposes of
the national historic site.

CONSIDERATION OF
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS
As part of general management planning,
the NPS is required to identify and evaluate
boundary adjustments that may be necessary
or desirable to carry out the purposes of the
particular park unit. Boundary adjustments
may be recommended to:
•

Protect significant resources and
values, or to enhance opportunities
for public enjoyment related to park
purposes;

•

Address operational and
management issues, such as the need
for access or the need for boundaries
to correspond to logical boundary
delineations such as topographic or
other natural features or roads; or

•

Otherwise protect park resources
critical to fulfilling park purposes.

All recommendations for boundary changes
must meet the following two criteria:
•

Other alternatives for management
and resource protection are not
adequate.

In addition to these important directives,
this plan includes indicators and standards
for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site.
Indicators and standards are measureable
variables that would be monitored to track
changes in resource conditions and visitor
experiences. The indicators and standards
help the NPS ensure that desired conditions
are being attained, supporting the fulfillment
of the national historic site’s legislative and
policy mandates. The general management
plan also identifies the types of management

The added lands will be feasible to
administer considering their size,
configuration, and ownership;
costs; the views of and impacts on
local communities and surrounding
jurisdictions; and other factors
such as the presence of hazardous
substances or exotic species; and

71

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

qualitative descriptions of the desired
conditions, data on existing conditions,
relevant research studies, staff management
experience, and scoping on public
preferences.

actions that would be taken to achieve
desired conditions and related legislative
and policy mandates.
Table 3 includes the indicators, standards,
and potential future management strategies,
allocated by management zones, that would
be implemented as a result of this planning
effort. The planning team considered many
potential issues and related indicators that
would identify impacts of concern, but
those described below were considered
the most significant, given the importance
and vulnerability of the resource or visitor
experience affected by visitor use. The
planning team also reviewed the experiences
of other parks with similar issues to help
identify meaningful indicators. Standards
that represent the minimum acceptable
condition for each indicator were then
assigned, taking into consideration the

User capacity decision making is a form
of adaptive management (see Figure 7)
in that it is an iterative process in which
management decisions are continuously
informed and improved. Indicators are
monitored, and adjustments are made as
appropriate. As monitoring of conditions
continues, managers may decide to modify
or add indicators if better ways are found
to measure important changes in resource
and social conditions. Information on the
NPS monitoring efforts, related visitor use
management actions, and any changes to the
indicators and standards would be available
to the public.

Figure 7: User Capacity Framework

72

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Table 3: Summary of User Capacity Indicators, Standards and Potential Management Strategies
Indicator

Assigned
Zone

Number of incidents of
bare (worn) ground on
the earthen fort exceeding one square foot
measured twice a year
before and after peak
season

Resource
Preservation
Zone

Number of written complaints per year related
to pets per year

Parkwide

Standard

Management Strategies

Zero incidents of bare
(worn) ground exceeding
one square foot measured
twice per year

-Education through interpretation
-Repair (work order) damaged areas
-Signage to prevent visitors from climbing on the
fort
-Restrict access – fencing, barricades

No more than six written
complaints related to pets
per year

-Education regarding pet related impacts
-Website/social media educational campaign regarding pet related impacts
-Community outreach
-Increased signage
-Additional enforcement of pet-related rules and
regulations (pets on a leash)
-Develop pet restriction in areas of concern (pet free
zones, fines, for example)

Number of written com- Parkwide
plaints per year related
to visitor conflict on trails
(excluding pet related
complaints)

No more than six written
complaints related to visitor
conflict on trails per year

-Education regarding trail use etiquette
-Website/social media educational campaign
-Community outreach
-Increased signage
-Additional enforcement of existing rules and regulations on the trails
-Develop trail restriction in areas of concern (separating the different user groups)
-Temporary and permanent closure of trails

Number of times per
year the visitor parking
lots at the Waterside
Theatre or National
Park Drive loop exceed
capacity

Waterside
Theatre
Zone
Visitor Services Zone

Visitor parking lots will not
exceed capacity more than
six times per year or two
consecutive days at Waterside Theatre or National
Park Drive loop

-Work with program providers to avoid parking
issues
-Additional signage
-Tour/charter bus management (to free up more
parking)
-Enhanced traffic management (directing traffic to
available parking, barricades, temporary signs)
-Shuttle service
-Require special use permits for large events

Number of new informal trails per year over
baseline conditions

Resource
Preservation
Zone

No new informal trails over
baseline conditions per year

-Signage – closure and/or educational signs
-Rehabilitate/re-vegetate informal trails
-Evaluate informal trail for formal designation
-Adapt/re-route trails
-Eradicate informal trails

73

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Indicators and Standards
•

The priority indicators for Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site are
associated with the following issues:

•

Impacts to the earthen fort

•

Impact from pets on the visitor
experience

•

User conflict on trails

•

Parking lot capacity

•

Visitor created informal trails

the visitors receive about the earthen fort.
If the educational efforts are not adequate
to remain within standard, national historic
site managers can increase the amount of
signage around the earthen fort conveying
the importance of not climbing on the
fort. If the standard is repeatedly violated,
restricted access may be needed (roping
off areas of concern) or in extreme cases,
temporary or permanent closure of the site.
The national historic site has a few trails
where it is common to see pets with their
owners. While pets are welcome in the
national historic site, they are required to be
under control of their owners at all times.
Pet owners are also required to clean up
after their pets and minimize any resource
damage that may occur (digging, chasing
wild life, over use of trails, for example).
Regardless of these regulations, pets have
the potential to cause problems in the
national historic site. Pets off of their leash,
pet waste, visitors with pets conflicting
with visitors that do not have pets, and
the chance that pets may cause resource
damage, are all reasons to monitor petrelated impacts in the national historic site.
To prevent impacts to the resources and
visitor experiences available at the national
historic site, an indicator was established
to track the number of complaints per year
related to pets. The standard was set at no
more than six written complaints per year, at
which point national historic site managers
would need to take action to mitigate the
impacts from pets. If the standard is close
to being exceeded, educational programs
focused on the impacts associated with pets
may be needed. Many of the visitors are
also community members who take their
pets to the national historic site, and thus a
community outreach program to stress the
impacts of pets may help to further protect
the resources of the national historic site.
If the number of pet related complaints is
exceeded on a regular basis the national
historic site may need to employ additional
enforcement of existing regulations or
develop restrictions on pet use in areas of
concern.

Visitors to the national historic site have
the opportunity to visit a reconstructed
earthen fort, and experience how this
structure served as a means of protection
for the initial European settlers on Roanoke
Island. The current earthen fort is located
in the approximate location of the original
from 1585 or 1587 and is on the National
Register of Historic Places. The extensive
history at this site means that the cultural
resources need extra protection. Visitors
currently are able to freely visit the earthen
fort with very few restrictions. At times
national historic site staff have observed
visitors climbing on the earthen fort or saw
evidence of such actions (bare ground on
or around the mounds), which could have a
negative effect on the integrity of the site. To
protect the earthen fort from visitor impacts,
the number of incidents of bare (worn)
ground on the earthen fort exceeding one
square foot was established as the indicator.
The standard will be zero incidents of
bare or worn ground on the earthen
fort in recognition of the sensitivity and
importance of the site. The national historic
site currently monitors the earthen fort and
will include a measurement of incidents of
bare ground on the earthen fort before and
after the peak visitor season (Memorial Day
to Labor Day). If incidents of bare ground
exceeding one square foot are found, the
national historic site may consider increasing
the educational and interpretive messages
74

Chapter 2: Alternatives

The trail system within the national
historic site connects to several adjacent
trails outside the national historic site and
is also used by several different types of
recreationists. The national historic site
attracts people who want to hike, horseback
ride, and bicycle and because of these very
different types of recreation, there is the
potential for conflict between the different
user groups. For example, hikers may be
disrupted by bikers or horseback riders may
interfere with bike riders. For these reasons,
an indicator measuring the number of
written complaints related to visitor conflicts
per year was developed (excluding pet
related complaints). There will be no more
than six written complaints a year related to
visitor conflicts before management action
is needed. If the number of complaints is
more than six per year, national historic
site managers may consider increasing their
educational efforts by providing visitor
orientation regarding the use of the trails
or constructing informational kiosks along
the trails. If the number of complaints
consistently exceeds the standard, the
separation of different user groups may be
needed. National historic site managers
may also consider temporary or permanent
closure of trails to any or all types of use in
order to preserve the visitor experience.

In addition, resource damage occurs from
visitors parking in the grass along the side
of the road when the designated parking
spots are full. When visitors begin to park
along the sides of the road, visitor safety
also becomes an issue. Visitors are often
walking down the narrowed road while
cars are searching for areas to park. By
monitoring and tracking the use of the
parking lots at the Waterside Theatre and
National Park Drive loop, national historic
site managers can document the impacts
from special events and periods of peak
use on visitor experience and the resources
of the national historic site and thus gauge
the appropriateness of certain events in the
national historic site. Per the indicator and
standard, visitor parking lots will not exceed
capacity more than 6 times per year or two
consecutive days at Waterside Theatre or
National Park Drive loop. This standard was
developed to protect the visitor experience
and limit the potential impacts to national
historic site resources. To ensure this
standard is not exceeded, national historic
site managers may consider providing
detailed information on the national historic
site website about when special events and
times of peak use may occur and potentially
adjusting the timing of the events (or visitors
may adjust their time of visitation). Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site managers
may consider working with the program
providers to free up additional parking (by
limiting the number of tour buses parked in
the lots at one time), and to enact enhanced
traffic management practices (directing
traffic to available parking, barricades,
temporary signs, for example). If the
standard is being violated on a regular basis,
national historic site managers may require
special use permits for all large events.

Visitors can generally expect to see few
people or to not encounter full parking lots
at the national historic site during regular
hours. However, during busy times of the
year and especially during special events,
the national historic site can become busy
and crowded, and thus provide a different
experience than the casual visitor expected
when they arrived. Special events are often
important to the mission of the national
historic site and interpreting the history of
the site, but may need to be regulated to
preserve the visitor experience. Associated
with special events and times of peak use is
the filling of the parking lots at the Waterside
Theatre and National Park Drive loop.
When these parking lots are full visitors may
be turned away from the national historic
site thus impacting their visitor experience.

Informal trails within the national
historic site are susceptible to erosion and
compaction because they were not properly
placed in the landscape or thoughtfully
designed. These impacts degrade the area
adjacent to the trail as well, and also lead to
a diminished visitor experience. Informal
trails can lead to areas of sensitive cultural
75

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

sites and/or vegetation and thus diminish
the natural and cultural qualities of that
area. For these reasons an informal trails
indicator was developed with the standard
being no new informal trails over baseline
condition per year. The national historic site
will need to inventory the existing informal
trails, which will then serve as the baseline
to which yearly measurements will be
compared. National historic site managers
can take actions to reduce the amount
of impacts that informal trails may have
when the standard is at or near the above
threshold. Education about the impacts of
informal trails, such as a visitor orientation
regarding the trail system, may help reduce
the incidents of informal trails. Providing
visitors with trail maps and potentially place
waysides or kiosks along the trails may
also be considered. National historic site
managers may need to relocate, re-vegetate
or remove informal trails if the standard
is at or over standard. If the standard
is consistently being violated, formally
designating some social trails and potentially
closing troubled areas completely may be
considered if impacts persist.

to modify the indicators or standards and
revise the monitoring program if better ways
are found to measure changes caused by
visitor use. Most of these types of changes
should be made within the first several years
of initiating monitoring. After this initial
testing period, adjustments would be less
likely to occur. Finally, if use levels and
patterns change appreciably, the national
historic site staff might need to identify new
indicators to ensure that desired conditions
are achieved and maintained. This iterative
learning and refining process, a form of
adaptive management, is a strength of the
NPS user capacity management program.
MITIGATION MEASURES
Congress charged the NPS with managing
the lands under its stewardship “in such
manner and by such means as will leave
them unimpaired for the enjoyment of
future generations” (NPS Organic Act,
16 USC 1). As a result, the NPS routinely
evaluates and implements mitigation
whenever conditions occur that could
adversely affect the sustainability of national
park system resources.

LONG-TERM MONITORING

To ensure that implementation of the action
alternatives protects natural and cultural
resources and the quality of the visitor
experience, a consistent set of mitigation
measures would be applied to actions
proposed in this plan. The NPS would
prepare appropriate environmental review
(including those required by the National
Environmental Policy Act, National Historic
Preservation Act, and other relevant
legislation) for these future actions. As part
of the environmental review, the NPS would
avoid, reduce, or minimize adverse impacts
when practicable. The implementation of
a compliance-monitoring program would
be considered to stay within the parameters
of National Environmental Policy Act
and National Historic Preservation Act
compliance documents, and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers Section 404 permits.

The staff would continue monitoring use
levels and patterns throughout the national
historic site. In addition, the national
historic site staff would monitor these user
capacity indicators. The rigor of monitoring
the indicators (for example, frequency of
monitoring cycles, amount of geographic
area monitored) might vary considerably
depending on how close existing conditions
are to the standards. If the existing
conditions are far from exceeding the
standard, the rigor of monitoring might be
less than if the existing conditions are close
to or trending toward the standard.
Initial monitoring of the indicators would
determine if the indicators are accurately
measuring the conditions of concern and if
the standards truly represent the minimally
acceptable condition of the indicator.
National historic site staff might decide
76

Chapter 2: Alternatives

The compliance-monitoring program would
oversee these mitigation measures and
would include reporting protocols.

Interior’s Standards for Archeology
and Historic Preservation.
•

Use screening and/or sensitive design
compatible with historic resources
and cultural landscapes and not
adjacent to ethnographic resources.
If adverse impacts could not be
avoided, mitigate these impacts
through a consultation process with
all interested parties.

•

Conduct archeological site
monitoring and routine protection.
Conduct data recovery excavations
at archeological sites threatened
with destruction, where protection
or site avoidance during design and
construction is infeasible. Strictly
adhere to NPS standards and
guidelines on the display and care of
artifacts, archival and ethnographic
materials. This would include items
used in exhibits in the visitor center.

•

Explicit research objectives will be
established before any archeological
undertakings occur. The NPS will
comply with all relevant regulations
and policies before beginning any
excavations or digging activities.

The following mitigation measures and best
management practices would be applied to
avoid or minimize potential impacts from
implementation of the alternatives. These
measures would apply to all alternatives.
Cultural Resources
The NPS would preserve and protect, to
the greatest extent possible, resources
that reflect the history, events, and people
associated with Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. Specific mitigation measures
would include the following:
•

•

•

Continue to develop inventories
for and oversee research about
archeological, historic, and
ethnographic resources to better
understand and manage the
resources. Conduct any needed
archeological or other resource
specific surveys and national
register evaluations, and identify
recommended treatments.
Incorporate the results of these
efforts into site-specific planning and
environmental analysis documents.

Natural Resources

Museum collections (prehistoric
and historic objects, artifacts,
works of art, archival material, and
natural history specimens) would
be acquired, accessioned and
cataloged, preserved, protected,
and made available for access and
use according to NPS standards and
guidelines.

Natural Soundscape
The NPS will restore to the natural condition
wherever possible those national historic site
soundscapes that have become degraded by
unnatural sounds (noise), and will protect
natural soundscapes from unacceptable
impacts.
The NPS will implement standard noise
abatement measures during construction
and daily park operations. Standard
noise abatement measures could include
a schedule that minimizes impacts on
adjacent noise-sensitive uses, the use of
the best available noise control techniques
wherever feasible, the use of hydraulically

Subject projects to site-specific
planning and compliance
procedures. For archeological
resources, locate projects and design
facilities in previously disturbed
or existing developed areas. Avoid
adverse effects to cultural resources
through use of the Secretary of the
77

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

or electrically powered impact tools when
feasible, and the location of stationary noise
sources as far from sensitive uses as possible.

Revegetation plans should specify
seed/plant source, seed/ plant
mixes, soil preparation, etc. Salvaged
vegetation from construction
sites should be used to the extent
possible.

Mitigation measures would be applied to
protect the natural sounds in the national
historic site. Specific actions could include,
but would not be limited to, siting and
designing facilities to minimize objectionable
noise, and exploring opportunities to reduce
the sounds of human-caused noise. Within
interpretative programs, rangers could ask
visitors to minimize sounds, and listen for
natural sounds of the national historic site.

•

Exotic Plant Species
An exotic plants control program would be
implemented during construction activities.
Standard measures could include the
following elements.

Vegetation
Mitigation actions would occur during
normal park operations as well as before,
during, and after construction to minimize
immediate and long-term impacts on
vegetation. These actions would vary by
specific project and area of the national
historic site affected, and additional
mitigation measures would be added
depending on site specific need. Mitigation
would include the following actions.
•

Monitor areas used by visitors, such
as roads and trails, for signs of native
vegetation disturbance, such as
trampling of vegetation, creation of
unauthorized trails, and widening
of trails beyond the trail’s intended
width as constructed.

•

Use public education, revegetation
of disturbed areas with native plants,
erosion control measures, and
barriers to control potential impacts
on plants from trail erosion or social
trailing.

•

Use barriers and closures when
necessary to prevent trampling and
loss of wetland vegetation.

•

Develop revegetation plans for
areas disturbed by construction
or unauthorized visitor use and
require the use of native species.

Implement fire management actions
to manage the spread of invasive
species.

•

Ensure construction-related
equipment arrives on-site free of
mud or seed-bearing material.

•

Certify all seeds and straw material
as weed-free.

•

Identify areas of noxious weeds
preconstruction and treat them
or noxious weed topsoil before
construction.

•

Revegetate disturbed area with
appropriate native species.

Threatened and Endangered
Species and Species of Concern
Mitigation actions would occur during
normal park operations as well as before,
during, and after construction to minimize
immediate and long-term impacts on
rare, threatened, and endangered species.
These actions would vary by specific
project and area of the national historic
site affected, and additional mitigations
will be added depending on the specific
action and location. Many of the measures
listed below for vegetation and wildlife
would also benefit rare, threatened, and
endangered species by helping to preserve
habitat. Mitigation actions specific to rare,

78

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Soil

threatened, and endangered species would
include the following:
•

•

Conduct surveys for rare, threatened,
and endangered species, as
warranted.
Locate and design facilities/actions
to avoid adverse effects on rare,
threatened, and endangered species.
If avoidance is infeasible, minimize
and compensate for adverse effects
on rare, threatened, and endangered
species as appropriate and in
consultation with the appropriate
resource agencies. Conduct work
outside of critical periods for the
specific species.

•

Develop and implement restoration
and/or monitoring plans, as
warranted. Plans should include
methods for implementation,
performance standards, monitoring
criteria, and adaptive management
techniques.

•

Implement measures to reduce
adverse effects of nonnative plants
and wildlife on rare, threatened, and
endangered species.

Scenic Resources
Mitigation measures are designed to
minimize visual intrusions. These include
the following:
•

Design, site, and construct facilities
to avoid or minimize visual
intrusions on natural and cultural
resources and landscapes.

•

Provide vegetative screening where
appropriate.

•

Continue cooperative measures on
a regional level to protect air quality,
which affects scenic views.

79

•

Build new facilities on soil suitable
for development.

•

Locate development on disturbed
sites where appropriate and combine
development needs when possible.

•

Locate trails on soil with low erosion
hazards and small changes in
slope, and develop proper signs to
minimize unauthorized trails.

•

Ensure proper stormwater drainage
of facilities.

•

Place construction equipment in
previously disturbed areas.

•

Minimize soil erosion by limiting
the time soil is left exposed and by
applying erosion control measures,
such as erosion matting, silt fencing,
and sedimentation basins in
construction areas to reduce erosion,
surface scouring, and discharge to
water bodies.

•

Once work is completed, revegetate
construction areas with native plants
in a timely period.

•

Monitor for visitor impacts,
particularly in sensitive or highly
visited areas.

•

Implement a spill prevention and
pollution control program for
hazardous materials, including
fuels. Standard measures could
include hazardous materials
storage and handling procedures;
spill containment, cleanup, and
reporting procedures; and limitation
of refueling and other activities to
upland or non-sensitive sites.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

noise, avoiding major construction
activities during biologically sensitive
times of year, and working with
partners (e.g. Federal Aviation
Administration, Dare County
Regional Airport) to reduce
overflights in these areas.

Wetlands
•

Delineate wetlands before
construction work and apply
protection measures during
construction. Delineation should
be done by qualified NPS staff or
certified wetland specialists and
boundaries clearly marked.

•

Perform construction activities using
best practices to prevent damage
caused by equipment, erosion, or
siltation.

•

Design new trails to minimize
impacts on wetland vegetation.

Visitor Safety and Experiences
While recognizing there are limitations on
its capability to fully eliminate all hazards,
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site and
its contractors, and cooperators seek to
provide a safe and healthful environment
for visitors and employees. The national
historic site works cooperatively with other
federal, tribal, state, and local agencies,
organizations, and individuals to carry
out this responsibility. Fort Raleigh strives
to identify and prevent injuries from
recognizable threats to the safety and
health of persons, and to the protection of
property, by applying nationally accepted
codes, standards, engineering principles,
and the guidance contained in Director’s
Orders 50B (Occupational Safety and Health
Program), 50C (Park Signs), 58 (Structural
Fire Management), and 83 (Public Health)
and their associated reference manuals.
Mitigation actions specific to visitor safety
and experience would include the following:

Wildlife
•

Employ techniques to reduce
impacts on wildlife, including visitor
education programs, restrictions on
visitor activities, and national historic
site ranger patrols.

•

Implement site specific natural
resource protection plan for land
disturbing activities. Standard
measures could include construction
scheduling outside sensitive
periods such as nesting, biological
monitoring, erosion and sediment
control, the use of fencing or other
means to protect sensitive resources
adjacent to construction, the removal
of all food-related items or rubbish,
topsoil salvage, and revegetation.
This could include specific
construction monitoring by resource
specialists as well as treatment and
reporting procedures.

•

•

Schedule activities in or near water
sources to minimize disturbance to
wildlife.
To reduce the exposure of wildlife
to human caused noise, possible
mitigation measures might include
signage for visitors to reduce
80

•

Implement a traffic control plan
during construction, as warranted.
Include strategies to maintain safe
and efficient traffic flow.

•

Implement measures to reduce
adverse effects of construction on
visitor safety and experience.

•

Incorporate safety into interpretation
and education programs.

•

Use interpretation and education
programs to promote a sense of
stewardship among national historic
site visitors.

Chapter 2: Alternatives
•

Implement a strategy to provide the
maximum level of accessibility for
people with impaired mobility.

Cultural resource studies and actions
to be addressed include:

NEEDED FUTURE
STUDIES AND PLANS
Other more detailed studies and plans would
be needed for implementation of specific
actions once this general management
plan is completed. These more detailed
implementation plans would describe how
the NPS would achieve desired conditions
outlined in the general management plan.
As required, additional environmental
compliance would be conducted under
current and/or future laws. Opportunities
for public input would be provided during
development of these implementation
plans. The types of plans and studies would
include, but would not be limited to, the
following:
•

Protection, research, and
management of the national historic
site’s natural and cultural resources
and processes are essential for
achieving the national historic site’s
purpose and mission. A parkwide
resource stewardship strategy would
address these issues and other
scientific and legal requirements
to promote understanding and
management of national historic
site resources. This planning
document would provide details on
the strategies and actions necessary
to address the historic site’s most
important resource management
problems and research needs.
Integral to this strategy would be
the need to research the status of
sensitive cultural resources and
species. The resource stewardship
strategy would integrate the
best available science and would
prescribe activities, including
inventories, research, monitoring,
restoration, rehabilitation,
mitigation, protection, education,
and management of resource uses.
81

o

Identifying specific
components of the national
historic site’s resources to
target for management during
the next 15 to 20 years.

o

Establishing methods to
evaluate the status of these
components, determine
measurable targets for
resources, and evaluate
whether the resources are
currently meeting targets.

o

Review of the resource
stewardship strategy
documents by subject matter
experts before finalization.

o

Integrate the resource
stewardship strategy with
the shoreline erosion
management plan.

•

An ethnographic overview and
assessment would be completed to
formally identify and document the
ethnographic resources associated
with the national historic site.

•

A fire management plan would be
developed to guide the full range of
fire management related activities in
the national historic site. Required
under Director’s Order 18, every
park area with burnable vegetation
must have a fire management plan
approved by the Superintendent.
Directors Order 12 requires an
annual review and update of the plan
as well as a major review and revision
every five years.

•

A shoreline erosion management
plan and appropriate analysis
under the National Environmental
Policy Act would be completed that
evaluates effects of shoreline erosion
on national historic site resources.
This plan and environmental

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

impact assessment would develop
alternatives for protecting the
shoreline of the national historic
site, including lands and facilities,
from shoreline erosion and
provide opportunities for public
involvement. This plan would
consider the following reports:
o

“Shoreline Erosion at
Culturally Significant Sites,
Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site”, February 2011,
Report for 2010 Technical
Assistance Report #119
(TAR).

o

“Shoreline Changes at Fort
Raleigh National Historic
Site” report, September 2002
(PMIS #41081).

•

The 1992 land protection plan would
be updated to reflect current national
historic site conditions.

•

An update on the future projections
for the Dare County Regional
Airport (e.g., frequency of flights,
etc.) is needed to provide baseline
sound data and to mitigate potential
future impacts of an expansion of
Dare County Regional Airport.

environmentally preferable alternative.
Alternative C was determined to be the
environmentally preferable alternative due
to its ability to best meet Section 101(b)
criteria as described below.

1. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment
for succeeding generations.
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is
a unit of the national park system and
as the trustee the NPS would continue
to fulfill its obligation to protect
the national historic site for future
generations. Alternative A would
provide less direction on important
issues needed to successfully manage
the historic site; consequently it
was ranked lower than the action
alternatives. Alternative B would
provide additional opportunities for
education and interpretation but would
direct some of this responsibility
outside of the NPS.
The planned increase in archeological
research and visitor interaction
opportunities in Alternative C would
reflect commitments to connect science
to the public and promote interaction
among science, management, and
community practice. These measures
provide for greater education,
communication, and outreach efforts,
with the objective of increasing
national historic site stewardship with
current and future generations. Due to
these factors, Alternative C would best
fulfill this criterion.
2. Assure for all Americans safe,
healthful, productive, and
aesthetically and culturally pleasing
surroundings.
Each of the action alternatives would
ensure safe, healthful, productive,
and culturally pleasing surroundings
for all Americans. Alternatives B
and C would expand visitor access

THE ENVIRONMENTALLY
PREFERABLE ALTERNATIVE
According to the Council on Environmental
Quality, regulations implementing the
National Environmental Policy Act, and
NPS guidelines (Director’s Order 12), an
environmentally preferable alternative
must be identified in environmental
documents. The environmentally
preferable alternative would cause the
least damage to the biological and physical
environment, and would best protect,
preserve, and enhance historical, cultural,
and natural resources. Section 101(b) of
the National Environmental Policy Act
identifies six criteria to help determine the

82

Chapter 2: Alternatives

to cultural interpretation through
additional facilities and events or
increased partnerships and research
efforts. Therefore there are no major
discernable differences between
Alternatives B and C with regard to
this criterion.
3. Attain the widest range of beneficial
uses of the environment without
degradation, risk to health or safety,
or other undesirable and unintended
consequences.
Alternative C would attain the
widest range of beneficial uses of the
environment, without degradation, risk
to health or safety, or other undesirable
and unintended consequences. Of
all the alternatives, Alternative C
would do the most to minimize
inadvertent or unintentional damage
to national historic site resources
by limiting construction of new
facilities, providing more land within
the Resource Preservation Zone, and
reducing
heavily landscape areas while
maintaining the current Waterside
Theatre campus size. Alternative
C would provide opportunities for
visitors to interact with archeologists,
historians, and researchers on-site
in addition to partner programs
offered off-site. This would help
reduce the potential for inadvertent or
unintentional damage to resources, as
compared to Alternatives A and B. The
balance between both on-site and offsite education and interpretation would
allow opportunities for recreational use
of the national historic site’s resources
while still ensuring their future
protection. Alternative C would best
meet the objective of this criterion.
4. Preserve important historic,
cultural, and natural aspects of our
national heritage, and maintain,

wherever possible, an environment
that supports diversity and a variety
of individual choices.
Each of the alternatives preserves
important historical, cultural, and
natural aspects of the nation’s heritage
and maintains, wherever possible, an
environment that supports diversity
and a variety of choice. In terms of
access to areas that may allow greater
choice in the fulfillment of national
historic site experiences, Alternatives
B and C provide more opportunities.
However, Alternative C would provide
more opportunities for data collection
and research at the national historic
site. The additional information and
understanding of the historic resources
could lead to greater protection of
these resources. As a result of this,
Alternative C meets this objective to a
greater degree than Alternatives A and
B.
5. Achieve a balance between
population and resource use that will
permit high standards of living and a
wide sharing of life’s amenities.
Alternative B provides greater
opportunity for commercial services
to operate in the national historic site
in the future. Food and beverages
would be offered within the national
historic site under this alternative, in
addition to increased interpretation
and theatrical education. Additionally,
the potential for a new partner-funded
facility would provide opportunities
for sharing of resources and would
offer expanded services to the public
in the form of theatrical presentations
and classes. Therefore Alternative B
would best meet the objective of this
criterion.
6. Enhance the quality of renewable
resources and approach the
maximum attainable recycling of
83

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

o

depletable resources.
Alternative C proposes to reduce the
amount of maintained landscape in
the national historic site and allow
more of a natural landscape to be
restored, whereas Alternatives A and
B would maintain the national historic
site much along existing conditions.
Alternative C has a greater potential
for consumption of depletable
resources through a greater emphasis
on archeological excavation. This
potential will be mitigated by defining
explicit research objectives prior to
initiating any excavations that could
destroy part of the archeological
record. There is relatively little
discernable difference between the
alternatives for this criterion.

•

•

•

Some specific actions under Alternative C
may achieve similar, or in some cases greater
levels of protection for cultural and natural
resources than under Alternatives A or B.
Based on the opportunity for additional
research and potential resource and visitor
impacts to natural and cultural resources,
Alternative C best meets the six criteria.

Development of a preferred alternative
involved evaluating the alternatives with
the use of a rational analysis process called
“Choosing by Advantages.” Choosing by
Advantages is an evaluation tool based on
determining the advantages of different
alternatives for a variety of factors or goals.
Through this process, the planning team
identified and compared the relative benefits
or advantages of each alternative according
to the following four factors:

o

Interpretive Opportunities

o

Availability of Facilities for
Visitor Services

Improve Effectiveness, Reliability,
and Sustainability of Park Operations
o

Facility Improvements

o

Partnership Responsibilities

Provides Other Advantages to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site,
Partners, and/or Stakeholders
o

Partnerships, including
Access to Theatrical Events

o

Public Perceptions,
Community Relations,
Economic Impacts

Cost estimates for each alternative were
considered in this process. The team
discussed each factor and reached a
consensus regarding how the factors should
be characterized for each of the three
alternatives. The advantages are scored in
relation to their satisfaction of each factor
and summed to help identify the NPS
Preferred Alternative. This process is a
systematic way to perform a complicated
task, provides a way to engage participants,

Protect Cultural and Natural
Resources
o

Improve Visitor Experience,
Awareness, and Understanding
through Better Service and
Educational Opportunities

Choosing by Advantages is a system
of concepts and methods to structure
decision-making. Choosing by Advantages
quantifies the relative importance of nonmonetary advantages or benefits for a set of
alternatives and allows subsequent benefit
and cost consideration during decisionmaking. (NPS Director’s Order 90)

THE NPS PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE

•

Zoning – Extent of Visitor
Services Zone and Waterside
Theatre Zone

Expanded Research and
Resource Knowledge

84

Chapter 2: Alternatives

and assists in the consensus building
process. It also leads to documented and
consistent evaluation.

Contacts with the North Carolina
Department of Administration
resulted in the conclusion that
this was not an achievable goal.
The site is now proposed for both
underground and tower-based water
storage tanks, thereby making this
proposal technically infeasible. This
consideration was therefore dropped
from further analysis.

Adjustments were made to the NPS
Preferred Alternative to incorporate features
that would increase that alternative’s
advantages. The NPS Preferred Alternative,
identified as Alternative C (described earlier
in this section), reflects the results of the
Choosing by Advantages workshop.
•

ACTIONS
CONSIDERED BUT DISMISSED
Scoping, including public involvement
conducted in association with preparing
this general management plan, is
described in “Chapter 5: Consultation and
Coordination.” Some of the alternatives or
actions suggested during scoping, both by
the public and the NPS interdisciplinary
team, were not incorporated into this general
management plan. Consistent with Section
1502.14 of the Council on Environmental
Quality (1978) regulations for implementing
the National Environmental Policy Act,
this section identifies those alternatives or
actions and briefly discusses the reasons why
each was eliminated.

established as the Croatan Woods
subdivision. As a result, this proposal
is technically infeasible and was
therefore dismissed from further
consideration.

As described in chapter 5, the identification
of issues and development of alternatives
provided opportunities for public and
agency input through responses to
newsletters, at meetings, and via the
Internet. However, some actions or
alternatives received through these avenues
were eliminated from further consideration.
This section briefly describes each of these
suggestions and the basis for excluding each
from this general management plan.
•

While developing the alternatives,
the NPS planning team proposed
recommending acquisition of the
property on the southwest side
of Highway 64 that was included
in the 1990 boundary expansion
under PL 101-603. This property
has since been subdivided and

During early scoping and
development of alternatives, there
was a proposal to attempt to acquire
the abandoned Highway 64 Welcome
Center from the state and convert it
to a Freedmen’s Colony Museum.

85

•

Water-based access to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site was
considered via a dock on the north
shore near the Waterside Theatre,
but the water in the sound is too
shallow for large tour boats or
passenger ferries to navigate safely.
These site conditions precluded this
proposal from further consideration
due to economic infeasibility and too
great of an environmental impact.

•

Early in the planning process,
the planning team proposed to
combine the Outer Banks Group
Headquarters with a planned
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
administrative/visitor center on the
southwest side of Highway 64. Initial
contacts indicated some receptivity
to this idea. However, before the
concept was further developed,
a variety of problems, including
mold, mildew, and leaks in both
the headquarters building and the

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Lindsay Warren Visitor Center,
were discovered. These conditions
resulted in a project to completely
remove and renovate the interior of
the headquarters and visitor center,
and partially renovate the interior
of The Lost Colony administration
building. All repairs and renovations
have been made and the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service had begun
construction on its facility as
well. This proposal was therefore
dismissed from further consideration
because it was technically infeasible.
•

Alternative because of a lower quality
visitor experience and uncertainty
regarding the reliance on partners
this alternative defined for providing
visitor services. Due to economic
uncertainties involved with this
alternative, the possibility that the
community would perceive the NPS
as falling short of its responsibilities,
reliance on self-guided visitor
experiences and other factors, the
NPS planning team dropped this
alternative from further analysis.
This alternative would not have met
planning objectives or resolved NPS
and visitor needs.

During the planning stages of the
general management plan, a third
action alternative was developed
for consideration. This alternative
focused on providing self-guided
information to visitors instead
of NPS led tours or interpretive
programs. The national historic
site would develop and rely
on partnerships to expand
interpretation both on- and offsite. No changes would have been
made to the visitor center except
for upgrades to existing exhibits.
During the Choosing by Advantages
workshop previously discussed, the
interdisciplinary team determined
that this alternative provided less
advantage than the No-action

ALTERNATIVE COMPARISON TABLES
The important differences among the
alternatives are summarized in Table 4.
Detailed descriptions of the features of each
alternative were provided earlier in this
section. Table 5 provides a comparison of
the full-time equivalent staff proposed under
each alternative and the estimated costs of
each alternative are presented in Table 6.
A summary of environmental consequences
is provided in Table 7. The summary shows
each alternative’s potential effects by impact
topic. Detailed descriptions of the context,
intensity, and duration of impacts--called
thresholds--are provided in chapter 4.

86

Chapter 2

Alternative Element
Concept

Visitor Experience

Alternative A
No-action / Continue Current Management

Alternative B
Enhanced Visitor Experience

Alternative B encourages more on-site experiences
through partnerships with Roanoke Island Historical
Association and The Elizabethan Gardens and
through additional expanded interpretive efforts,
marketing, and facilities. Roanoke Island Historical
Association would take on interpretive responsibilities
in this alternative.
Alternative C adds the element of enhanced
historical, archeological, and scientific research to
support the interpretive programs, both cultural and
natural, at the national historic site.

Alternative B expands the role of partnerships
involvement in interpretation of Roanoke Voyages;
NPS staff would interpret other national historic site
stories.
Alternative C expands the role of research in the
national historic site to allow visitors to gain
increased knowledge of the national historic site’s
multiple themes, both cultural and natural.

Discussion of Differences

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Continue to centralize orientation and exposure to
the national historic site’s expanded interpretive
mission in the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
• Provide opportunities for visitors to interact in positive
and meaningful ways with archeologists, historians,
and researchers on-site.
• Encourage visitors to experience outlying resources of
the site independently through more formal
interpretive trails with themed areas.
• Enhance the visitor experience by participating in
partner programs that offer interpretive programs at
other off-site locations on Roanoke Island.

Alternative C
Enhanced Focus on Research
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would implement
Section 3 of PL 101-603, November 16, 1990, by
increasing emphasis on research related to parkwide
interpretive themes and legislative mandates. By
coordinating and expanding efforts with research
organizations and agencies, national historic site visitors
would benefit by gaining increased knowledge of the
national historic site’s multiple themes, both cultural and
natural. Other general features of the alternative:
• Continue its partnership with the First Colony
Foundation.
• Establish partnerships with organizations that focus
on natural and cultural resource topics.
• Include archeology as a significant aspect of the
research program at the national historic site.
• Maintain the current visitor center as the primary
visitor orientation facility.
• Implement NPS researcher-in-the-park program.
• Promote increased research use of collections at the
Museum Resource Center.
• Increase research efforts with regard to the effects of
climate change on natural and cultural resources in
the national historic site.

Table 4: Summary Comparison of the Alternatives

Continues current management practices. No new facilities
would be proposed under Alternative A.

The NPS would continue to centralize orientation to the
historic site at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages and modestly
expanded interpretive themes would continue to occur
through films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and Underground Railroad
exhibits, through wayside exhibits, and other methods.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would greatly expand
the scope of its partnerships through greater partner
involvement in interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages.
Use of a revised cooperative agreement or other
appropriate contract or mechanism would permit the
partner to take on this responsibility. NPS staff would
interpret other national historic site stories. By
coordinating and expanding efforts among The
Elizabethan Gardens, Roanoke Island Historical
Association, and the NPS, visitors would spend more
time in the national historic site. Under Alternative B,
the national historic site would:
• Emphasize a greater reliance (than under current
conditions) on partnerships, cooperative agreements,
and on-site visitor facilities and services to accomplish
interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages. NPS
interpretive focus would be on the national historic
site's other stories (Carolina Algonquians, Civil War,
Freedmen's Colony, Fessenden experiments).
• Provide orientation to the national historic site.
• Evaluate the feasibility of an expanded Waterside
Theatre campus (new partner-funded visitor
center/indoor theater could be built near the current
NPS visitor center) for interpretation and theatrical
education.
Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
• Expand personal interpretive service program efforts.
• Inspire visitors to spend more time on-site through
expanded interpretive efforts, facilities, partnering,
marketing, and availability of food service (drinks and
snacks) at the national historic site.
• Evaluate the feasibility of an expanded campus (new
Roanoke Island Historical Association [partner]-funded
visitor center/indoor theater could be built near the
current NPS visitor center) for interpretation of the
Roanoke Voyages and The Lost Colony outdoor
symphonic drama.
• Provide more emphasis on theatrical skills classes
through enhanced partnerships and partner-funded
facilities.

2-40

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1
87reformat.docx

2-41

88

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

The NPS would continue to centralize orientation to the
historic site at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages and modestly
expanded interpretive themes would continue to occur
through films and exhibits at the Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center, the Freedmen’s Colony and Underground Railroad
exhibits, through wayside exhibits, and other methods.

Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
• Rely more upon Roanoke Island Historical Association
to tell the story of the Roanoke Voyages. The NPS
would interpret other national historic site stories,
including Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s Colony,
Civil War, and Fessenden radio experiments.
• Provide self-guided interpretive opportunities using
existing trails.
• Explore the use of the NPS Arts-in-Parks program.

Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center

Trails

Expanded Interpretive
Mission

Alternative B
Enhanced Visitor Experience

Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
• Natural processes would take precedence; however,
the NPS would take measures to protect sensitive
resources such as the Dough Cemetery and Waterside
Theatre.
• Establish a small outdoor seating area to provide
interpretive programming near the reconstructed
earthworks.
• A NPS partner would fund and conduct a feasibility
study and assessment of a range of alternatives for
the design and construction of a partner-operated
visitor center annex. This annex would be in proximity
to the existing Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
visitor center and would provide additional program
space, including, for example, exhibit space,
restrooms, offices, storage, multipurpose rooms, and
an indoor theater.
• Expanded parking at headquarters (8 spaces).
Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
The national historic site would continue to maintain and
operate the current trail system.
• Extend the Roanoke Island multi-use trail into the
national historic site all the way to The Elizabethan
Gardens, visitor center, and Waterside Theatre
parking.
• Establish a parallel trail to the Freedom Trail or
establish a new trail along the entrance road that
would complete the loop between the Freedom Trail
and Highway 64.
• Improve interpretive signage; clarify circulation
patterns.
Under Alternative B the national historic site would:
Under an approved and funded project, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site would design and install new exhibits
• Continue to maintain the Lindsay Warren Visitor
that expand the scope of the interpretive themes to include
Center; however, the interpretive focus would
not only the Roanoke Voyages but also exhibits on the
change.
Carolina Algonquians, the Freedmen’s Colony, the Civil
• The Lindsay Warren Visitor Center would interpret the
War, and Fessenden for the recently repaired and
Carolina Algonquians, Freedmen’s Colony, Civil War,
renovated Lindsay Warren Visitor Center. The modern
and Fessenden radio experiments.
exhibits would be interactive and would meet current NPS
• Interpretation of the Roanoke Voyages themes would
and Americans with Disabilities Act standards for quality,
be done by a partner in a partner-constructed and
scope, content, and design. The exhibits would also be
operated annex facility. The NPS partner would be
designed in accordance with the recommendations of the
required to fund and conduct a feasibility study for
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Long-Range Interpretive
this new facility.
Plan (NPS 2010a).

No change from current conditions. No new facilities would
be proposed.

Alternative A
No-action / Continue Current Management

Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Expand and rely on partnerships with other
organizations and agencies (such as the First Colony
Foundation, Roanoke Island Festival Park, North
Carolina Maritime Museum) to tell the various stories.
• Use results of expanded research to enhance
interpretive programs and media on all national
historic site interpretive themes, both natural and
cultural.
• Implement NPS researcher-in-the park program.
• Establish on-going archeological excavations with
partner organizations.

Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Maintain the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center as the
primary orientation and interpretation center of the
national historic site.

Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Determine design, route, and other features of an
improved loop trail in subsequent implementation
planning and analysis.
• Establish a parallel trail to the Freedom Trail or
establish a new trail along the entrance road that
would complete the loop between the Freedom Trail
and Highway 64.
• Improve interpretive signage; clarify circulation
patterns.

Alternative C
Enhanced Focus on Research
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Continue to protect the Waterside Theatre and
Dough Cemetery shorelines as described in
Alternative B.
• Continue to centralize orientation and exposure to
the national historic site’s expanded interpretive
mission in the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
• Establish a small outdoor seating area to provide
interpretive programming near the reconstructed
earthworks as described in Alternative B.
• Expanded parking area at headquarters (8 spaces).

Table 4: Summary Comparison of the Alternatives

Facilities and Associated
Visitor Activities

Alternative Element

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

All alternatives take into account the recently
completed rehabilitation and repair of the Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site.
All alternatives would upgrade or replace exhibits
and films to accommodate additional interpretive
themes. The primary difference between Alternatives
B and C is that Alternative B includes the potential
for a partner-funded visitor center annex in which
the primary interpretation of the Roanoke voyages
would occur while under Alternative C, all exhibits
and interpretive program themes would be housed
under the existing Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Alternative B relies more on self-guided information
and partnerships to implement the national historic
site’s expanded interpretive mission.
Alternative C relies more on partnerships and
expanded research on site to tell various national
historic site stories.

Alternative B provides for an extension of the multiuse trail into the national historic site.
Action alternatives seek to improve trail system by
redesigning and improving signage to clarify
confusing circulation patterns and by improving
interpretive signage.

Action alternatives would be similar. Alternative C
would continue to centralize visitor activities at the
Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.

Discussion of Differences

Chapter 2

Chapter 2

Alternative Element
Partnerships

Alternative A
No-action / Continue Current Management
The national historic site would maintain existing
partnerships with the Roanoke Island Historical Association
and the First Colony Foundation. Expansion of existing
partnerships or development of new partnerships would not
likely occur.

Alternative B would require more additional staff
than Alternative C.
Alternative C would require less additional staff than
Alternative B but would require the addition of an
NPS historian that is specific to Alternative C.

All alternatives recommend further study, analysis,
and planning to protect cultural and natural
resources from shoreline erosion (i.e. shoreline
erosion management plan).
Under Alternatives B and C, the NPS would build
and protect existing facilities in place unless future
extreme and/or successive catastrophic natural
disasters warranted otherwise.

All alternatives recommend further study, analysis,
and planning to protect cultural and natural
resources from shoreline erosion.
Under Alternative C, an additional archeological
survey would be conducted annually (funding
permitting), whereas under Alternative B, one
additional archeological survey would be conducted.
Alternative C would provide research results and
knowledge for protecting and preserving museum
collections to a greater degree. This alternative
enhances partnerships with research and
archeological partners that may be able to provide
treatments and conservation for museum collection
objects that the national historic site would not have
the capacity (funding or expertise) to do alone.

Alternative B would maintain and expand
partnerships for interpretive and theatrical education
purposes.
Alternative C would expand partnerships with local
historical and tourism-oriented organizations on
Roanoke Island as well as develop new partnerships
with research organizations.

Discussion of Differences

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Develop and implement a plan for protecting the
shoreline of the national historic site would be the
same as described under Alternative A.
• The NPS would rebuild and protect existing facilities in
place unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted otherwise.
However, resource management decisions due to
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the shoreline
erosion management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all alternatives.
Under Alternative C, staff levels would increase by 2.98
full-time equivalent staff positions, including a staff
historian.

Alternative C
Enhanced Focus on Research
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Implement recommendations of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site Long-Range Interpretive Plan (NPS 2010a)
• Expand partnerships with other historical and tourismoriented organizations on Roanoke Island.
• Continue and enhance partnership with the First
Colony Foundation, and others, for interpretive,
archival, and research purposes.
• Develop new partnerships with research
organizations, such as the University of North
Carolina Coastal Studies Institute, that could provide
research efforts on other national historic site cultural
and natural topics (beyond Roanoke Voyages).
Under Alternative C, the national historic site would:
• Reduce heavily landscaped and maintained areas. The
national historic site would restore these areas back
to natural conditions or convert them to low
maintenance plantings.
• Conduct additional annual archeological
investigations and data recovery between the
Elizabethan Gardens and the Dough Cemetery;
between the Thomas Hariot trail and the Elizabethan
Gardens; and at the Works Progress Administration
camp. These areas have been investigated the least
over the years and have the potential to yield
information about island historical themes apart from
the Roanoke voyages and the Lost Colony. These
themes include the Native American culture, the
Antebellum period, the Civil War, the Freedmen’s
Colony, and the Works Progress Administration camp.
The NPS would continue to coordinate with the First
Colony Foundation for on-going annual surveying.
• Partner with other organizations to increase
investigations, treatment, and conservation of cultural
resources.

Table 4: Summary Comparison of the Alternatives
Alternative B
Enhanced Visitor Experience
Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
• Maintain and enhance existing partnerships and
expand partnerships for interpretive and theatrical
education purposes.

Under Alternative A, the national historic site would:
Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
Resource Conditions –
(Includes Archeological and
• Maintain existing landscaped areas or convert them to
• Establish vegetative screening along the road to the
Museum Collections)
low maintenance plantings.
Waterside Theatre in order to minimize or screen the
view of automobile vehicles from visitors as they
• Allow natural processes such as shoreline erosion to
experience the nearby earthworks.
prevail in most areas, including the pond area. Excavate
• Conduct one additional archeological investigation
archeological resources that are threatened.
and data recovery between Pear Pad Road and the
• Continue to protect the Waterside Theatre area and
Heritage Point subdivision. This area has not been
Dough Cemetery shorelines pending results of future
investigated to the extent that other areas of the
shoreline studies and environmental analysis.
national historic site have and it has the potential to
• Implement the national historic site’s fire management
yield information about island historical themes apart
plan.
from the Roanoke voyages and the Lost Colony.
• Continue current resource collections management
These themes include the Native American culture,
efforts.
the Antebellum period, the Civil War, the Freedmen’s
• Continue current exotic plant management practices.
Colony, and the Works Progress Administration camp.
The NPS would continue to coordinate with the First
• Continue to conduct archeological surveys in compliance
Colony Foundation for on-going annual surveying.
with Section 110 of the National Historic Preservation
Act and the research requirement of Public Law 101• Evaluate the feasibility of an expanded “Waterside
603. The NPS would continue to coordinate with the
Theatre campus” to possibly include a new visitor
First Colony Foundation for on-going annual surveying.
center annex. The feasibility study would be partner(s)
funded and would address compliance requirements
• Continue natural resource monitoring activities.
(to include: archeological surveys, natural resource
surveys, landscaping requirements, etc.).
Under Alternative B, the national historic site would:
Response to Catastrophic The NPS would continue current management practices.
Loss and Ongoing
Natural processes would take precedence; however,
• Develop and implement a plan for protecting the
Shoreline Erosion
resource management decisions due to shoreline erosion
shoreline of the national historic site as described
would be deferred to the shoreline erosion management
under Alternative A.
plan and environmental assessment that is an element of all • The NPS would rebuild and protect existing facilities in
alternatives.
place unless future extreme and/or successive
catastrophic natural disasters warranted otherwise.
However, resource management decisions due to
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the shoreline
erosion management plan and environmental
assessment that is an element of all alternatives.
Staffing
Under Alternative B, staff levels would increase by 3.35
full-time equivalent staff positions.
The national historic site would maintain existing staffing
levels (at 4.95 full-time equivalents) and would continue to
share staff with Cape Hatteras National Seashore and
Wright Brothers National Memorial.

2-42

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

89

2-43

This page intentionally left blank.

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Chapter 2

91

1

0.5

0.25

0.5

0

0.7

1

Current
staff

Current
staff

Current
staff

Current
staff

Current
staff

Current
staff

1

1.5

0.5

0.5

0.9

0.9

1

Alternative
Alternative
Rationale
A FTEs
B FTEs

Same as Alternative A.

2-44

Same as Alternative A, plus new position – More
landscaped areas to maintain due to potential
partner-funded facility. New trails (Roanoke Island
multi-use trail in the national historic site plus
parallel trail to Freedom Trail).

Alternative A, plus 0.25 full-time employees –
More landscaped areas to maintain due to
potential partner-funded facility. New trails
(Roanoke Island multi-use trail in the national
historic site plus parallel trail to Freedom Trail).

Same as Alternative A.

New position – Expanded interpretive service
program efforts.

Same as Alternative A, plus 0.2 full-time
employees– Expanded interpretive service program
efforts. Inspire visitors to spend more time on site
than currently.

Same as Alternative A.

Rationale

1

0.5

0.333

0.5

0.9

0.7

1

Alternative
C FTEs
Rationale

Same as Alternative A.

Same as Alternative A.

Alternative A, plus 0.083 full-time
employees – One new trail parallel to
Freedom Trail. Establish small outdoor
seating area near reconstructed
earthworks.

Same as Alternative A.

New position – Provide opportunities
for visitors to interact with
archeologists, historians, and
researchers on site in meaningful
ways. Enhanced interpretive programs
due to expanded research efforts.

Same as Alternative A.

Same as Alternative A.

Table 5: Comparison of Staffing Levels by Alternative 1 (Presented as Full-time Equivalents)

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

WG-5
Maintenance
Worker

WG-4
Maintenance
Worker

Maintenance
Supervisor

Interpretation
Supervisor

Interpretation
Park Guide

Interpretation
Seasonal
Employees

Interpreter

Position

Chapter 2

92

0

2

Same as Alternative A, plus 1 full-time employee –
Extension of Roanoke Island multi-use trail into the
national historic site potentially results in more
visitor conflicts. Also additional trails and more
visitors because of more interpretive programming
could increase density of visitors at peak times and
therefore more potential for incidents.

Rationale

2-45

New staff positions would be shared with Cape Hatteras National Seashore and Wright Brothers National Memorial.

0

1

Current
staff

Alternative
Alternative
Rationale
A FTEs
B FTEs

1

2

Alternative
C FTEs

Chapter 2

More onsite research creates need for
a person to initiate, schedule, and
manage these activities.

Same as Alternative A, plus 1 full-time
employee – More onsite archeological
research plus increased opportunities
for visitors to interact with
archeologists, historians, and other
researchers on sites create potential
for more incidents.

Rationale

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter 2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

1

Historian

Law
Enforcement

Position

Table 5: Comparison of Staffing Levels by Alternative 1 (Presented as Full-time Equivalents)

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Chapter
2:2Alternatives
Chapter

1

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 6. Summary Comparison of the Costs of the Alternatives

Annual Operating Costs1

Alternative A

Alternative B

Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)

$871,900

$1,312,300

$1,222,500

2

Other Annual Costs

$30,000

3

Staffing (FTE)

4.95

8.30

7.93

$176,500

$931,300

$641,100

4

Total One-Time Costs :
Facility Costs
Non-Facility Costs

$30,000

1

Annual operating costs are the total costs per year for maintenance and operations associated with each alternative, including
1
utilities,
leasing,
and other materials.
Costassociated
and staffing
assume
the alternative
is fully
Annualsupplies,
operatingstaff
costssalaries
are the and
totalbenefits,
costs per year
for maintenance
and operations
withestimates
each alternative,
including
utilities, supplies,
implemented
as described
in the narrative.
The national
siteestimates
shares staff
withthe
Cape
Hatteras
National
Seashore
and the in
staff salaries and
benefits, leasing,
and other materials.
Cost historic
and staffing
assume
alternative
is fully
implemented
as described
Wright
Brothers
National
thewith
staff
splitHatteras
their time
between
the and
parks,
due
to some
seasonal
employment,
the narrative.
The
nationalMemorial.
historic site Because
shares staff
Cape
National
Seashore
the and
Wright
Brothers
National
Memorial.
Because this
value
can be
fraction
a full-time
equivalent
the staff
splitatheir
time of
between
the parks,
and dueemployee.
to some seasonal employment, this value can be a fraction of a full-time equivalent
employee.

Alternative
C includes an additional annual archeological survey in response to the legislative mandate of Public Law 101-603 to
2
Alternative C includes an additional annual archeological survey in response to the legislative mandate of Public Law 101-603 to undertake
undertake research on the history and archeology of the national historic site. Over time some of this research may be funded by
research on the history and archeology of the national historic site. Over time some of this research may be funded by various partner
various
partner organizations.
organizations.
2

3

The
3 total number of staff (FTE = Full Time Equivalent) is the number of person-years of staff required to maintain the assets of the
The total number of staff (FTE = Full Time Equivalent) is the number of person-years of staff required to maintain the assets of the national
national
historic site at a good level, provide acceptable visitor services, protect resources, and generally support the national historic
historic site at a good level, provide acceptable visitor services, protect resources, and generally support the national historic site’s operations. The
site’s
operations.
The number
of staffstaff
indicates
NPS-funded
staff only,
not volunteer
orSalaries
positions
Salanumber
of staff indicates
NPS-funded
only, not
volunteer positions
or positions
funded positions
by partners.
andfunded
benefitsby
arepartners.
included in
the
ries
and benefits
included
in the annual
costs.
For Alternative
B there would
be guide
3.35 additional
FTEinterpreter
staff consisting
of
annual
operatingare
costs.
For Alternative
B there operating
would be 3.35
additional
FTE staff consisting
of a park
and a seasonal
for
expanded
programs,
additional
staff due to more
landscaped
areas associated
with a staff
potential
funded
a park
guideinterpretation
and a seasonal
interpreter
for maintenance
expanded interpretation
programs,
additional
maintenance
duepartner
to more
landscaped
facility,
and a lawwith
enforcement
ranger
related
to expanded
opportunities.
For Alternative
there would
be 2.98 additional
FTE staff
areas
associated
a potential
partner
funded
facility,trail
and
a law enforcement
rangerCrelated
to expanded
trail opportunities.  For
consisting C
of there
an interpretive
park
guide
to assist visitors
in interacting
onsite
archeologists,
other
researchers
in meaningful
Alternative
would be
2.98
additional
FTE staff
consistingwith
of an
interpretive
park historians
guide to and
assist
visitors
in interacting
with onways, a law enforcement ranger related to more onsite archeological research, and a cultural historian to initiate, schedule, and manage onsite
site archeologists, historians and other researchers in meaningful ways, a law enforcement ranger related to more onsite archeologiresearch activities.
cal research, and a cultural historian to initiate, schedule, and manage onsite research activities.
4 4One-time facility costs for both alternatives include expansion of the headquarters parking area by 8 spaces of which 2 would be accessible
One-time facility costs for both alternatives include expansion of the headquarters parking area by 8 spaces of which 2 would be
spaces, new
exhibits
in the
VisitorinCenter
vicinity,
modification
the trail systemofnorth
of Highway
and of
demolition
the and
Prince
and Beehive
accessible
spaces,
new
exhibits
the Visitor
Center
vicinity,ofmodification
the trail
system64,
north
Highwayof64,
demolition
of
to Beehive
extreme shoreline
erosion.
thehouses
Princedue
and
houses due
to extreme shoreline erosion.
One-time
costsfor
forAlternative
Alternative
B would
include
archeological
investigations
Pear and
Pad the
Road
and the
Heritage
One-timenon-facility
non-facility costs
B would
include
archeological
investigations
betweenbetween
Pear Pad Road
Heritage
Point
community
and aand
feasibility
study and
assessment
of a rangeof
of aalternatives
for the designfor
andthe
construction
of aconstruction
partner-funded
operated
Point
community
a feasibility
study
and assessment
range of alternatives
design and
of and
a partner-fundcenter annex.
One-time
costs for non-facility
Alternative Ccosts
wouldfor
include
annual archeological
investigations
and artifact recovery
covering
edvisitor
and operated
visitor
centernon-facility
annex. One-time
Alternative
C would include
annual archeological
investigations
most
park lands
that covering
have not been
investigated
thebeen
feasibility
study listed
in Alternative
B. feasibility study listed in Alternative
and
artifact
recovery
mostpreviously
park lands
that haveand
not
previously
investigated
and the
B. The following applies to costs presented throughout this GMP:
The following applies to costs presented throughout this GMP:
•

••
•

•

•

••
•

••

The costs are presented as estimates and are not appropriate for budgeting purposes.

The
are presented
as estimates
and
areNPS
notand
appropriate
for budgeting
purposes.
Thecosts
costs presented
have been
developed
using
industry standards
to the extent
available.
Specific costs will be determined at a later date, considering the design of facilities, identification of detailed resource protection needs
andcosts
changing
visitor expectations.
The
presented
have been developed using NPS and industry standards to the extent available.

Actual costs to the NPS will vary depending on if and when the actions are implemented, and on contributions by partners and
volunteers.
Specific
will
be determined
atplan
a later
date,
considering
design
facilities,
identification
resource
Approvalcosts
of the
general
management
does
not guarantee
thatthe
funding
or of
staffing
for proposed
actionsof
willdetailed
be available.
protection
needs and
visitor
The implementation
of changing
the approved
plan,expectations.
no matter which alternative, will depend on future NPS funding levels and servicewide
priorities, and on partnership funds, time, and effort.
The NPS
will seek
grants
of funding
to address
for archeological
surveying.
Actual
costs
to the
NPSand
willother
vary sources
depending
on if and
when the
theneed
actions
are implemented,
and on contributions by partners

and volunteers.
•

Approval of the general management plan does not guarantee that funding or staffing for proposed actions will be available.

•

The implementation of the approved plan, no matter which alternative, will depend on future NPS funding levels and
servicewide priorities, and on partnership funds, time, and effort.

•

The NPS will seek grants and other sources of funding to address the need for archeological surveying.

2-46

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter
2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

93

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Chapter 2
Draft
General
Management
Plan
/
Environmental Impact Statement
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 7. Summary of Impacts of the Alternatives
Impact Category

Alternative A

Alternative B

Alternative C (NPS
Preferred Alternative)

Floodplains

Long-term, negligible,
adverse
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Wetlands

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, negligible to
minor, adverse

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, negligible,
adverse

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, negligible,
adverse

Species of Concern

Long- and short-term,
beneficial (federally and
state listed)
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse

Long- and short-term,
beneficial (federally and
state listed)
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Long- and short-term,
beneficial (federally and
state listed)
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Vegetation

Long-term, beneficial and
long- and short-term,
negligible to minor,
adverse
Cumulative: Long-term,
beneficial

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, beneficial

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, beneficial

Archeological Resources

Permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse and longand short-term beneficial
Cumulative: Permanent,
minor, adverse and longand short-term beneficial
Section 106: Not
applicable

Permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse and longand short-term beneficial
Cumulative: Permanent,
minor, adverse and longand short-term beneficial
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse and longterm beneficial
Cumulative: Permanent,
minor, adverse and longterm beneficial
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Ethnographic Resources

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse and longterm, beneficial
Section 106: Not
applicable

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse and longterm, beneficial
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse and longterm, beneficial
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Cultural Landscape

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse
Section 106: Not
applicable

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
minor, adverse
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Museum Collections

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: None

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: None

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: None

Natural Resources

Cultural Resources

2-47

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter
2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

94

Chapter 2

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Chapter 2: Alternatives

Table 7. Summary of Impacts of the Alternatives (Continued)
Impact Category
Historic Structures

Alternative A

Alternative B

Alternative C (NPS
Preferred Alternative)

Permanent, negligible,
adverse and long-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: None
Section 106: Not
applicable

Permanent, negligible,
adverse and long-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: None
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Permanent, negligible,
adverse and long-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: None
Section 106: No adverse
effect

Long-term, minor to
moderate, adverse
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, minor, adverse

Long-term, beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
beneficial

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long-term,
beneficial

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, beneficial

Long- and short-term,
beneficial
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, beneficial

Visitor Use and Experience
Visitor Use and Experience

Park Operations and Facilities
Park Operations and
Facilities

Long- and short-term,
moderate, adverse
Cumulative: Long- and
short-term, moderate,
adverse

2-48

I:\747760 Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter
2 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx

95

This page intentionally left blank.

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 3: AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter...

This chapter describes the characteristics
of the existing environment that could
be affected by the proposed management
alternatives. This is done in compliance with
the guidelines contained in the National
Environmental Policy Act and Section
1502.15 of the regulations for implementing
that act developed by the Council on
Environmental Quality (1978). Chapter 1
introduced the impact topics that may be
affected by the proposed actions or the Noaction Alternative. This section establishes
the basis for “Chapter 4: Environmental
Consequences”, which addresses the effects
the alternatives may have on the impact
topics. Each impact topic addressed is as
listed in chapter 1. A summary of climate
change is also included in this introduction,
with resource specific information provided
under each impact topic in this chapter.

•
•
•
•
•

Climate Change
Natural Resources
Cultural Resources
Visitor Use and Experience
Park Operations and Facilities

ranging from ice ages to long periods of
warmth. Historically, natural factors such as
volcanic eruptions, changes in earth’s orbit,
and the amount of energy released from the
sun have affected the earth’s climate. Human
activities associated with the Industrial
Revolution also changed the composition
of the atmosphere and, therefore, are
very likely influencing the earth’s climate.
For example, over the past 200 years, the
burning of fossil fuels and deforestation
caused concentrations of heat-trapping
“greenhouse gases” to increase significantly
in the atmosphere (USEPA 2008). As
concentrations of these gases continue
to increase in the atmosphere, the earth’s
temperature is climbing above past levels
(IPCC 2007; United Nations Environment
Programme 2007; U.S. Climate Change
Science Program 2008). Most warming in
recent decades is likely the result of human
activities (IPCC 2007). For example, the
recent United Nations report (IPCC 2007)
stated that “Observational evidence from
all continents and most oceans shows that
many natural systems are being affected
by regional climate changes, particularly
temperature increases.” The report
further states that, “A global assessment
of data since 1970 has shown it is likely
that anthropogenic warming has had a
discernible influence on many physical and
biological systems.”

CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change refers to any significant
change in measures of climate (such as
temperature, precipitation, or wind) lasting
for an extended period (decades or longer).
In general, climate change may result from
(USEPA 2008):
• Natural factors, such as changes in the

sun’s intensity or slow changes in the
earth’s orbit around the sun;

• Natural processes within the

climate system (e.g., changes in
ocean circulation, acidification, or
temperature); and

• Human activities that change the

atmosphere’s composition (e.g., burning
fossil fuels) and the land surface
(e.g., deforestation, reforestation,
urbanization, desertification, etc.).

Over the past 200 years the oceans have
absorbed nearly half the carbon dioxide
produced by human activities. One effect
has been to produce carbonic acid, thus

The earth’s climate has changed many times
during the planet’s history, with events
99

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

in NPS 2010e), but much of government,
business, organization, and individual
response to the challenges of climate
change is undetermined. Future threats of
deterioration, segmentation, and collapse of
the barrier islands along the North Carolina
Outer Banks coast as a result of increased
sea level rise and storm activity have been
described (Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs
and Ames 2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS
2010e). Given the complex interactions
among multiple factors and the uncertainties
over human response to climate change on
the barrier islands, the level of uncertainty
about possible effects on specific resources
or impact topics over the 15- to 20- year
planning period makes analysis for impacts
of climate change in this document
speculative. It is assumed that future NPS
management efforts would incorporate
measures to address resiliency and that
such measures would have beneficial effects
for natural and cultural resources as they
adapt to as yet unknown conditions that
may change over future decades. The effects
of climate change are not the result of
management actions, yet influence resource
conditions in as yet unknown ways, with
possible long-term, major adverse effects.
Since the effects of climate change are not
the result of management actions, they are
not incorporated into the environmental
consequences chapter.

increasing acidity and lowering the pH of
surface seawater by 0.1 pH unit. Projections
based on different emission scenarios give
additional reductions in average global
surface ocean pH of between 0.14 and 0.35
units by the year 2100 (IPCC 2007). This
seawater acidity is probably higher than has
been experienced for hundreds of millennia,
and there is convincing evidence that
such acidification will impair the process
of calcification by which animals, such as
molluscs, make their shells from calcium
carbonate.
Scientists are certain that human activities
are changing the composition of the
atmosphere, and that increasing the
concentration of greenhouse gases will
change the planet’s climate (USEPA 2008;
IPCC 2007). However, they are not sure
by how much it will change, at what rate it
will change, or what the specific effects will
be. Observed effects include sea level rise,
shrinking glaciers, changes in the range and
distribution of plants and animals, trees
blooming earlier, temperature increases,
lengthening of growing seasons, ice on
rivers and lakes freezing later and breaking
up earlier, and thawing of permafrost.
Climate change affects sea level; amounts of
precipitation intensity and runoff; height,
duration, and frequency of ocean waves; and
long-term tracks, intensity, and frequency of
coastal storms (Nicholls 2002).

Sea Level Rise Impacts on North Carolina

Potential Present and
Future Impacts of Climate Change

The North Carolina Coastal Resources
Commission, Science Panel on Coastal
Hazards, reviewed a range of possible sea
level rise scenarios and their associated
levels of plausibility. The panel determined
that the most likely sea level rise scenario for
North Carolina is a rise of 0.4 to 1.4 meters
(15 inches to 55 inches) by 2100 (NCCRC
2010). The panel also recommended a rise
of 1 meter (39 inches) by 2100 to be adopted
for policy and planning purposes (NCCRC
2010).

Studies predict that coastal barrier islands
and their natural and cultural resources will
be affected by sea level rise and potential
stronger storm events resulting from climate
change. Relative sea level is currently rising
in northeastern North Carolina at a rate of
16 to 18 inches (40 to 46 centimeters) per
century, a substantially higher rate than the
7 inches (18 centimeters) per century 100
years ago and the 3 inches (8 centimeters)
per century rate 200 years ago. The current
rate will likely continue to increase as the
climate continues to warm (Riggs et al. 2008

According to the National Centers for
Coastal Ocean Science, major impacts
100

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

NATURAL RESOURCES

of sea level rise in North Carolina are
increased erosion, flooding, and storm
damage (NCCOS 2011). Because of North
Carolina’s gently sloped coastal plain, a sea
level rise of 1 centimeter (0.4 inch) could
result in an inundation of 20 to 100 meters
(66 to 328 feet) of land area over the next
century (Pilkey 2004 in NCCOS 2011).
Over the past 25 years, shoreline erosion
has consumed approximately 125 square
kilometers (48 square miles) of land area, as
much as 60% of wetlands in northeastern
North Carolina (Riggs and Ames 2003 in
NCCOS 2011). Ninety-three miles (150
kilometers) of shoreline from Cape Hatteras
to Virginia average 4.7 feet (1.4 meters) of
erosion per year (NCCOS 2011). However,
shoreline recession rates vary dramatically
and are a function of shoreline type,
geometry, and composition; geographic
location, size, and shape of the associated
coastal water body; coastal vegetation; water
level; and storm frequency and intensity
(Riggs and Ames 1993 in NCCOS 2011).
Rising sea levels may flood beaches and
bluffs and force estuarine waters up river
valleys and adjacent land slopes, allowing
salt water to infiltrate farther inland and
upstream (NCCOS 2011). Higher salinity
affects surface and groundwater, impairing
water supplies, ecosystems, and coastal
farmland as well as harming aquatic plants
and animals (NCCOS 2011). Higher storm
surges, even from relatively minor storms,
can be expected from rising sea levels
causing storm damage along coasts (NCCOS
2011). Coastal North Carolina is expected
to receive a tropical storm once every four
years, and a tropical cyclone every 1.3 years
(State Climate Office of North Carolina in
NCCOS 2011). Increased hurricane intensity
may possibly be linked to a warming ocean
(NCCOS 2011).

This section describes natural resource
characteristics of the existing environment
that could be affected by the proposed
management alternatives. Impact topics
included in this section are floodplains,
wetlands, species of concern, and vegetation.
Floodplains
The Federal Emergency Management
Agency defines geographic areas as flood
zones according to varying levels of flood
risk. Each zone reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area. According to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site is within a Special
Flood Hazard Area subject to inundation
by the one percent annual chance flood
(100-year flood). The site contains areas
within Zone AE, indicating that Base Flood
Elevations have been determined. The
Base Flood Elevation is the water-surface
elevation of the one percent annual chance
flood. The Base Flood Elevations are 7 feet
(2.1 meters) in the southern portion of the
national historic site, 8 feet (2.4 meters)
in the center of the national historic site,
and 10 feet (3 meters) in the northeastern
portion of the national historic site. The
portion of the national historic site that
contains Pear Pad Road, the Waterside
Theatre parking lot, and the Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site headquarters is
located within Zone X, indicating areas of
0.2% (500-year flood) annual chance flood
and areas of one percent annual chance
flood with average depths of less than 1 foot
or with drainage areas less than one square
mile (FEMA 2006).
The shorelines of the Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site are within Zone V, indicating
a Coastal High Hazards Area. This area
extends from offshore to the inland limit of
a primary frontal dune along an open coast
and any other area subject to high velocity
wave action. The area landward of Zone V is
referred to as Coastal Zone A. The principal

Though natural evolution and change are an
integral part of our national parks, climate
change will fundamentally transform the
natural and cultural landscapes of national
parks in the not-too-distant future.

101

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

sources of flooding in Coastal Zone A areas
are associated with astronomical tides,
storm surges, seiches (standing waves), or
tsunamis. Areas subject to wave heights
between 3 and 1.5 feet (1 to 0.5 meters)
(Coastal Zone A) are not shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (NC DCCPS
2008). Figure 8 depicts the flood zones in
and around the national historic site (note
that the figure below is for reference only;
refer to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps for
detailed information).

alteration of the barrier islands may cause
marshes to convert to salt marsh, tidal range
and tidal influence may increase and spread
farther inland, and acceleration of shoreline
erosion would potentially occur (Schafale
2010). Specific impacts to the national
historic site are as yet unknown.
Wetlands
This section provides a summary of the
numbers, types, functions, and values of
wetlands identified within the national
historic site. Information to complete
this assessment was identified from
interactive maps available through the
National Wetland Inventory and the NPS
(USFWS 2011a; NPS 2006a) and from other
available information.

Climate Change
Climate change affects sea level, amounts
of rainfall, intensity and amount of runoff,
the height duration and frequency of ocean
waves, and long-term tracks, intensity
and frequency of coastal storms (Nicholls
2002) that could, in turn, affect floodplains.
Climate change is expected to increase the
extent and frequency of coastal flooding
(Loehman and Anderson 2009) from storm
surges and sea level rise. Changes in the
frequency of severe storms and increased
rainfall intensity could further aggravate
flooding and storm damage (Titus and
Richman 2001 in Loehman and Anderson
2009).

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
formally define wetlands as, “Those areas
that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas,” (USACE 1987). Lakes and ponds are
also classified as wetlands by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (Cowardin, et al. 1979).
Wetlands are defined according to the types
of vegetation, soils, and hydrology on a given
site (Cowardin, et al. 1979).

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coastline as a result of increased
sea level rise and storm activity have been
described (Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs
and Ames 2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS
2010e). The potential for sea level rise
to cause opening of new tidal inlets in
the Outer Banks barrier islands or the
collapse of the barrier islands themselves
(Schafale 2010) may cause more drastic
changes to occur to the national historic
site’s floodplains. Increased sea level and
storm events may affect the ability of the
landscape to convey flood waters as sea level
and landscape features change. Collapse or

Wetlands perform many ecological functions
that have associated value to humanity,
including (NPS 2003a):
• Surface water storage (flood control);
• Shoreline stabilization (wave damage

protection/shoreline erosion control);

• Groundwater recharge (some types

replenish water supplies);

• Sediment removal and nutrient cycling

(water quality protection);

102

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

Figure 8. Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Floodplain Map

including the pond on the north shore,
adjacent to US 64. This pond is considered
a wetland. The spit of shoreline dividing the
pond would be expected to be breached
during storm activity, thereby affecting the
ponded wetland status. There are other
wetlands within the national historic site that
have not yet been delineated. A Technical
Assistance Request has been made through
the Natural Resource Program Center
to assist the Outer Banks Group with
delineation of wetlands and development of
appropriate management strategies for their
continued protection.

• Support of aquatic productivity (fishing,

shell fishing, and waterfowl hunting),
production of trees (timber harvest);

• Production of herbaceous growth; and
• Provision of plant and wildlife habitat

(plant/wildlife/nature photography,
nature observation, and aesthetics).

Figure 9 and Table 8 detail the types and
general location of wetlands that occur
within Fort Raleigh National Historic Site.
Natural processes such as shoreline erosion
would be allowed to prevail in most areas,

103

104

Figure 9. Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Wetlands Map

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

Table 8. Wetland Types Occurring within Fort Raleigh National Historic Site1
National Wetland
Inventory Code
Abbreviation 2
E2EM1Pd

National Wetland
Inventory
Classification

Class/SubClass

[E] Estuarine,
[2] Intertidal,
[EM] Emergent,
[1] Persistent, [P] Irregularly Flooded, (d) Partially Drained/Ditched

[EM] Emergent - Characterized
by erect, rooted, herbaceous
hydrophytes, excluding mosses
and lichens. This vegetation is
present for most of the growing season in most years. These
wetlands are usually dominated
by perennial plants.
[1] Persistent - Dominated by
species that normally remain
standing at least until the beginning of the next growing season. This subclass is found only
in the Estuarine and Palustrine
systems.

PFO4/1C

[P] Palustrine,
[FO] Forested,
[4] Needle-Leaved Evergreen,
[1] Persistent , [C] Seasonally Flooded

[FO] Forested - Characterized
by woody vegetation that is 6
meters tall or taller.

PSS1A

[P] Palustrine,
[SS] Scrub-Shrub,
[1] Broad-Leaved Deciduous, [A] Temporarily
Flooded

[SS] Scrub-Shrub - Includes areas
dominated by woody vegetation
less than 6 meters (20 feet) tall.
The species include true shrubs,
young trees (saplings), and
trees or shrubs that are small or
stunted because of environmental conditions

Modifiers

[P] Irregularly Flooded –
Tidal water floods the
land surface less often
than daily.
(d) Partially Drained/
Ditched – Hydrologically
altered but soil moisture
is sufficient to support
some hydrophytes.  

[C] Seasonally Flooded Surface water is present
for extended periods
especially early in the
[4] Needle-leaved Evergreen
growing season but is
- Woody gymnosperms with
absent by the end of the
green, needle-shaped, or scale- growing season in most
like leaves that are retained by
years.  The water table
plants throughout the year; e.g., after flooding ceases is
black spruce (Picea mariana).
variable, extending from
saturated to the surface
[1] Persistent - Dominated by
to a water table well bespecies that normally remain
low the ground surface.
standing at least until the beginning of the next growing season. This subclass is found only
in the Estuarine and Palustrine
systems.

[1] Persistent - Dominated by
species that normally remain
standing at least until the beginning of the next growing season. This subclass is found only
in the Estuarine and Palustrine
systems.
105

[A] Temporarily Flooded Surface water is present
for brief periods during
growing season, but the
water table usually lies
well below the soil surface. Plants that grow
in both uplands and
wetlands may be characteristic of this water
regime.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 8. Wetland Types Occurring within Fort Raleigh National Historic Site1
National Wetland
Inventory Code
Abbreviation 2
PSS7C

National Wetland
Inventory
Classification
[P] Palustrine,
[SS] Scrub-Shrub,
[7] Evergreen, [C] Seasonally Flooded

Class/SubClass

Modifiers

[SS] Scrub-Shrub - Includes areas
dominated by woody vegetation
less than 6 meters (20 feet) tall.
The species include true shrubs,
young trees (saplings), and
trees or shrubs that are small or
stunted because of environmental conditions

[C] Seasonally Flooded Surface water is present
for extended periods
especially early in the
growing season but is
absent by the end of the
growing season in most
years.  The water table
after flooding ceases is
variable, extending from
saturated to the surface
to a water table well below the ground surface.

[7] Evergreen – A plant community where evergreen trees
or shrubs represent more than
50% of the areal coverage of
trees and shrubs.  The canopy is
never without foliage; however,
individual trees and shrubs may
shed their leaves.
PUBHx

1

[P] Palustrine,
[UB] Unconsolidated
Bottom,
[H] Permanently Flooded, [x] Excavated

[UB] Unconsolidated Bottom
- Includes all wetlands and
deepwater habitats with at least
25% cover of particles smaller
than stones (less than 6-7 centimeters), and a vegetative cover
less than 30%.

[H] Permanently Flooded
- Water covers the land
surface throughout the
year in all years.
[x] Excavated - Lies
within a basin or channel
excavated by man.

Source:  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory, 2011a.

2

  [P] Palustrine - The Palustrine System includes all nontidal wetlands dominated by trees, shrubs, emergents, mosses or lichens,
and all such wetlands that occur in tidal areas where salinity due to ocean derived salts is below 0.5 parts per trillion.  Wetlands
lacking such vegetation are also included if they exhibit all of the following characteristics: are less than 8 hectares (20 acres); do
not have an active wave-formed or bedrock shoreline feature; have at low water a depth less than 2 meters (6.6 feet) in the deepest
part of the basin; and have a salinity due to ocean-derived salts of less than 0.5 parts per trillion.
[E] Estuarine – The Estuarine System describes deepwater tidal habitats and adjacent tidal wetlands that are influenced by water
runoff from and often semi-enclosed by land.  They are located along low-energy coastlines and they have variable salinity.
[2] Intertidal – This is defined as the area from extreme low water to extreme high water and associated splash zone.

106

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

Climate Change

Collapse or alteration of the barrier islands
may cause marshes to convert to salt marsh,
tidal range and tidal influence may increase
and spread farther inland, and acceleration
of shoreline erosion would potentially occur
(Schafale 2010). Specific impacts to the
national historic site are as yet unknown.

Climate change affects sea level, amounts
of rainfall, intensity and runoff, height,
duration and frequency of ocean waves, and
long-term tracks, intensity and frequency
of coastal storms (Nichols 2002) that could
affect wetlands and associated vegetation,
especially communities in close proximity
to national historic site shorelines. Climate
change is expected to increase the extent
and frequency of coastal flooding (Loehman
and Anderson 2009) from storm surges and
sea level rise.

Species of Concern
The NPS is required under the Endangered
Species Act to ensure that federally listed
species and their habitats are protected on
all lands within the agency’s jurisdiction.
In addition, the NPS manages state and
locally listed species in a manner similar to
its treatment of federally listed species to the
greatest extent possible (NPS 2006a).

Freshwater and brackish wetlands, common
to the mid- and south Atlantic coasts,
are particularly sensitive to sustained or
pulsed salinity penetration; such pulses
are expected to increase in magnitude
and frequency with climate change and
may likely result in a transition to more
salt tolerant species (Boesch et al. 2000 in
Loehman and Anderson 2009). Salt marshes
may be able to survive rates of sea-level rise
as high as 50 centimeters (20 inches) in 50
years, an estimate that is lower than the
expected rise in sea level for much of the
coastal U.S. over the next 100 years (Boesch
et al. 2000 in Loehman and Anderson
2009). Local subsidence or hydrologic
changes, however, could increase the rate
of relative sea level rise experienced by
individual marshes, potentially exceeding
the local threshold of some salt marshes to
adapt (Boesch et al. 2000 in Loehman and
Anderson 2009).

Species of concern include species with
federal or state endangered, threatened, or
candidate for listing status, as well as locally
rare species. Species of concern historically
known, presently known, or potentially
occurring in the national historic site were
identified based on recent NPS resource
studies (NPS 2011a), Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site Fiscal Year 2010 Government
Performance and Results Act Species of
Management Concern list, as well as the
North Carolina Natural Heritage Program’s
Virtual Workroom 2-mile radius search
database (NCNHP 2011) (see Appendix C
for more information).
There are two federally listed species (one
bird and one reptile) of concern that are
presently known or potentially occurring
at the national historic site, and 14 North
Carolina listed species (three birds, two
reptiles, three insects, and six plants).
A federally listed species of concern
refers to those species that may require
concentrated conservation actions, but do
not have legal protection under Section 7
of the Endangered Species Act (USFWS
2011b). Federal species of concern are
recommended for consideration by federal
agencies undertaking management actions.
They are not species officially designated as
candidate species for Section 7 protection.

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks barrier
islands or the collapse of the barrier islands
themselves (Schafale 2010) may cause more
drastic changes to occur to the national
historic site’s resources including wetlands.
107

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Both federal and state listed species are
included in Table 9, along with habitat and
occurrence information.

ecosystems, in both plant and animal
communities (Parmesan 2006 in Loehman
and Anderson 2009). Birds have exhibited
a variety of responses to warming trends
including earlier breeding dates, range
expansions, and asynchronous life history
events (Marra et al. 2005 in Loehman and
Anderson 2009).

Special status species were last surveyed
in the national historic site from 1996 to
1997. A Technical Assistance Request was
submitted in fiscal year 2011 to conduct rare
plant inventory and mapping for the Outer
Banks Group at Cape Hatteras National Sea
Shore, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site,
and Wright Brothers National Monument.
Future funding and completion of the
inventory will provide the national historic
site with more information regarding species
of concern within its boundaries.

Species of concern, regardless of listing
status, are especially vulnerable to changes
in habitat, water quality, air and water
temperature, and other anticipated effects of
climate change in the Outer Banks region of
North Carolina. For example, sea level rise
and increases in severe weather events may
increase erosion at the national historic site,
permanently altering the remaining dune,
maritime forest and marsh communities on
Roanoke Island. The resulting loss of habitat
and species may effectively eliminate some
species of concern from the national historic
site.

Climate Change
Plant-animal interactions such as
pollination, seed dispersal, and insect
control depend on synchrony between
species. Although some species may
respond to climate change at similar rates
and maintain synchrony, for other species
the loss of synchrony (such as mismatched
timing between larval emergence and
growth of host plants) may have detrimental
effects (Burkett et al. 2005 in Loehman and
Anderson 2009). Because different species
are likely to respond differently to climate
change, current ecological communities
may ultimately be replaced by entirely new
assemblages of species (Root et al. 2003 in
Loehman and Anderson 2009). Changes in
terrestrial and aquatic species compositions
are likely to occur as ranges shift, contract,
or expand. Rare species and communities
may disappear, and more common species
may become rare (Burns et al. 2003 in
Loehman and Anderson 2009).

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks
barrier islands or the collapse of the barrier
islands themselves (Schafale 2010) may
cause more drastic changes to occur to the
national historic site’s resources. Collapse
or alteration of the barrier islands may
cause marshes to convert to salt marsh, tidal
range and tidal influence may increase and
spread farther inland, and acceleration of
shoreline erosion would potentially occur
that would alter habitat for some species of
concern(Schafale 2010). Specific impacts to
the national historic site are as yet unknown.

Range-restricted species (such as those at
high elevations) and endemics will likely
be the first to experience severe range
contraction and extinction due to climate
change (Parmesan 2006 in Loehman and
Anderson 2009). Behavioral and genetic
responses to climate change have been
documented across multiple studies
in marine, freshwater, and terrestrial

Vegetation
The flora of Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site includes those species associated
with North Carolina’s barrier islands. The
108

109

Status

Northern
diamondback
terrapin
(Malaclemys
terrapin terrapin)

Reptiles

Black rail
(Laterallus
jamaicensis)

Birds

NC: Special
Concern

Federal:
Species of
Concern

NC: Special
Concern

Federal:
Species of
Concern

Federal Listed Species

Common
Name
(Scientific
Name)

The northern diamondback terrapin is found within coastal marshes, tidal flats, coves, estuaries, and lagoons behind
barrier beaches in brackish and salt water (NatureServe 2010). The turtle burrows into mud when inactive and in
Virginia, has been observed hibernating in moist sand 8 meters from the high tide mark (Ernst and Barbour 1972 in
NatureServe 2010). Nesting occurs in the sandy marsh edge, offshore island, or dune (vegetated or un-vegetated) above
the high tide mark (NatureServe 2010). The northern diamondback terrapin eats mainly marine clams, snails, worms,
crabs and scavenges and takes live food (Ernst and Barbour 1972 in NatureServe 2010). Threats include water pollution,
development, and heavy recreational use of beaches and dunes (NatureServe 2010). The northern subspecies (essentially
Dare County) Malaclemys terrapin terrapin has a U.S. status of Federal Species of Concern while the southern subspecies (essentially the southern half of the coast) Malaclemys terrapin centrata, has no U.S. status (NCNHP 2011). The
northern diamondback terrapin is listed as present in the national historic site and a species of management concern
(NPS 2010b).

In North Carolina, the black rail is found primarily in the brackish marshes dominated by black needlerush, with varying amounts of finer grasses, such as slatmeadow cordgrass and/or salt-grass marshes (Distichlis spicata). The species
is known to be a fairly common permanent resident in the extensive brackish marshes of the eastern and southern
portions of Roanoke Island. Fussell (1997a) identified black rail that vocally respond to tape recorded calls in winter,
concluding that permanent resident individuals exist on the island. The study also identified the brackish marsh south of
US 64/264 as moderately suitable breeding habitat and marginal wintering habitat (Fussell 1997a). Threats include loss
and degradation of habitat due to drainage, dredging, filling, impounding, mining, and pollutant discharge (Todd 1977;
Tiner 1984; Kerlinger and Sutton 1989; Kerlinger and Wiedner 1990 in NatureServe 2010). The black rail is also affected
by predators, inclement weather conditions, human disturbances, and environmental contamination (NatureServe,
2010).

Habitat and Occurrence

Table 9. Species of Concern

110

Status

Bald eagle
(Haliaeetus leucocephalus)

Black-throated
green warbler
– coastal plain
population
(Dendroica
virens waynei)

Birds

NC: Threatened

Federal: Bald
and Golden
Eagle Protection Act
(16 U.S.C.
668-668d)

NC: Significantly Rare

North Carolina Listed Species

Common
Name
(Scientific
Name)

Breeding habitat most commonly includes areas close to (within 4 kilometers or 2.5 miles) coastal areas, bays, rivers,
lakes, or other bodies of water that reflect the general availability of primary food sources, including fish, waterfowl,
and seabirds (Andrew and Mosher 1982; Green 1985; Campbell et al. 1990 in NatureServe 2010). Bald eagles referentially roost in conifers or other sheltered sites in winter in some areas; this species typically selects the larger, more
accessible trees (Buehler et al. 1991, 1992 in NatureServe 2010). Perching in deciduous and coniferous trees is equally
common in other areas (e.g., Bowerman et al. 1993 in NatureServe 2010). Communal roost sites used by two or more
eagles are common, and some may be used by 100 or more eagles during periods of high use (NatureServe 2010). Winter roost sites vary in their proximity to food resources (up to 33 kilometers or 21 miles) and may be determined to some
extent by a preference for a warmer microclimate at these sites (NatureServe 2010). Fussell (1997a) concluded that
migrating individuals visit the shorelines of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site occasionally to rarely and nesting by eagles
within national historic site boundaries is extremely unlikely at this time. In addition, use of the area by individuals on
a long-term basis is also very unlikely because of a poor food supply (Fussell 1997a). Major threats include habitat loss,
disturbance by humans, biocide contamination, decreasing food supply, and illegal shooting (Evans 1982; Green 1985;
Herkert 1992 in NatureServe 2010).

The black-throated green warbler – coastal plain population is located within a narrow belt of forested wetlands of
the outer Coastal Plain from southern Virginia to the Edisto River in South Carolina (Cely N.D.). This species has one
of the most restricted breeding distributions of any warbler in the southeastern United States (Cely N.D.). It is rarely
found farther than 40 to 48 kilometers (25 to 30 miles) inland from the coast (Cely N.D.). Population size and trends are
unknown, although it is suspected of disappearing or declining from southeastern Virginia and parts of North Carolina
(Watts and Paxton 2002 in Cely N.D.) as well as areas devastated by Hurricane Hugo in South Carolina in 1989 (Cely
pers. obs. In Cely N.D.). In southern Virginia and coastal North Carolina, the species is closely associated with Atlantic
white cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides) (Cely N.D.). Where cedar is scarce or absent, birds are found primarily in nonalluvial forested wetlands or transitional zones between uplands and wetlands, where, as a canopy or subcanopy species, it uses blackgum (Nyssa sylvatica), laurel oak (Quercus laurifolia), sweetgum (Liquidamber styraciflua), bald cypress
(Taxodium distichum), “wet” loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), and red maple (Acer rubrum) (Cely N.D.). In Virginia and North
Carolina, Watts and Paxton (2002) found higher than expected warbler use in survey plots containing loblolly pine,
Atlantic white cedar, and bald cypress and less than expected use in those plots with pond pine (P.serotina) and hardwoods (Cely N.D.). As a canopy/subcanopy species, short timber rotations may negatively affect the species (Cely pers.
obs.; Sprunt 1953 in Cely N.D.). Alterations of hydrology and wetlands drainage also pose potential problems; however,
little is known about the species breeding biology, status, and habitat use (Cely N.D.). The black-throated green warbler
– coastal plain population is listed as present in the national historic site and a species of management concern (NPS
2010b).

Habitat and Occurrence

Table 9. Species of Concern

111

NC: Special
Concern

Timber rattlesnake
(Crotalus horridus)

The timber rattlesnake’s preferred habitat in its southern range consists of hardwood forests, swampy areas and floodplains, wet pine flatwoods, river bottoms, hydric hammocks, and hardwood forests and cane fields of alluvial plain and
hill country (NatureServe 2010). The species primarily feeds on small mammals, but may also include birds, bird eggs, lizards, and other small animals (NatureServe 2010). Threats to the species include loss of habitat; habitat fragmentation,
and isolation of populations, which may become small and nonviable; and direct mortality caused by humans (including
illegal snake hunters) and vehicles as habitat is encroached upon by urban/residential development (Brown, in Tyning
1992; Brown 1993 in NatureServe2010). The timber rattlesnake is listed as present in the national historic site and a
species of management concern (NPS 2010b).

Carolina watersnakes are found in salt or brackish marshes and are endemic to North Carolina (NCNHP 2011). The species is listed as present in the national historic site and a species of management concern (NPS 2010b).

NC: Special
Concern

Carolina watersnake
(Nerodia sipedon williamengelsi)

Habitat and Occurrence
Peregrine falcons are found in various open situations from tundra, moorlands, steppe, and seacoasts, especially where
there are suitable nesting cliffs, to mountains, open forested regions, and human population centers (AOU 1983 in NatureServe2010). When not breeding, occurs in areas where prey concentrate, including farmlands, marshes, lakeshores,
river mouths, tidal flats, dunes and beaches, broad river valleys, cities, and airports (NatureServe 2010). Birds often nest
on ledges or holes on rocky cliffs or crags, and may also nest in river banks, tundra mounds, open bogs, large stick nests
of other species, tree hollows, and man-made structures (e.g., ledges of city buildings, bridges, rock quarries, and raised
platforms) are used locally (Cade 1982 in NatureServe 2010). In the United States, the Atlantic coast from New Jersey
to South Carolina and the barrier islands of the Texas Gulf Coast are important feeding areas for long-distance migrants
(NatureServe 2010). Peregrine falcons primarily feed on birds, and rarely take small mammals, lizards, fish, or insects
(NatureServe 2010). The birds may hunt up to several kilometers from nest sites (NatureServe 2010). Threats include loss
of wetland habitat of primary prey, poachers robbing nests, shooting by hunters, and food chain contamination from
use of persistent pesticides (NatureServe 2010). Reintroduced populations in some areas of the eastern United States
(e.g., barrier islands of the mid-Atlantic states) may be threatened by increasing human disturbance and use of nesting
habitat (Byrd and Johnston 1991 in NatureServe 2010). The peregrine falcon is listed as present in the national historic
site and a species of management concern (NPS 2010b). Peregrine falcons have been recorded to annually nest in the
national historic site and fledge chicks (NPS 2010b).

Status

Peregrine falcon NC: Endan(Falco pergered
egrines)

Common
Name
(Scientific
Name)

Table 9. Species of Concern

112

Moundlily yucca NC: Signifi(Yucca gloriosa) cantly Rare

Moundlily yucca is a rare evergreen shrub found along North Carolina’s coast. Primary habitat for this species includes
dunes and is associated with yaupon (Ilex vomitoria) and southern redcedar (Juniperus silicicola) shrubs (Cook 2011).
The flowering / fruiting period for the species occurs during October (Fussell 1997b). Moundlily yucca is currently pending NPS confirmation in the national historic site (NPS 2010b).

Ringed witch grass occurs in dry sandy or rocky open woods and borders of thickets (NCNHP 2011). The species was last
observed within a 2-mile (3.2 kilometer) radius of the national historic site in 1958 (NCNHP 2011).

Ringed witch
grass
(D. annulum)

NC: Significantly Rare

Blue witch grass is primarily associated with wet savannas with a calcareous influence (NCNHP 2011). The last recorded
observance near the national historic site was in 1898 (NCNHP 2011).

Blue witch grass NC: Endan(Dichanthelium gered
caerulescens)

The northern oak hairstreak butterfly is associated with oak-dominated woods, usually in dry sites (NCNHP 2011). Oak
species are the primary hosts for the butterfly (NCNHP 2011). The last recorded observance near the national historic
site was in 1977 (NCNHP 2011).

The little metalmark is found from southern Maine south along the Atlantic coastal plain to Gulf Coast of northern Florida (butterfliesandmoths.org N.D.). The species inhabits coastal plains swamps and stream banks and associated barrens
(NCNHP 2011). Atlantic white cedar is the primary caterpillar host for the little metalmark. Adult butterflies feed primarily on nectar from flowers including swamp milkweed (Asclepias incarnate), shadbush (Amelanchier sp.), sand myrtle
(Leiophyllum buxifolium), sweet pepperbush (Clethra sp.), highbush blueberry (Vaccinium sp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), and dogbane (Apocynum cannabinum) (NCNHP 2011). The little metalmark is listed as present in the
national historic site and a species of management concern (NPS 2010b).

NC: Significantly Rare

Northern oak
hairstreak butterfly
(Satyrium favonius Ontario)

Giant swallowtail butterflies are primarily associated with coastal areas in maritime forests or thickets, but may also be
found in the foothills and mountains near prickly ash (Zanthoxylum sp.) or hoptree (Ptelea trifoliate), or gardens (NCNHP
2011; NatureServe 2010). The species breeds in a variety of habitats with suitable native or non-native Rutaceae (including citrus groves) (NatureServe 2010). The giant swallowtail butterfly has been found near The Elizabethan Gardens and
is presumed to occur in the nearby mature Maritime Evergreen Forest (Schafale 2010). The last recorded observance
near the national historic site was in 2007 (NCNHP 2011).

Habitat and Occurrence

Little metalmark NC: Signifi(Calephrys hes- cantly Rare
seli)

NC: Significantly Rare

Status

Giant swallowtail butterfly
(Papilio
cresphontes)

Butterflies

Common
Name
(Scientific
Name)

Table 9. Species of Concern

113

NC: Threatened

NC: Signifi- Winged seedbox inhabits a broad spectrum of wetland habitats, but mostly near-coastal types, including wet to ponded
cantly Rare - dune swales, brackish marshes, fresh tidal marshes (including “wind tide marshes” in Virginia), wet pockets in maritime
Peripheral
forests, pond cypress depressions, shores of freshwater lakes, margins of spring-fed rivers, margins of blackwater rivers,
wet hammock woodlands on oolite, roadside ditches, and borrow pits (NatureServe 2010). Currently, it is found in seven
counties in North Carolina and is likely declining due to development of coastal counties; however, no hard data exist
(NatureServe 2010). Winged seedbox was observed in 1997 (Fussell 1997b) and is currently a species of management
concern for the national historic site (NPS 2010b). Threats include beach migration and competition with common reed in
marsh areas (NPS 2010b).

Saltmarsh spikerush
(Eleocharis halophila)

Winged seedbox
(Ludwigia alata)

Source: Species of concern were obtained from NPS 2010b, NPS 2011, and NCNHP 2011. References are provided in Appendix C.

Saltmarsh spikerush was reported as a tentative observation of species in 1997 (Fussell 1997b) and is currently listed as a
species of management concern (NPS 2010b). Current threats include competition with common reed (Phragmites australis) in marsh areas and land development (NPS 2010b).

Twig-rush occurs in open, sunny, wet areas dominated by sedges (NatureServe 2010). Primary habitat for this species
includes: calcareous and saline marshes and swamps; patterned water tracks, spring fens, and calcareous fens; and
wetlands and swales of the Atlantic coastal plain and the Great Lakes (NatureServe 2010). Threats to twig-rush include
sedimentation, land-use conversion, habitat fragmentation, forest management practices, exotic species, and beach migration (NatureServe 2010; Fussell 1997b). Twig-rush was observed by 1997 (Fussell 1887b) and is currently a species of
management concern (NPS 2010b).

NC: Significantly Rare
– Other

Twig-rush
(Cladium mariscoides)

Habitat and Occurrence

Status

Common
Name
(Scientific
Name)

Table 9. Species of Concern

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

national historic site contains a variety of
communities ranging from vegetationstabilized sand dunes on its eastern shore,
interior maritime forests, and extensive
tidal marsh swamps in the southern area of
the national historic site (NPS 2010c). The
pervasive vegetative character of the site is
secondary growth woodland, with open
areas that include overhead tree canopy
(NPS 2010c). Information on State-listed
plant species is provided in the “Species of
Concern” section of this chapter.

During the 1960s, a mix of native and exotic
trees, shrubs, and groundcovers were
planted at the national historic site in an
area from the Waterside Theatre parking
lot to The Elizabethan Gardens parking lot.
Tree species planted included natives such
as longleaf pine (Pinus palustris), live oak,
American holly, dogwood, redbud (Cercis
canadensis), southern magnolia (Magnolia
grandiflora), sweetgum (Liquidamber
styraciflua), sourwood (Oxydendrum
arboretum), black walnut (Juglans nigra),
eastern red cedar, and sassafras, as well
as the naturalized exotic, crape myrtle
(Lagerstroemia indica). Native shrub species
planted included inkberry (Ilex glabra),
yaupon holly, sweetshrub (Calycanthus
floridus), and moundlily yucca. Exotic
shrubs and groundcovers planted included
leucothoe (Leucothoe sp.), cotoneaster
(Cotoneaster horizontalis), gardenia
(Gardenia florida), and liriope (Liriope
spicata). Most of the species planted in
the 1960s appear to be present, with the
exception of many of the exotic shrubs
(NPS 2010c). Existing natural vegetation
communities bear limited resemblance
to their native condition; however,
characteristic flora have re-established
beneath the historic site’s successional forest
canopy (Schafale 2010).

The national historic site’s landscape is
heavily wooded and dominated by live
oak (Q. virginiana), laurel oak, blackjack
oak (Q. marilandica), sassafras (Sassafras
albidum), American holly (I. opaca),
yaupon holly, loblolly pine (Pinus tæda),
flowering dogwood (Cornus florida),
wax myrtle (Myrica cerifera), and redbay
(Persea borbonia) (NPS 2010c). Other
species observed at the national historic site
include: Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus
quinquefolia), english ivy (Hedera helix),
black cherry (Prunus serotina), osmanthus
(Osmanthus sp.), hickory pignut (Carya
glabra), red mulberry (Morus rubra),
black oak (Q. velutina), water oak (Q.
nigra), willow oak (Q. phellos), persimmon
(Diospyros sp.), shortleaf pine (Pinus
echinata), spruce pine (P. glabra), eastern
red cedar (J. virginiana), serviceberry
(Amelanchier sp.), silktree (Mimosa sp.),
sparkleberry tree (Vaccinium arboreum),
sumac (Rhus sp.), sweetbay magnolia
(Magnolia virginiana), moundlily yucca,
baccharis (Baccharis halimifolia), American
beautyberry (Callicarpe Americana),
Carolina jasmine (Gelsemium sempervirens),
grape (Vitus sp.), greenbriar (Smilax sp.),
poison ivy (Toxicodendrum radicans),
trumpet flower (Campsis radicans),
blueberry (Vaccinium sp.), partridgeberry
(Mitchella repens), and silkgrass (Pityopsis
aspera) (NPS 2010c).

Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus
quinquefolia), one of the many species found
at the national historic site.

Natural Communities

Vegetation at the national historic site has
had European influences since the 1600s
and was completely deforested during
the Civil War (Schafale 2010; NPS 2010c).

Vegetation at the national historic site
was inventoried in 2010 by the North
Carolina Natural Heritage Program and
114

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

has been described as containing four
distinct vegetation communities: Maritime
Evergreen Forest, Successional Wet Pine
Flatwoods and Coastal Fringe Sandhill,
Tidal Cypress – Gum Swamp, and Tidal
Freshwater Marsh (Schafale 2010).

sawgrass (Cladium jamaicense), with some
common three-square (Schoenoplectus
pungens); however, large areas have become
dominated by common reed. Inland on the
tidal creek, is a transitional area with wax
myrtle dominant and dense herbaceous
vegetation that includes arrowhead
(Sagittaria sp.), smartweed (Persicaria sp.),
marsh fern (Thelypteris palustris), climbing
hempvine (Mikania scandens), and herb of
grace (Bacopa monnieri). This area likely
only recently converted to marsh from
former swamp and will presumably continue
to change, becoming more open and
dominated by Jamaica swamp sawgrass. This
area is susceptible to common reed invasion.
A large ditch has been excavated through
the most extensive portion of the marsh,
separating it from inland areas.

Maritime Evergreen Forests occur in
sheltered areas of barrier islands but are
subject to the extremes of the maritime
environment, primarily salt water spray that
shapes the canopy and excludes some tree
species (Schafale 1990). These forests are
also subject to periodic severe disturbance
by wind and heavy salt spray of hurricanes
(Schafale 1990). The Successional Wet Pine
Flatwoods and Coastal Fringe Sandhill
communities are identified near the tidal
creek in the southern area of the national
historic site. These communities suggest
overgrown longleaf pine communities, but
have been reported to represent former
fields (Schafle 2010). More information
on Maritime Evergreen Forests and the
Successional Wet Pine Flatwoods and
Coastal Fringe Sandhill communities are
provided in the Fort Raleigh Maritime
Forest Significant Natural Heritage Area
discussion below.

Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest, North
Carolina Significant Natural Heritage
Area
A Significant Natural Heritage Area is an
area of land or water identified by the
North Carolina Natural Heritage Program
as important for conservation of the State’s
biodiversity. Significant Natural Heritage
Areas contain one or more Natural Heritage
elements - high-quality or rare natural
communities, rare species, and special
animal habitats. The North Carolina Natural
Heritage Program identified more than 2,000
Significant Natural Heritage Areas across the
State. The Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest is
currently listed as recommended for registry
as regionally significant (Schafale 2010;
NCNHP N.D.).

The portion of the national historic site
south of U.S. Highway 64, near Weir Point
and the tidal creek, contains Tidal CypressGum Swamp and Tidal Freshwater Marsh.
Tidal Cypress-Gum Swamp areas of the
national historic site are dominated by pond
cypress (Taxodium ascendends) with some
red maple (Acer rubrum var. trilobum) and
swamp bay (Persea palustris). There is a
substantial shrub layer of wax myrtle and
swamp rose (Rosa palustris). The herb layer
is fairly dense, with royal fern (Osmunda
regalis), Virginia chainfern (Woodwardia
virginica), Lizard’s tail (Saururus cernuus),
and green arrow arum (Peltandra virginica)
abundant.

The Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest is located
at the north end of Roanoke Island, within
the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
boundary. The forest is divided into two
areas of concern: a small area of Maritime
Evergreen Forest located on the dunes near
the reconstructed earth works, north of the
national historic site visitor center (identified
as primary concern), surrounded by a larger
area of successional pine forest that occupies

Tidal Freshwater Marsh occurs along
the tidal creek, and extends well inland
from Croatan Sound. Intact areas of
marsh are dominated by Jamaica swamp
115

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the majority of the historic site (identified as
secondary concern) (Figure 10). The forest
totals 184.02 acres, including the 20.35acre Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest. The
Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest is reported
as one of the best examples remaining in
the Pamlimarle Peninsula region (Schafale
2010).

The herbaceous layer is relatively sparse, but
some areas are dominated by partridgeberry.
The northern part of the primary areas
is composed of younger tree species, and
species along the shore are composed of
shorter or younger canopy trees that are
probably related to brackish water spray and
storm exposure. The secondary area that
makes up the majority of the forest consists
of a successional Maritime Evergreen Forest.
The canopy is dominated by loblolly pine,
with an understory layer consisting of
laurel oak, live oak, swamp bay, devilwood,
as well as some red oak (Q. falcata) and
flowering dogwood. The shrub layer is
dominated by yaupon holly, with a sparse
herb layer with partridgeberry sometimes
common. Successional Maritime Evergreen
Forest is likely a result of past clearing and
farming in the area prior to establishment

The mature Maritime Evergreen Forest of
primary concern consists of dominate tree
canopy of live oak, laurel oak, and loblolly
pine. Understory species include swamp
bay, devilwood (Osmanthus americanus),
and American holly, in addition to smaller
canopy oak species. The fairly dense shrub
later is dominated by yaupon holly and
includes smallflower pawpaw (Asimina
parviflora), southern blueberry (Vaccinium
formosum), and deerberry (V. stamineum).

Figure 10. Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest Primary and Secondary Areas of Concern

116

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

of the national historic site. A site survey
indicated canopy gaps that may be attributed
to southern pine beetles (Dendroctonus
frontalis Zimmermann) (Schafale 2010).

past and recorded the location of the statelisted significantly rare moundlily yucca
(NPS 2010d). An exotic form of common
reed was identified to be extensive in the
marshes around Weir Point (Schafale 2010).

The southern portion of the successional
pine forest contains species that represent
the Successional Wet Pine Flatwoods and
Coastal Fringe Sandhill community. The
canopy is composed of dense loblolly pine,
with an understory of laurel oak, swamp
bay, some dogwood, and blackjack oak.
The shrub layer is well developed with blue
huckleberry (Gaylussacia frondosa) or wax
myrtle as dominant species interspersed
with chinkapin (Castanea pumila) and
sassafras. The herbacious layer varies
from large patches dominated by western
brackenfern (Pteridium aquilinum) or
partridgeberry to other areas that include
surge nettle (Cnidoscolus stimulosus),
American ipecac (Euphorbia ipecacuanhae),
and moccasin flower (Cypripedium acaule).
The transition zone to the swamp at the
south edge of the forest consists of loblolly
pine, red maple, and tupelo (Nyssa sp.), with
swamp bay, pink fetterbush (Lyonia lucida),
and gray inkberry beneath. This community
presumably represents former fields in this
long-settled area (Schafale 2010).

English ivy is an exotic, invasive plant species
at the national historic site.

The national historic site was treated for
gypsy moths (Lymantria dispar) in 1999.
Gypsy moths, since their introduction to the
United States in 1869, have been responsible
for defoliating thousands of acres of
hardwood forests across the northern
United States, including North Carolina. An
aerial application of synthetic gypsy moth
pheromone impregnated flake was applied
to approximately 485 acres of forest at the
national historic site, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service property, and some private property.
This action was the done in cooperation
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service’s “Slow the Spread Project”
which was aimed at reducing the spread of
the gypsy moth into vulnerable areas (USDA
2003).

Factors Affecting Natural Vegetation
Communities
The national historic site is bordered
by increasingly heavy development and
experiences high traffic volume through the
national historic site that represents a source
of exotic plant seeds, feral pets, and other
forms of intrusion that may affect natural
vegetation communities in the national
historic site. The Southeast Coast Exotic
Plant Management Team surveyed and
removed areas of invasive English ivy and
Japanese wisteria (Wisteria floribunda) at
the national historic site in November 2010
(NPS 2010d). The team treated four sites,
totaling 6.7 acres within the national historic
site, primarily around The Elizabethan
Gardens (NPS 2010d). The team surveyed
sites where common reed was treated in the

Climate Change
Climate change affects sea level, amounts
of rainfall, intensity and runoff, height,
duration and frequency of ocean waves, and
long-term tracks, intensity and frequency
of coastal storms (Nichols 2002) that
could affect habitat conditions, especially
communities in close proximity to national
historic site shorelines. Because different
species are likely to respond differently
117

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

to climate change, current ecological
communities may ultimately be replaced by
entirely new assemblages of species (Root
et al. 2003 in Loehman and Anderson 2009).
Changes in terrestrial and aquatic species
compositions are likely to occur as ranges
shift, contract, or expand. Rare species
and communities may disappear, and more
common species may become rare (Burns et
al. 2003 in Loehman and Anderson 2009).

representative of a culture or that contain
significant information about a culture. A
cultural resource may be a tangible entity
or a cultural practice. Tangible cultural
resources are categorized as archeological
resources, ethnographic resources, cultural
landscapes, museum objects, and historic
structures for NPS management purposes.
This section provides a historical context for
the cultural resources found at Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site beginning with Native
American settlements and ending with the
transition to a NPS unit. Details regarding
categories of known, documented cultural
resources identified within the boundaries
of the historic site are also provided.

Rising sea levels may continue to alter the
national historic site (Schafale 2010). Sea
level rise may increase the tidal influence
on terrestrial resources, however the north
end of Roanoke Island has enough slope
that a 1.5-meter (4.5-foot) rise in sea level
may not inundate most of it (Schafale 2010).
Increased storm activity may affect the
mature maritime forest on the north shore,
and shoreline erosion may slowly consume
the outer parts of the national historic site,
however most of forest should persist for
many years (Schafale 2010).

Early History
Early Native American settlements persisted
on Roanoke Island and other surrounding
islands, forming a greater community
with common leaders. The tribe living on
Roanoke Island at the end of the sixteenth
century grew corn, beans, squash, and
spoke a dialect of the Algonquian language
group. The local Algonquian community
would largely shape the first English
settlement on Roanoke Island. English
settlers mimicked the village layout used
by the Roanoke Indians, and the town of
Wanchese on present day Roanoke Island
was named for a member of the Roanoke
Island Native American community
encountered during the first English contact.
However, archeological evidence of the
Native American village of ‘Roanoac’ on
Roanoke Island is nonexistent (Trebellas and
Chapman 1999).

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks
barrier islands or the collapse of the barrier
islands themselves (Schafale 2010) may
cause more drastic changes to occur to the
national historic site’s resources. Collapse
or alteration of the barrier islands may cause
marshes to convert to salt marsh, tidal range
and tidal influence may increase and spread
farther inland, and acceleration of shoreline
erosion would potentially occur (Schafale
2010). Specific impacts to the species of
concern at the national historic site are as yet
unknown.

The first English exploration party
arrived on Roanoke Island in July 1584
to explore and gather information. This
initial survey party left two months later
with two local Native Americans, Manteo
and Wanchese, and recommendations for
further exploration. Roanoke Island was
a preferred site because it could be used
for attacks on Spanish shipping, another
purpose for colonization besides resource
extraction and claiming territory for British

CULTURAL RESOURCES
Cultural resources are aspects of a cultural
system that are valued by or significantly
118

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

the “Cittie of Ralegh.” At this site, now
archeologically unaccounted for, the first
child of English parents, Virginia Dare, was
born in North America. In August 1587,
John White, the leader of the expedition and
grandfather to Virginia Dare, returned to
England to recruit more colonists and bring
back provisions (Trebellas and Chapman
1999).

interests. The next English ships arrived in
June 1585 with 107 colonists and provisions
to stay. Wanchese and Manteo also returned
to Roanoke Island on this voyage. The
site on Roanoke Island proved to be a
poor base for privateering (piracy with
government authorization and targeted at
a specific enemy) due to a shallow harbor
and as a result, long term plans involved
finding a more suitable permanent site. The
expedition led by Ralph Lane built homes,
a fort, and a science center, but all these
structures were abandoned in June 1586 due
to conflicts with the local Native Americans
and other hardships. Fifteen men were left
by a supply expedition that arrived shortly
after the colonists’ departure (Trebellas and
Chapman 1999).

Three years later, in March 1590, John
White returned to Roanoke Island to find
the colony abandoned. The colonists were
presumed to have fled to Croatoan Island or
to have mixed with the Native Americans,
but no evidence remains (Trebellas and
Chapman 1999). Nevertheless, the historical
importance of this colonization attempt
cannot be underestimated. “The Roanoke
Island colony, while never successful, set the
precedent for future English colonization
efforts in the New World … [It] marked
the transition from a military outpost to
a settlement of both men and women
attempting to establish a permanent
foothold in North America.” (Trebellas and
Chapman 1999). The “Cittie of Ralegh”
has not been identified archeologically.
Remains of the fort were found, but some
historians and archeologists believe this
fort is from a later date. The location of
the “science center” associated with Ralph
Lane’s expedition was identified, but the
changing coastline of Roanoke Island may
put the missing settlement areas underwater
(Trebellas and Chapman 1999).
Roanoke Island continued to be populated
by Native Americans after the original
English attempts at colonization. However,
by the mid 1600s, European Americans
began to migrate into the area. An agreement
was reached in 1654 for the Roanoke Indians
to move inland so British colonists could
occupy the more valuable land along the
coast. Settlers soon began filtering down
from current-day Virginia, tending cattle and
growing tobacco (Trebellas and Chapman
1999).

Virginia Dare, the first English child born
in the New World, is memorialized at the
national historic site.

On June 22, 1587, the “lost colony” arrived
off the Outer Banks to make contact with
the 15 remaining men left by the previous
English party. These 110 colonists were
to proceed to the Chesapeake region, but
stayed at Roanoke Island for unknown
reasons. The colonists cleaned up the
fort and built new housing, in addition
to occupying the former dwellings from
the year before. This settlement became
119

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

19th Century History

contrabands. Like many other Northerners,
Colyer was not an ardent abolitionist but
was pragmatic and did not believe in the
South’s ‘peculiar institution’ of slavery.”
(Crumley 2005). At this time, runaway
slaves or contrabands took advantage of the
safe haven provided by areas in the South
controlled by Union troops. The geographic
separation from the mainland that Roanoke
Island offered gave runaway slaves an even
greater sense of security and led to a large
Freedmen’s Colony. (A more detailed
description of the Freedmen’s Colony is
provided in the Ethnographic Resources
section below.)

A farming- and fishing-based community
persisted on Roanoke Island throughout
the 1800s. The Dough Farm and Cemetery
is evidence of this community. The Outer
Banks region did not provide the necessary
elements for a plantation society, so slavery
took on a different form on Roanoke Island.
For instance, slaves often fished for their
masters, which would have been a much
different lifestyle than that which their
counterparts experienced on the mainland.
The U.S. Census of 1850 listed the total
population of Roanoke Island at 610,
consisting of 442 residents and 168 slaves
(Crumley 2005).

The post-Reconstruction period on
Roanoke Island was relatively uneventful,
with the exception of the establishment of
U.S. Lifesaving Service Stations on the Outer
Banks in the 1870s. These stations were built
along the U.S. Eastern seaboard to assist in
the rescue of imperiled ships. The Atlantic
Ocean off the coast of the Outer Banks was
a dangerous, yet heavily trafficked area, with
the apt nickname of “The Graveyard of
the Atlantic” (Crumley 2005). As the 20th
century approached, the only way to reach
Roanoke Island was via boat. The primary
means for employment, other than in the
Lifesaving Service, were either fishing or
farming.

During the Civil War, the Outer Banks
and Roanoke Island were at a strategic
location important to naval penetration of
the Southern defenses in North Carolina,
as well as a conduit for military access
to the strategic naval base at Norfolk,
Virginia. This area of the North Carolina
coastline provided a crucial supply line
for the transport of goods. As a result, the
Confederacy placed a priority on defense
of the Outer Banks and Roanoke Island,
constructing several forts (Forts Huger,
Blanchard, and Bartow) and earthworks
on the northern end of Roanoke Island.
Nevertheless, General Ambrose Burnside
and his Union forces captured the island
in February 1862. The ensuing transfer of
power gave rise to a Freedmen’s Colony on
Roanoke Island, a notable part of the area’s
past (Crumley 2005).

20th Century History
In 1901, Reginald Fessenden chose Roanoke
Island as a site for radio experimentation.
His work led to the island’s distinction
as the location of the first commercially
adaptable radio broadcast in North America.
Fessenden resided at a hotel in Manteo
and built an experimentation station on the
western portion of the island at Weir’s Point,
in the location that U.S. Highway 64 now
intersects with the bridge connecting the
mainland. It is now believed that the greater
portion of Fessenden’s site is submerged
(Crumley 2005). Another first, the Wright
Brothers flight at Kitty Hawk in 1903, was

“After Burnside’s victory, he appointed
Vincent Colyer as Superintendent of
the Poor in the Department of North
Carolina on March 30, 1862. … It was
incumbent upon Colyer to organize and
find employment for the contrabands
[former slaves] by initially having them
construct earthworks on Roanoke Island,
New Bern, and Washington. Docks were
also constructed on Roanoke Island to
receive the large volume of supplies that the
Union Navy ferried in for both soldiers and
120

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

noted throughout the Roanoke Island
Community as well (Trebellas and Chapman
1999).

come,” playwright Paul Green was
commissioned to write the script
for the production. Green was a
native of North Carolina whose
roots were in rural Harnett County.
In 1927, he won the Pulitzer Prize
for his Broadway play, In Abraham’s
Bosom, which was a depiction of
black life in the South. Green was
also the first playwright from the
South to receive both national and
international recognition for his
work. What was seminal about
his work was that Green had
formulated a new dramatic art form
that is now known as symphonic
drama, which combined historical
circumstances along with music,
dance, and dialogue. His works
attracted prominent stars of the
era, such as Bette Davis and Will
Rogers, to perform parts in them.
Andy Griffith, star of Matlock and
the classic Andy Griffith Show, both
long-running television series, along
with the silver screen hit, No Time
for Sergeants to his credit, played the
part of Sir Walter Raleigh for seven
seasons during the 1940s and early
1950s, prior to achieving national
prominence.

The early 20th century brought tourism to
Roanoke Island and created an economy
very different from the island’s previous
farming and fishing livelihood. The Roanoke
Island Historical Association was formed
in the late 19th century and placed the
first marker to commemorate the Roanoke
Colony in 1894 (Trebellas and Chapman
1999). Historical tourism became a much
greater part of Roanoke Island in the 20th
century. By the 1920s, the birthday of
Virginia Dare was becoming an important
annual event for Roanoke Island. A bridge
to the mainland was opened in 1928, and
greater plans to accommodate more tourists
were planned. At about this same time, there
was a “renewed interest in making Fort
Raleigh a landmark. Dare County not only
was connected to the mainland by a bridge
but it also had ten miles of highway running
through it. Tourism was anticipated to surge,
and the Fort Raleigh site was viewed as a
possible attraction that could draw tourists
on a year-round basis. There were questions
raised as to why the Wright Brothers were
getting a memorial while Virginia Dare was
being overlooked. It was suggested that
either the state or national government take
over the Fort Raleigh site and develop it into
a viable project.” (Crumley 2005).

It was obvious that the date for the
grand opening of The Lost Colony
in 1937 was not selected at random.
The Fourth of July, America’s
birthday, was the day of the initial
performance of a play that is now
over sixty-five years old and the
longest running outdoor stage show
in American history. New York
Times drama critic Brooks Atkinson
attended the show’s opening
performance and wrote, “Paul
Green has written a history with a
compassion that turns its characters
into unconscious symbols of a brave
new world.” A review such as that,
having a national exposure, could
not help but attract an audience far

The Great Depression slowed private
development, but New Deal programs
came to Roanoke Island in the form of
Civilian Conservation Corps camps, Works
Progress Administration funds, Coast Guard
facilities, and Paul Green’s The Lost Colony
production in 1937. The Lost Colony outdoor
symphonic drama, which has presented
over 4,000 performances (Crumley 2005)
has played a large role in the history of Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site. Crumley’s
Roanoke Island Special History (2005)
describes it as such:
In a very early template of the
concept of “build it, they will
121

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

beyond the limited boundaries of
Dare County and North Carolina.

eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places.

The North Carolina Historical Commission
assumed control of the site as a state park
in 1934, and it received federal assistance
to commemorate and reconstruct the
early English settlement (Trebellas and
Chapman 1999). With the grand opening
of The Lost Colony production in 1937,
President Franklin D. Roosevelt made an
appearance on Roanoke Island. Then,
in 1939, ownership and management
responsibilities were transferred to
the NPS. Two years later, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site was established to
commemorate Sir Walter Raleigh’s colonies
and the birthplace of Virginia Dare, the first
child of English parents born in America.
The Roanoke Island Historical Association
would maintain a stake in the site through
a cooperative agreement. Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site was expanded and
improved throughout the remainder of the
century, exhibiting its current inventory
of recreated structures and interpretation
(Crumley 2005).

According to the National Register of
Historic Places nomination update, Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site “is bounded
by a series of landscape features and
imaginary lines that intersect to form a
polygon around the area containing the
contributing historic resources. Beginning
at the Roanoke Sound, the boundary runs
south and east along the eastern edge of
The Elizabethan Gardens for approximately
800 feet. It then runs east for approximately
850 feet to the southwestern corner of
the Waterside Theatre parking lot. The
boundary follows the edge of the parking lot
north and east for approximately 300 feet
to the trail leading from the parking lot to
Waterside Theatre. It then runs along this
trail for approximately 350 feet and turns
north and east along the edge of Waterside
Theatre for almost 325 feet. The boundary
then follows the edge of the Roanoke Sound
to the beginning.” (Trebellas and Chapman
1999).
The 1999 National Register of Historic
Places re-evaluation established two
contexts that can be used to assess eligibility
and evaluate integrity of individual resources
within the overall site:

National Register of Historic Places
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site was
initially placed on the National Register
of Historic Places in 1966, with additional
revisions submitted in 1978 (NPS 1978).
The National Register of Historic Places
documentation was amended in 1999 to
re-evaluate earlier research (NPS 1999).
The site is listed on the National Register
of Historic Places under both Criteria A
and D, for its association with events that
made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history and for its
potential to yield information important
in history, respectively. Tables 10 and 11
list archeological resources and historic
structures discussed within the most recent
evaluation (Prentice and Groh 2010). The
tables indicate whether each resource
contributes to the overall site, if it has been
located, and if it has been determined to be

“Context A, ‘The Roanoke Colonies
and Fort Raleigh,’ addresses the
long recognized context for the
site, ‘English Exploration and
Settlement on Roanoke Island and
the Outer Banks of North Carolina,
1585-1590,’ and describes the
unsuccessful English colonies on
the island. This context is related
to the NPS interpretive theme of
Peopling Places, as well as certain
aspects of North Carolina history,
such as English Exploration and
Settlement of the Carolinas. Context
B, ‘Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site: Preservation and Recognition,’
outlines the early preservation and
commemoration of the Roanoke
122

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

1
2

Chapter 3

Chapter 3: Affected Environment
Theatre for almost 325 feet. The boundary then follows the edge of the Roanoke Sound to the
beginning.” (Trebellas and Chapman 1999).

3

Table 10: Archeological Resources

Fort Raleigh

800-1965

Yes

Yes

Eligible for listing on the
National Register of
Historic Places
Yes

Outwork and Science Center

1585-1586

Yes

Yes

Yes

Cittie of Raleigh

1585-1590

No

No

Yes

Dough Farmstead
Village Stockade
Gates
Museum
Chapel
Ananias Dare Cabin
John White House
Blockhouse (Storehouse)
Cabin #1
Cabin #2
Dough Cemetery
Dough Cemetery Plot
WPA Medical Area
Trash Pit
Old Faithful

1860-1965
1936-1950
1936-1950
1936-1950
1934-1965
1936-1950
1936-1950
1934-1965
1936-1950
1936-1950
800-1950
1827-1906
1930s
1900-1950
Circa 1850

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Razed
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Fort Huger (Fort Reno)

1861-1867

No

No

No

Area A

1861-1867

No

Yes

No

Area D

1861-1867

No

Yes

No

Area E

1861-1867

No

Yes

No

Area F

1861-1867

No

Yes

No

Artifact Scatter

1861-1867

No

Yes

No

Roadside Dump

Circa 18501900

No

No

No

Camp Foster/Freedmen's Colony

1861-1867

No

Yes

Yes

1861-1867

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Archeological Resource

Date

Freedmen's Colony

Contributing1

Located

Circa 18001850
5000 B.C. –
1650
Circa 18001890
Circa 18501875

North Shore
Alder Branch Marsh
High Ridge
Tart Etheridge
Camp Wirth
Chapter
3 Trash Dump #1
Camp Wirth

1930s

Yes
Yes
Fort
Raleigh
National
1930s
No
Yes
NoHistoric Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
1930s
No
Yes
No

WPA Shoreline Trash Dump
Old Ferry Road (Freedom Trail)

No

1862-1950

I:\747760
1

3-23 No

Yes

No

Fort Raleigh GMP EIS\2010-2011 FORA Draft-Final GMP EIS\Task 10 - Camera Ready Draft GMP EIS\Task 10.1\FORA Chapter
The reason most resources are not considered as contributing to site status is due to the fact that they have not yet been located.
3 - Final Draft v1 reformat.docx
Source: Prentice and Groh 2010

1

Table 11: Historic Structures
Historic Structures
Fort Raleigh Reconstructed
Earthwork Fort

Date
1947-1953

Contributing
Yes

123

Located

Eligible for Listing on the National
Register of Historic Places

Yes

Yes

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 11: Historic Structures
Historic Structures

Date

Contributing

Located

Eligible for Listing on the National
Register of Historic Places

Fort Raleigh Reconstructed
Earthwork Fort

1947-1953

Yes

Yes

Yes

Waterside Theatre

1937-1970

No

Yes

No

Prince House

1940-2012

No

Yes

No

Northeast Ossuary

800-1650

No

Yes

No

Camp Wirth Building #1

1930s

No

Yes

No

Camp Wirth Building #2

1930s

No

Yes

No

Camp Wirth Cistern

1930s

No

Yes

No

Camp Wirth Waste Water
Vaults

1930s

No

Yes

No

Source: Prentice and Groh 2010

the archeological findings over the last
fifty years document the establishment of
a sixteenth-century science center within
the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
boundary which is eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places.” For ‘Context A,’
the amended National Register of Historic
Places documentation reports that, “While
the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is
nationally significant for its association with
early English colonization efforts in North
America (see Context A), the preservation
and commemoration efforts of the site for
more than 135 years represent an additional
area of significance. The site is exceptional
for the degree of local and state attention
and for the richness of its historical
associations.” (Trebellas and Chapman
1999).

colonies and the fortification
known as Fort Raleigh, as well as its
connection to national preservation
movements. This context relates
to the themes of Creating Social
Institutions and Movements and
Expressing Cultural Values. It
also reflects certain aspects of
North Carolina history, such as
Historic Preservation and Social
and Humanitarian Movements.”
(Trebellas and Chapman 1999).
The significance statements for Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site are described
relative to their context. For ‘Context A,’
the amended National Register of Historic
Places documentation states that “the site
of the science center associated with the
Roanoke colonies has national significance
under Criterion D. It represents the only
tangible evidence of the Elizabethan age in
North America and marks the site of the first
English colonizing efforts, which led the way
for future successful English colonies in the
New World. The science center is nationally
significant under Criterion D for the proven
potential of its archeological resources
to yield information on the first English
settlement in North America. Although there
are no extant structures, and the settlement
site and fortification have yet to be located,

Archeological Resources
The boundaries of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site encompass a broad range of
archeological sites that embody nearly the
full spectrum of eastern Carolina Native
American culture, the American Civil War
including the African-American Freedman’s
Colony, a Depression era Works Progress
Administration camp, and the life and
career of radio pioneer, Reginald Fessenden
(National Park Service 1992).
124

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

An Archeological Overview and Assessment
of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
was completed in 2010 (Prentice and
Groh, 2010). This assessment “presents
a summary of previous archeological
investigations conducted within the park
as well as detailed accounts of all known
archeological resources. The overview
also evaluates the efficacy of past research
and offers recommendations regarding
protection and management of these
resources. These recommendations are
based on NPS policy and regulations, the
goals of Fort Raleigh National Historic Site’s
Resource Management Plan (National Park
Service 2000), the Regionwide Archeological
Survey Plan (Keel et al. 1996), previous
archeological investigations, and current
plans affecting the cultural resources of Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site as outlined by
park management.”

long-term tracks, intensity and frequency
of coastal storms (Nichols 2002) that could
affect archeological sites, especially sites
located in the vicinity of shorelines. Natural
disasters such as hurricanes, tropical storms,
northeasters, and tornadoes can also result
in site alterations. Rapid erosion along
areas such as Roanoke Sound, Albemarle
Sound, and Croatan Sound causes loss of
archeological sites, damage to site integrity
and loss of diagnostic data. By mixing
older and new deposits, storms can make
definition of different site occupants,
functions, or periods of use difficult, if not
impossible.
Epic storms and changing sea levels can
adversely affect submerged resources. That
is, archeological resources in shallow waters
could be damaged by high frequency waves
of long duration. Or, increased sea levels
could offer some measure of protection.
Rising sea levels and frequent storm events
can contribute to the physical damage to or
loss of coastal historical and archeological
resources. Climate change could contribute
to unanticipated changes in the types
of vegetation and location of vegetation
communities on the island, affecting
archeological sites. However, the levels
and types of change cannot, at present, be
determined.

As listed in Tables 10 and 11, several
archeological resources have been identified
near or within the national historic site,
including the former science center from
the Ralph Lane Colony in 1585 to 1586. The
Ralph Lane Colony included a center for
scientific investigation of North America.
Thomas Hariot, an English scientist, and
Joachim Ganz, a metallurgist from Prague,
oversaw the investigation of North American
resources in an equipped structure that is
speculated to have been protected by the
earthen fort. Pieces of laboratory equipment,
including crucibles, glassware, and distilling
flasks, were discovered near the area where
the original fort is thought to have been.
Many of the other archeological resources
are known to have existed within or adjacent
to the current boundary of the national
historic site also would be considered
eligible for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places, but their exact location is
presently undetermined.

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks barrier
islands or the collapse of the barrier islands
themselves (Schafale 2010) may cause more
drastic changes to occur to the national
historic site’s archeological resources.
Collapse or alteration of the barrier islands
may cause marshes to convert to salt marsh,
tidal range and tidal influence may increase
and spread farther inland, and acceleration

Climate Change
Climate change affects sea level, amounts
of rainfall, intensity and runoff, height,
duration and frequency of ocean waves, and
125

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

of shoreline erosion would potentially
occur (Schafale 2010). Specific impacts
to archeological resources at the national
historic site are as yet unknown.

Union forces in 1862, it became a haven for
African-American families from throughout
the region. Their presence prompted the
Union Army to establish a Freedmen’s
Colony on the northern end of Roanoke
Island. This colony, similar to others
established by the Union Army, gave African
Americans their first tastes of independence
and freedom. However, like other sites, it
was short-lived (NPS 2011d).
Labeling slaves as “Contraband of War,” the
Union Army emancipated them, offering
a new start on Roanoke Island. Soon,
hundreds of slaves from the interior of the
state made the journey to Roanoke Island.
By May 1863, the population situation
was so acute that the Federal government
seized many local lands and established
a formal colony. Major General John G.
Foster, commander of the Department of
North Carolina, instructed Army chaplain
Reverend Horace James as “Superintendent
of Blacks in North Carolina” to “settle the
colored people on the unoccupied lands
and give them agricultural implements
and mechanical tools… and to train and
educate them for a free and independent
community.” According to Assistant
Superintendent George O. Sanderson,
a sergeant with the 43rd Massachusetts
Infantry, the Freedmen’s Colony was laid
out on the north end of the island using
“compass, chart and chain, and a gang of
choppers” among “the old groves of pine,
gum and cypress” (NPS 2011d).

Ethnographic Resources
Ethnographic resources are defined by
the NPS as any “site, structure, object,
landscape, or natural resource feature
assigned traditional legendary, religious,
subsistence, or other significance in the
cultural system of a group traditionally
associated with it” (NPS 28, Cultural
Resource Management Guideline, 181).
Ethnographic resources are cultural
resources that are uniquely understood
from the specific viewpoint of particular
people or groups. These resources have a
special importance relative to these people
or groups that is different from the more
general qualities observed or enjoyed by
the general public (NPS 2010b). While
not formally documented, there exists the
potential for an ethnographic resource at
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site in the
form of a connection to the landscape held
by descendents of the inhabitants of the
Freedmen’s Colony of the 1860s.

A local census in 1864 reported that 2,212
black freedmen resided on the island. A
church and several schools with seven
teachers were established, as well as a
sawmill operation. The next year, the
Superintendent reported 561 houses
had been built and the population had
increased to 3,901. At the end of the war,
a government order restored all lands that
were confiscated by the Union Army back to
the original owners. The black residents on
Roanoke Island failed to receive the rights
and privileges to their homesteads promised
by the government when they established
the colony. Further government orders that

First Light of Freedom memorial
commemorating the Underground
Railroad.

Roanoke Island was the setting for an
historic experiment during the Civil War.
Following the island’s occupation by
126

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

reduced food rations and other necessities
of life ushered the beginning of the end. The
colony’s population declined by half from
1865 to 1866 as residents left to seek a new
life elsewhere. By late 1866, the Freedmen’s
population had dwindled to a few families
and, by 1867, the colony was officially
decommissioned (NPS 2011d).

highlights the Freedmen’s Colony located in
a plaza beside the visitor center. Two rangerled interpretive sessions are also held twice
weekly with national historic site visitors.
Climate Change
Increased storm frequency and intensity
along with rising sea levels are anticipated
consequences of climate change. Damaging
storms and erosion could adversely
impact ethnographic resources and
places important to the national historic
site’s culturally associated peoples. Some
terrestrial sites/resources may be at risk of
submersion as sea levels rise. Alteration of
the barrier islands associated with climate
change may also accelerate shoreline
erosion. These changes may cause impacts
to some resources and places important
to culturally associated peoples to occur.
Specific impacts to the ethnographic
resources at the national historic site are as
yet unknown.

The Freedmen’s Colony on Roanoke Island
never became the self-sufficient community
its planners envisioned. Its isolation and
the transfer into the army of most of the
working men made the residents more and
more dependent on the government for
support. It did, however, provide homes for
the families of soldiers, brought education
for the first time to the colony’s residents,
and gave them a renewed sense of hope.
Furthermore, while most of the freedmen
returned to the mainland, many descendants
still live, work, and raise their families on
Roanoke Island today (NPS 2011d).
In 2003, the national historic site hosted
an event in which the Roanoke Island
Freedmen’s Colony was received into
the Underground Railroad Network to
Freedom, a nationwide program of sites
that represent the story of the Underground
Railroad (NPS 2003b). African Americans
whose heritage is linked to the Freedmen’s
Colony, both those who still live nearby and
those who have moved away, may still value
the north end of Roanoke Island as the place
where their forefathers first experienced
freedom from slavery. This sense of place
and events that occurred are meaningful to
descendants. This is embodied in the stories
passed down over generations, and in the
feeling of pride and of “belonging” to this
area. As such, landscapes within the national
historic site may function as an ethnographic
resource. The First Light of Freedom
Memorial is located in the plaza immediately
adjacent to the visitor center. It was placed
on site in 2001 as part of the North Carolina
Civil War Heritage Trail, funded via a State
of North Carolina grant received by the
Freedmen’s Remembrance Committee.
In addition, there is a wayside exhibit that

Cultural Landscape
A cultural landscape is defined as “a
geographic area, including both cultural
and natural resources and the wildlife
or domestic animals therein, associated
with a historic event, activity, or person or
exhibiting other cultural or aesthetic values.
… Like historic buildings and districts,
these special places reveal aspects of our
country’s origins and development through
their form and features and the ways they
were used (NPS 2011b).” According to a
cultural landscape inventory completed
in 2010 for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site (NPS 2011c), the landscape continues
to reflect the national historic site’s unique
development patterns from three different
periods of significance.
The Cultural Landscape Inventory provides
a useful planning tool to successfully
implement management actions with
consideration of features and patterns
that contribute to the cultural landscape.
This inventory indicates that the most
127

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

important natural feature of the cultural
landscape of Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site is the shoreline along Roanoke Sound,
Albemarle Sound, and Croatan Sound. Over
the years this shoreline has been modified
and continues to be threatened by natural
forces. Shoreline erosion along these banks
has been an ongoing problem and has
required protective measures to prevent
further damage. The erosion protection
efforts can be seen from Dough Cemetery
and Waterside Theatre on the north end of
the national historic site. Tidal movements
and storm destruction have been a part of
the history of the cultural landscape, and
have contributed to the loss of some of the
national historic site. In addition to natural
features such as the shoreline, other features
that combine to contribute to the overall
cultural landscape include the following:
spatial organization, land use, topography,
vegetation, circulation, buildings and
structures, and small-scale features such as
benches and trash cans (NPS 2011c).

and his attendance at the twenty-third
performance of The Lost Colony, restoration
of natural vegetation, erosion control
measures at Dough Cemetery and Waterside
Theatre, reconstructed earthwork fort
based on archeological studies performed
by Jean D. Harrington, and the Freedmen’s
Colony interpretation and First Light of
Freedom monument. According to the
Cultural Landscape Inventory, the site has
moderate integrity overall in relation to this
period of significance, with some changes
implemented over time (NPS 2011c).

The settlements in 1584, 1585 to 1586,
1587, and 1590 constitute the first period
of significance. Although elements from
this period are not readily observable,
archeological resources may remain within
the national historic site boundaries that
date to this time of attempted permanent
settlements. However, the Cultural
Landscape Inventory states that because
there is a lack of known remains, the site is
considered to have little integrity from this
period of significance (NPS 2011c).

Reconstructed earthen fort.

Most of the primary features that serve
to define the site are in the approximate
location where they existed during the
1860 to 1953 period. However, vegetative
patterns have altered throughout this
period, and no historic cultural vegetation
has been identified. The original spatial
organization of the site prior to the 1960s is
difficult to discern today due to the Mission
66-era changes to the national historic
site (discussed in the paragraph below),
including the relocation or abandonment
of roadways and construction of new
buildings, roads, and parking lots. However,
the historic core of the site maintains
many aspects of the original design. The
landscape within the boundaries of the
national historic site possesses a moderate to
high level of integrity of setting and feeling
in relation to its 1860 to 1953 period of
significance, especially in the historic core
of the national historic site, where Waterside
Theatre and the Thomas Hariot Nature

The second period of significance, 1860 to
1953, centers around efforts to preserve and
commemorate the site. During this period,
significant man-made site features were
introduced to the landscape that enhanced
its interpretive value. Examples of landscape
features from this time include the Raleigh
Colony/Virginia Dare Monument, Waterside
Theatre, interpretation of the “Cittie of
Ralegh,” interpretation of the science
center, the Thomas Hariot Nature Trail,
The Elizabethan Gardens, the memorials
of Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s speech
128

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

Trail still retain their visual relationships to
Roanoke Sound. The site has only moderate
integrity of materials and workmanship
because many features have been replaced
or heavily altered since the period of
significance (NPS 2011c).

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks
barrier islands or the collapse of the barrier
islands themselves (Schafale 2010) may
cause more drastic changes to occur to the
national historic site’s resources including
the cultural landscape. Collapse or alteration
of the barrier islands may cause marshes
to convert to salt marsh, tidal range and
tidal influence may increase and spread
farther inland, and acceleration of shoreline
erosion would potentially occur (Schafale
2010). Physical changes (erosion, effects
from flooding) to the landscape associated
with climate change may alter resources
that contribute to the national historic site’s
cultural landscape. Specific impacts to the
national historic site are as yet unknown.

The third period of significance relates to
Mission 66 development at the national
historic site from 1963 to 1966. During
this timeframe, the visitor center, Outer
Banks Group Support Office (formerly
the Cape Hatteras Group Headquarters),
the plaza and walk complex adjacent to
these buildings, The Lost Colony Activities
Building, four staff residences on Pear
Pad Road, and the restroom building and
generator rooms near the Outer Banks
Group Support Office, were constructed.
The Mission 66 program was initiated by the
NPS after World War II to address the rapid
increase in visitors to the national parks. In
general, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
retains good integrity for this third period of
significance. The buildings and site features
(primarily the plaza and walk complex)
remain in their original locations, reflect
their original design, retain their original
setting, retain their original materials, reflect
their original workmanship, and convey the
feeling and association of the Mission 66
period of significance.

Museum Collections
Museum collections consist of prehistoric
and historic objects, artifacts, works of
art, archival material, and natural history
specimens. Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site has almost 57,000 items in their museum
collections. Most of these are archival
materials, of which 41,915 items have been
catalogued; approximately 15,000 items (also
mostly archival items) remain uncatalogued.
The majority of the collections are stored
in the Museum Resource Center within the
national historic site. A few artifacts are on
display in the national historic site’s visitor
center. A 2,800-square-foot, state-of-the-art
artifact laboratory and depository (i.e., the
Museum Resource Center) enables Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site museum
collections to be conserved and studied onsite (NPS 2010a).

Climate Change
Increased storm frequency and intensity
along with rising sea levels are anticipated
consequences of climate change. Increasing
storms and high winds have the potential
to adversely impact cultural landscapes,
diminishing the integrity of landscape
features (spatial organization, land use
patterns, circulation systems, topography,
vegetation, and other character-defining
elements). Increased potential for shoreline
erosion as a result of sea level rise and
intensity and frequency of storms may affect
the national historic site’s shoreline along
Roanoke Sound, Albermarle Sound, and
Croatan Sound.

129

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

was erected at a different site from its current
location in 1896. However, the marker was
moved to examine archeological evidence
and the marker’s setting was not changed.
This granite plaque marks the first phase of
preservation and commemoration of the
first English settlement in North America.
It describes the original settlement and fort
as well as the baptism of Virginia Dare, the
first child born of English parents in North
America. The date of erection, November
24, 1896, and the name of the officers of
the Roanoke Colony Memorial Association
were inscribed on the back by a Wilmington,
North Carolina stone cutter. The marker
stands near where the original Fort Raleigh
and settlement are thought to have been.

Climate Change
Increased storm frequency and intensity
along with rising sea levels are anticipated
consequences of climate change. Museum
collections stored in the Museum Resource
Center at the national historic site may
potentially be destroyed or damaged by
storms, high winds, and flooding. The 2007
Park Museum Collection Storage Plan
recommends that collections be moved
to facilities further inland. The existing
curatorial building at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site would serve as a museum
research room, processing space, and
support for other resource management
functions.
Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks
barrier islands or the collapse of the barrier
islands themselves (Schafale 2010) may
cause more drastic changes to occur to the
national historic site’s resources including
museum collections. Collapse or alteration
of the barrier islands may cause marshes to
convert to salt marsh, tidal range and tidal
influence may increase and spread farther
inland, and acceleration of shoreline erosion
would potentially occur (Schafale 2010),
thus further potentially affecting museum
collections and their storage. Specific
impacts to the national historic site are as yet
unknown.

Two separate markers commemorate
Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s visit to Fort
Raleigh on August 18, 1937. The F.D.R.
Marker marks the spot where Franklin
Delano Roosevelt made a short speech
outside Waterside Theatre. The marker
simply reads “SPOKE F.D.R. 8/18/37.” The
structure is composed of a one foot square
concrete slab set into the ground. The other
Franklin D. Roosevelt Theater Marker
marks the spot where Roosevelt watched
the 23rd performance of The Lost Colony
performance. The marker’s structure is a 22
¼ foot by 17 ½ foot polished granite plaque
at the entry area to Waterside Theatre. The
exact date that both markers were erected is
not known, but corresponds to shortly after
Roosevelt’s visit to the national historic site.

Historic Structures
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site contains
four historic structures that contribute to
the site’s eligibility: The Roanoke Colony/
Virginia Dare Monument, the F.D.R. Marker,
the Franklin D. Roosevelt Theater Marker,
and the reconstructed fort (Table 11). The
Roanoke Colony/Virginia Dare Monument

One of the two markers commemorating
Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s visit to Fort
Raleigh on August 18, 1937.
130

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

The reconstructed fort was built between
1947 and 1953. It was built to duplicate
the specifications of a late 16th century
earthwork fort similar to what the original
colonists on Fort Raleigh erected in 1585 to
1586. The placement of the reconstructed
fort is thought to be close to the original
location of the first colony’s fort.

erosion would potentially occur (Schafale
2010), and may further threaten historic
structures. Structures not considered
historically significant at the present may
be eligible for future listing on the National
Register of Historic Places, and future effects
from climate change could therefore impact
these resources. Specific impacts to the
historic structures are as yet unknown.

Other structures present at Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, but considered not
historically significant, include the Visitor
Center, Hatteras Group Headquarters
building, Waterside Theatre, Maintenance
Area (Trebellas and Chapman 1999) and the
Prince House. The North Carolina State
Historic Preservation Office determined
that the Prince House was not eligible for
the National Register, so the removal of this
structure will not affect a National Registerlisted property.

VISITOR USE AND EXPERIENCE
Visitation at the historic site has remained
fairly steady over the past decade, averaging
280,999 persons per year (Table 12).
Visitation is highest during summer months
(May through August), and averaged 49,653
visitors per month during the summer of
2010 (Table 13). High summer visitation
is primarily associated with The Lost
Colony productions held at the national
historic site’s Waterside Theatre. In 2008,
the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center also
experienced the highest levels of visitation
during the period of May through August,
and it is assumed that this trend is consistent
across all sampling years (NPS 2010a).

Climate Change
Increased storm frequency and intensity
along with rising sea levels are anticipated
consequences of climate change. Increasing
storms and high winds have the potential
to adversely impact historic structures,
diminishing their architectural and historical
integrity as character-defining structural
and architectural features are damaged or
irreparably lost.

Table 12. Annual Visitors to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site, 2000-2010

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks barrier
islands or the collapse of the barrier islands
themselves (Schafale 2010) may cause more
drastic changes to occur to the national
historic site’s historic structures. Collapse or
alteration of the barrier islands may cause
marshes to convert to salt marsh, tidal range
and tidal influence may increase and spread
farther inland, and acceleration of shoreline

Year

Number of Visitors*

2000

244,750

2001

267,464

2002

278,565

2003

177,263

2004

270,050

2005

276,071

2006

299,432

2007

321,717

2008

311,751

2009

338,212

2010

305,711

Source:  NPS 2011e
*Note: Visitor totals include both recreational
and non-recreational visits. Data are presented
from the NPS Statistics Office. The methods
used to estimate visitation are detailed at:
http://www.nature.nps.gov/stats/CountingInstructions/FORACI1993.pdf.

131

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the first time (NPS 2002). Just under onefourth of visitors stop at the national historic
site’s visitor center (NPS 2010a). Although
most respondents indicated that crowding
did not detract from their experience, those
who did feel crowded reported the problem
to be worse in the afternoon (NPS 2002). A
more recent 2008 visitor survey indicated
that 76% of visitors considered the overall
quality of facilities, services, and recreational
opportunities at the national historic site to
be “very good.” Eighteen percent gave the
national historic site a “good” rating, and the
remaining percentages were negligible (NPS
2008a).

Table 13. Total Monthly Visitors to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site, 2010
Month

Number of Visitors*

January

4,851

February

5,042

March

9,184

April

17,642

May

25,382

June

43,729

July

70,557

August

58,946

September

25,836

October

23,733

November

14,385

December

7,768

A variety of experiences are available to
visitors to the national historic site, ranging
from enjoyment of history, to exercise, to
drama. Several historical narratives appeal to
visitors and include the stories of European
colonization, the Freedmen’s Colony, the
Civil War, and Reginald Fessenden (see
Cultural Resources section for in-depth
descriptions of each of these elements). The
Lindsay Warren Visitor Center provides
access to park staff and volunteers that
orient visitors to Roanoke Island through
exhibits, artifacts, and a 17-minute national
historic site video. NPS-led interpretive
programs are also offered to visitors
throughout the week and address England’s
first colonization efforts in America and
other Roanoke Island stories. Visitors
also have the opportunity to learn about
archaeological investigations conducted at
the national historic site to reveal the area’s
cultural past in greater detail. Interpretive
programming schedules are available at
the visitor center as well as on the national
historic site’s website. The national historic
site contains a small restored fortification
associated with England’s first New World
settlement, and is a tangible trace of part of
the infrastructure built during the 1585 to
1586 time period. An annual celebration of
Virginia Dare’s birthday is held on August
18 by The Elizabethan Gardens, The Lost
Colony, and Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site.

Source:  NPS 2011e
*Note: Visitor totals include both recreational and
non-recreational visits. Data are presented from the
NPS statistics office. January, February, and April were
adjusted for the large increase in construction vehicle
traffic.

Visitation at Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site consists mainly of vacationers from
eastern states (Carolinas to New England),
as well as many visitors from the Midwest
(NPS 2010a). Tuesdays, Wednesdays,
and Thursdays are highest use days for
vacationers during summer months
(NPS 2010a). According to a visitor study
conducted in 2002, 79% of visitors were
family groups. Nearly one-third of visitors
were North Carolina or Virginia residents,
and most were at the national historic site
either to explore its historical significance
or to attend The Lost Colony production.
Organized school or other education
groups are common visitors in the national
historic site during fall and spring seasons.
Local residents tend to use the national
historic site’s trails for walking/hiking, dog
walking, horseback riding (appropriate on
the Freedom Trail only), kayaking, fishing,
picnicking, bike riding (appropriate on the
Freedom Trail only), birding, and nature
study throughout the year (NPS 2010a).
Slightly over three-quarters of visitors
surveyed were at the national historic site for
132

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

The national historic site contains two
walking trails (Thomas Hariot Nature
Trail and Freedom Trail) that provide
visitors natural solitude, recreation, and an
opportunity to learn about Roanoke Island
history. The Thomas Hariot Nature Trail
provides visitors a short (20-minute) glimpse
of what Thomas Hariot and the explorers
experienced during their time on the island.
The trail provides wayside signs to interpret
the New World’s natural resources and the
commodities they produced. The Freedom
Trail is a 1.25-mile (one way) out and
back trail beginning near The Elizabethan
Gardens through the national historic site to
the island’s western edge. The trail provides
a viewshed that the native Algonquians
would have experienced during their
inhabitation, as well as signs that discuss
the Civil War Battle of Roanoke Island. The
trails are intended for pedestrian use, and
bicycle and horse riding have also been
observed on the trails from time to time.

Climate Change
Climate change may affect visitor experience
at the national historic site in a variety
of ways, ranging from altered timing of
visitation to restrictions on public access.
Longer, hotter summers may shift the spring
and fall visitation seasons, and visitation may
decline during the hottest summer months
or during months with increased storms.
Visitor facilities may need to be upgraded or
moved to withstand flooding or severe storm
events. Energy expenditures for cooling
buildings may increase in the summer and
decline in the winter. Pollen-based allergies
and outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases
may also increase. Sea level rise and erosion,
resulting in the need to protect sensitive
resources, may eliminate visitor access to
specific areas of the national historic site.
Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks barrier
islands or the collapse of the barrier islands
themselves (Schafale 2010) may cause more
drastic changes to occur to the national
historic site’s natural and cultural resources
that may in turn affect visitor experience.
Collapse or alteration of the barrier islands
may cause marshes to convert to salt marsh,
tidal range and tidal influence may increase
and spread farther inland, and acceleration
of shoreline erosion would potentially occur
(Schafale 2010), with increased potential
to affect existing visitor opportunities and
experiences at the national historic site.
Permanent to temporary physical impacts
to visitor facilities (for example, storm
damage to the visitor center or the Waterside
Theatre) may effectively eliminate visitor
opportunities that are currently popular
among national historic site visitors. Specific
impacts to the visitor use and experience are
as yet unknown.

Other popular activities include visits to the
national historic site’s partner organizations,
The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic drama
and The Elizabethan Gardens. The Lost
Colony provides visitors the opportunity
to witness the nation’s first and longestrunning outdoor symphonic drama
that recounts the events leading to the
disappearance of the English colonists that
settled in the area over 400 years ago. The
production features music, dance, drama,
action, and special effects performed in the
historic site’s open-air Waterside Theatre.
Backstage tours (limited to 50 people) and
gourmet picnics are also provided through
The Lost Colony production. Adjacent to
and outside the boundaries of the national
historic site is The Elizabethan Gardens funded and supported by the Garden Club
of North Carolina. The Elizabethan Gardens
is one of the finest examples of 16th century
gardens. The gardens provide views of
Roanoke Sound and seasonal arrays of
flowering plants, shrubs, and trees.

133

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

PARK OPERATIONS AND FACILITIES

services to the visitor center, presenting
programs, conducting school tours,
presenting education programs in local and
area schools, roving the site, developing
interpretive products, and researching the
history and resources of the site (Table
15). Fort Raleigh National Historic Site is
managed under the Outer Banks Group,
including Cape Hatteras National Seashore
and Wright Brothers National Memorial.
Staffing is shared throughout the Outer
Banks Group. The following information
was summarized / excerpted from Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site Long-Range
Interpretative Plan (NPS 2010a).

Staffing
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site staff
provide the full scope of functions and
activities to accomplish management
objectives and perform duties that include
resource protection and management, visitor
services, interpretation and education,
law enforcement, public health and safety,
and maintenance. There are 4.95 fulltime employees (referred to as full-time
equivalents) serving Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site (2011) (Table 14). Seasonal
interpretive staff provides additional

Table 14. Current Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Staff Levels
Department

Full Time Equivalents

Interpreter
Interpretation
Seasonal
Employees
Interpretation Park Guide
Interpretation
Supervisor
Maintenance
Supervisor
Maintenance Level 4
Maintenance Level 5
Law
Enforcement
TOTAL

1
0.7
0
0.5
0.25
0.5
1
1
4.95

Source: NPS 2010a

Park Infrastructure and Facilities

The Lindsay Warren Visitor Center, Outer
Banks Group Administrative Building,
and The Lost Colony Activities building,
restroom facilities, and generator room
buildings were constructed as part of the
Mission 66 development in the visitor area
of the national historic site (NPS 2010c).
The Lindsay Warren Visitor Center is a
6,000-square-foot facility that contains
an information desk near the front doors,
a large open lobby containing several
interpretive wall panels and seating, an
Eastern National bookstore, a separate

Buildings and structures within Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site include facilities
constructed during the 1960s for the
national historic site expansion, Waterside
Theatre buildings, water treatment plant
structures, maintenance buildings, four
employee residences on Pear Pad Road,
two houses at the end of Dare Avenue, and
structures installed to control shoreline
erosion around the national historic site
(Figures 3 and 4).
134

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

Table 15. 2008 Interpretive Staff
Position Title

Status

FTE

Headquarters
Outer Banks Group Chief of
Interpretation

Permanent Full-time

1

Outer Banks Group Interpretive
Activities Assistant

Permanent Full-time

1

Year-Round Park Ranger

Permanent Full-time

1

Summer Park Ranger

Seasonal Full-time

0.5

Summer Park Ranger

Seasonal Full-time

0.3

Winter Park Guide

Seasonal Full-time

0.5

Summer Park Ranger

Seasonal Full-time

0.2 (shoulder season)

Summer Park Guide

Seasonal Full-time

0.3

Winter Park Guide

Seasonal Part-time

0.05 (2 days/week)

Winter Park Guide*

Seasonal Part-time

0.05

Fort Raleigh NHS

Project Funded

TOTAL

4.9

*Wright Brothers National Memorial seasonal who covered Fort Raleigh National Historic Site visitor center two days/week
  Source: NPS 2010a

1,200-square-foot exhibit area, a 750-squarefoot audio visual auditorium with 70 seats,
and a paneled anteroom, the Elizabethan
Room, leading into the auditorium (NPS
2010c). A paved patio is located between the
visitor center and the Outer Banks Group
Administrative Building where interpretive
programming is presented by park staff
(NPS 2010c). The Outer Banks Group
Administrative Building houses staff offices
for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site, Cape
Hatteras National Seashore, and the Wright
Brothers National Memorial, and is located
southwest of the visitor center (Figure 4)
(NPS 2010c).

theater was reconstructed in 1947, only to
be damaged by a hurricane in 1960. The
rebuilt Waterside Theatre was dedicated
in 1962, and renovated from 1998 to
2001. Waterside Theatre stands today as
a the theater structure with seating, two
concession buildings, dressing rooms, a
lighting booth, two lighting towers, and
a theater office building. The 1,498 seat
theater can be accessed using four aisles in
the upper and lower tiers. The stage includes
a chapel, two open sided buildings, and two
shingle-roofed half-timbered structures
all surrounded by a log palisade. Support
structures include the Costume Shop, a
backstage building, and other small woodframed buildings (NPS 2010c).

Originally constructed in 1937, Waterside
Theatre contained approximately 3,500 seats
comprised of a lower and upper area with
two radiating aisles and a center aisle. The
stage was built with a log chapel, several
log buildings, and a long palisade as a
backdrop. The original theater structure
and several of the support buildings were
damaged by a hurricane in 1944 and
completely destroyed by fire in 1947. The

Buildings associated with the water
treatment plant are located off Pear Pad
Road along what was Manns Harbor Ferry
Road. The complex includes a large water
storage tank, another tank, a small concrete
block building, and three small storage
sheds. Drawings from 1964 for this area
indicate that at that time, a Pump House,
135

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

two wells with pumps, and a 2,000-gallon
water storage tank were installed (NPS
2010c).

arbor is about 6 feet high and supports a
large grape vine, which is the only visible
remaining feature left from the Dough family
homestead (NPS 2010c).

The maintenance yard is located west of
the water treatment plant on Pear Pad Road
and includes the Museum Resource Center,
the Museum Resource Center Garage
(also known as the “Bally building”), and
the Maintenance Building. The Museum
Resource Center is a 2,800square-foot
facility that provides a secure environment
for the protection and preservation of the
museum collections of the Outer Banks
Group. The facility contains three separate
storage areas, each with its own climate
control system, and allows records and
artifacts to be sorted and stored under
controlled temperature and humidity
conditions. The Museum Resource Center
Garage provides storage for large artifacts
that are too large to be stored in the Museum
Resource Center, such as items the size of
boats or vehicles. The Maintenance Building
serves as storage for maintenance equipment
(NPS 2010c).

Shoreline erosion has been an ongoing
problem at the national historic site. A series
of groins (wooden structures perpendicular
to the shoreline) were installed on the
western end of the site near the Pear Pad
Road turn-around. Granite rip-rap has
been installed to slow erosion in other areas
such as the shoreline along the northern
boundary. Since 1941, a series of jetties has
been constructed close to Waterside Theatre
to protect it from erosion. In 1978, concrete
block revetments were installed along the
shoreline to protect both Dough Cemetery
and Waterside Theatre from erosion (NPS
2010c).
Roads and Parking
Visitors enter the site via U.S. Highway
64. The entrance road extends northwest
approximately 1,000 feet before it splits
in two directions. Fort Raleigh Road
runs northward and becomes a loop that
leads to a large parking lot primarily used
for Waterside Theatre, and two smaller
parking lots used for the visitor center.
National Park Drive runs northwest toward
parking for the NPS Outer Banks Group
administrative offices and terminates in a
loop that offers parking for The Elizabethan
Gardens and the Freedom Trail trailhead.
The site’s roadways do not present any
particularly notable risks. However, the lack
of adequate parking for The Elizabethan
Gardens and The Lost Colony production
has created safety problems because of
the lack of overflow parking. Visitors park
along the entrance road and other areas
not appropriate for parking, which creates
a safety issue for pedestrian access to these
cars, as well as enforcement issues (NPS
2007).

To the west, along Pear Pad Road, are four
residences used as seasonal staff housing.
Two other residences, located in the
northeast corner of the national historic
site, are the Beehive (constructed in 1960)
and the Prince houses (constructed in
1972). These two buildings have been used
to house The Lost Colony cast and crew
on a seasonal basis; however both of these
structures are threatened by shoreline
erosion and are no longer viable for
occupancy (NPS 2010c).
Other structures within the national historic
site include the Dough Family Grape
Arbor and structures along the shoreline
that control erosion. The Dough Family
Grape Arbor is located on an island in
the Waterside Theatre parking lot. The

136

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

The Raleigh Colony/Virginia Dare
Monument is located along the sidewalk
leading from the visitor center plaza to
the earthen fort. It was first placed on the
grounds in 1896 and was relocated in the
mid-1930s and then again circa 1950. It was
funded by the Roanoke Colony Memorial
Association and received by the national
historic site as part of the transfer of lands to
the U.S. Government.
One Franklin D. Roosevelt Marker is located
between the earthen fort and Waterside
Theatre. A flat, one-foot square concrete
slab, the marker commemorates the spot
where President Roosevelt spoke in 1937.
Additionally, a small, polished granite
marker is located in Waterside Theatre to
honor Roosevelt’s presence on the 350th
anniversary of Virginia Dare’s birth.
Thomas Hariot Nature Trail begins along the
sidewalk to Waterside Theatre and circles
through approximately one-half mile of
“pocket wilderness,” occasionally giving
glimpses of the sound. Small interpretive
signs along the trail, some with excerpts
from Thomas Hariot, describe many of the
natural resources the English found and
how those raw materials might be used
for sustenance or profitable trading. The
Freedom Trail is a 1.25-mile (one way)
out and back trail beginning near The
Elizabethan Gardens through the national
historic site to the island’s western edge.
The trail provides a viewshed that the native
Algonquians would have experienced during
their inhabitation, as well as signs that
interpret the Civil War Battle of Roanoke
Island.

Riprap and groins have been used to protect
the Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
shoreline from ongoing erosion.

Park Monuments and Trails
The national historic site provides
visitors with a variety of experiences and
opportunities for interpretation of the
national historic site’s various historic
themes through signage, monuments, and
trails.

Partner/Cooperating
Organizations and Associations

The First Light of Freedom Memorial is
located in the plaza immediately adjacent
to the visitor center. It was placed on site
in 2001 as part of the North Carolina Civil
War Heritage Trail, funded through a State
of North Carolina grant received by the
Freedmen’s Remembrance Committee.

Chartered in 1932, the Roanoke Island
Historical Association is a non-profit
organization whose mission is to celebrate
the history of the first English colonies
on Roanoke Island as well as honor the
founders of The Lost Colony symphonic
drama through theater performances,
137

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

education, and literature. The Roanoke
Island Historical Association has served as
the producer of The Lost Colony since its
debut, which was July 4, 1937, making it the
longest-running outdoor symphonic drama
in the nation. The Lost Colony symphonic
drama is housed entirely on NPS land
and within its structures. The relationship
between Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
and Roanoke Island Historical Association is
legislated by the 1941 order that established
the national historic site. NPS and the
Roanoke Island Historical Association
signed a revised formal agreement on
December 17, 2009 for 10 years ending on
December 16, 2019. The Roanoke Island
Historical Association’s use of the national
historic site includes the historic Waterside
Theatre, as well as 16 associated structures
that serve as dressing rooms, costuming,
a technicians’ workshop, rehearsal areas,
backstage spaces, day-use activities, and
administration. The Lost Colony is presented
nightly (except Sundays) from mid-June
to late August, and children’s theater and
theater workshops are held during the day.
Total attendance in 2008 was 69,682 visitors.
The Roanoke Island Historical Association
is governed by a board of directors and is
composed of approximately 300 members
(2008 membership).

by its own membership base as well as from
the Garden Club of North Carolina. The
Elizabethan Gardens are also a popular
(fee-based) venue for weddings and private
events hosting from 20 to 400 guests. Total
attendance at The Elizabethan Gardens in
2008 was 150,000 visitors.
The First Colony Foundation, a non-profit
organization established in 2004, conducts
archeological and historical research, public
education, and interpretation relating to
the settlement efforts of Roanoke Island
in the 1580s. The Foundation relies on the
resources and support of several academic
institutions, archeologists, and historians
and cooperative support from the NPS
Southeast Archeology Center in Tallahassee,
Florida. The First Colony Foundation
sponsors regular archeological digs and
research at the national historic site to
identify and reveal the sites of the first New
World English colonies. The Foundation has
presented lectures regarding its research and
findings to the public in the national historic
site’s auditorium.
Eastern National, the national historic
site’s cooperating association, provides
educational products and services to
national historic site visitors. The association
operates a bookstore in the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center and contributes funds that
support national historic site interpretive
programming.

The Elizabethan Gardens was created by
The Garden Club of North Carolina as
a memorial to the first colonists and as
an example of the estate gardens owned
by wealthy backers of the colony. The
Elizabethan Gardens features a Tudor-style
entrance gate, sunken garden, herb garden,
rose garden, 400 year-old (estimated) live
oak, marble statue of an imagined young
Virginia Dare, and the world’s largest bronze
statue of Queen Elizabeth I. The Elizabethan
Gardens is located on property owned by
the Roanoke Island Historical Association
that is leased to the Garden Club of North
Carolina for $1.00 every 50 years. The
Elizabethan Gardens provides special
programming during summer months and
special events and classes throughout the
year. The Elizabethan Gardens is supported

Climate Change
Increasing frequency and intensity of severe
storms and floods may pose threats to roads
and trails, administrative facilities, and other
park resources and infrastructure (Loehman
and Anderson 2009). As predicted storm
frequency increases, more time may be
spent by NPS staff as part of clean up or
reconstruction efforts. Visitor facilities may
need to be upgraded or moved to withstand
flooding or severe storm events. In addition,
energy expenditures for cooling buildings
may increase in the summer and decline

138

Chapter 3: Affected Environment

in the winter as a result of longer, hotter
summers.

historic site’s park operations and facilities.
Collapse or alteration of the barrier islands
may cause marshes to convert to salt marsh,
tidal range and tidal influence may increase
and spread farther inland, and acceleration
of shoreline erosion would potentially occur
(Schafale 2010), with increased potential to
affect day to day operations of the national
historic site. Permanent to temporary
physical impacts to national historic site
facilities (for example, storm damage to the
visitor center or the Waterside Theatre) may
increase demands on NPS staff. Specific
impacts to the national historic site’s
operations and facilities are as yet unknown.

Future threats of deterioration,
segmentation, and collapse of the barrier
islands along the North Carolina Outer
Banks coast as a result of increased sea level
rise and storm activity have been described
(Culver et al. 2007, 2008; Riggs and Ames
2003; Riggs et al. 2009 in NPS 2010e). The
potential for sea level rise to cause opening
of new tidal inlets in the Outer Banks barrier
islands or the collapse of the barrier islands
themselves (Schafale 2010) may cause more
drastic changes to occur to the national

139

This page intentionally left blank.

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 4: ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter...

The National Environmental Policy Act
mandates that environmental impact
statements disclose the environmental
impacts of proposed federal actions. In
this case, the proposed federal action is
implementation of the general management
plan for Fort Raleigh National Historic Site.
This chapter analyzes the impacts that could
result from implementing the management
alternatives, as described in chapter 2, on
natural resources, cultural resources, visitor
use and experience, and national historic
site operations and facilities. This general
management plan establishes management
objectives and implementation actions
needed to manage Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site for the next 15 to 20 years.
Therefore, the analysis period of this
environmental impact statement is 15 to 20
years.

•
•
•
•

Summary of Laws and Policies
Impact Analysis Methodology
Cumulative Impact Analysis
Impact Topics

minor, moderate, and major), methods
used to analyze impacts, and the analysis
methods used for determining cumulative
effects. A summary of the environmental
consequences of each alternative is
provided in Table 7 in chapter 2. The impact
topics presented in this chapter and the
organization of the topics correspond to the
discussion contained in “Chapter 3: Affected
Environment”.
SUMMARY OF LAWS AND POLICIES
Four overarching environmental protection
laws and policies guide the actions of the
NPS in the management of the parks and
their resources: the NPS Organic Act of
1916, the National Environmental Policy
Act and its implementing regulations, the
National Historic Preservation Act and its
implementing regulations, and the Omnibus
Management Act. For a complete discussion
of these guiding and other cross-cutting
regulations, refer to chapter 1 as well as
Appendix B. Guiding regulations are
described in brief below.

The alternatives provide broad management
direction for the national historic site.
Because of the general, conceptual
nature of the alternatives, their potential
consequences can only be analyzed in
general terms. Therefore, this environmental
impact statement should be considered a
programmatic analysis. Prior to undertaking
specific actions as a result of this general
management plan, appropriate detailed
environmental and cultural compliance
documentation would be prepared
consistent with provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act, the National
Historic Preservation Act, and other legal
and policy requirements. The public
will have the opportunity to review and
comment during the implementation phase
as well.

The NPS Organic Act of 1916 (16 USC
1) commits the NPS to making informed
decisions that perpetuate the conservation
and protection of national historic site
resources unimpaired for the benefit and
enjoyment of future generations.
The National Environmental Policy Act of
1969 is implemented through Council on
Environmental Quality regulations (40 CFR
1500-1508). NPS procedures for compliance
with these regulations are detailed in
Director’s Order 12: Conservation Planning,

Included in chapter 4 is a summary of the
laws and policies relevant to addressing
environmental consequences, definitions of
impact thresholds (for example, negligible,

143

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

known, the agency is directed to include the
following within the environmental impact
statement:

Environmental Impact Analysis, and
Decision-making Handbook (NPS 2001).
The National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 is implemented through the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation’s
regulations (36 CFR 800). These regulations
require that, as a federal agency, the NPS
must assume responsibility for cultural
resources within the parks, and must take
into account the effects of NPS undertakings
on these historic properties (such as
cultural resources eligible for or listed on
the National Register of Historic Places).
NPS procedures for compliance with these
regulations are outlined in Director’s Orders
28 and 28A: Cultural Resource Management
and NPS Management Policies 2006.
The Omnibus Management Act (16 USC
5901, et seq.) underscores the National
Environmental Policy Act in that both
are fundamental to national historic
site management decisions. Both acts
provide direction for connecting resource
management decisions to the analysis of
impacts and communicating the impacts
of these decisions to the public using
appropriate technical and scientific
information. Both acts also recognize that
such data may not be readily available and
they provide options for resource impact
analysis should this be the case. Section 4.5
of Director’s Order 12 adds to this guidance
by stating “when it is not possible to modify
alternatives to eliminate an activity with
unknown or uncertain potential impacts,
and such information is essential to making a
well-reasoned decision, NPS will follow the
provisions of the Council on Environmental
Quality regulation (40 CFR 1502.22).” If
the incomplete information relevant to
reasonably foreseeable significant adverse
effects is essential to a reasoned choice
among alternatives and the overall costs of
obtaining it are not exorbitant, the agency
is directed to include the information in
the environmental impact statement. If the
relevant information cannot be obtained
because the overall costs of obtaining it are
exorbitant or the means to obtain it are not

•

A statement that such information is
incomplete or unavailable;

•

A statement of the relevance of
the incomplete or unavailable
information to evaluating reasonably
foreseeable significant adverse
impacts on the human environment;

•

A summary of existing credible
scientific evidence relevant to
evaluating the reasonably foreseeable
significant adverse impacts on the
human environment; and

•

The agency’s evaluation of such
impacts based on theoretical
approaches or research methods
generally accepted in the scientific
community.

The term “reasonably foreseeable”
includes impacts that have catastrophic
consequences, even if their probability of
occurrence is low, provided that analysis
of the impacts is supported by credible
scientific evidence, is not based on pure
conjecture, and is within the rule of reason.
Collectively, these guiding regulations
provide a framework and process for
evaluating the impacts of the alternatives
proposed in this general management plan /
environmental impact statement.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT METHODS
This impact analysis and conclusions are
based largely on the review of existing
scientific literature and studies; information
provided by experts in the NPS, other
agencies, universities, and the public; and
professional judgment. The method of
analyzing impacts is further explained
below. It is important to remember that
impacts have been assessed assuming
mitigating measures would be implemented
to minimize or avoid impacts.
144

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

A brief description of relevant components
of existing conditions is presented for each
impact topic in chapter 3. This information
is the basis for determining the effects of
implementing each alternative. The impact
analysis involved the following steps:
•

Define the issues of concern, based
on scoping input as described in
chapter 1.

•

Identify the geographic area that
could be affected. This varies by
impact topic, and may include a
specific location within national
historic site boundaries or the region.
Localized effects are those effects
that occur directly in the immediate
vicinity of the action. The region
typically is defined as the area
surrounding the national historic
site, and is specifically addressed
under each impact topic.

•

Define the resources within the area
that could be affected.

•

Identify the effects caused by the
management alternative, compare
these to the No-action Alternative,
Alternative A, and determine
the relative change in resource
conditions. For the No-action
Alternative, the analysis assumes
continuation of the current
management direction, that is,
the NPS continues to manage the
national historic site to the extent
possible given current conditions
and constraints.

•

that approach has been used in this
document. Impact topic-specific
thresholds for each level of intensity
are provided in each impact topic
methods section. Threshold values
were developed based on federal
and state standards and consultation
with NPS and other agency resource
experts. Because definitions of
intensity vary by impact topic,
intensity definitions are provided
separately for each impact topic
analyzed. Where duration is not
noted in the impact analysis, it is
considered long-term.
•

Director’s Order 12: Conservation
Planning, Environmental Impact
Analysis, and Decision Making,
presents an approach to identifying
the duration (occurs over the
short or long term), type (adverse
or beneficial), and intensity or
magnitude (e.g., the degree, level, or
strength of an impact as negligible,
minor, moderate, or major) and
145

Define whether the effect would be
beneficial or adverse.
o

Beneficial effects are those
that result in a positive
change in the condition or
appearance of the resource,
or a change that moves the
resource toward a desired
condition.

o

Adverse effects are a
change(s) that move the
resource away from a desired
condition or detract from its
appearance or condition.

•

Determine cumulative effects by
evaluating the effect in conjunction
with the past, on-going, or
reasonably foreseeable future actions
for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site and the region. Additional
detail regarding the method for
determining cumulative effects is
provided in sections that follow.

•

Determine whether impairment
would occur to resources and
values considered necessary and
appropriate to fulfill the purposes
of Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site. Details regarding the method
for analyzing impairment and a
discussion of impairment will be
provided in the record of decision.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Impacts of the alternatives are analyzed
in this order: Alternative A – No-action
Alternative, Alternative B, and Alternative
C, the NPS Preferred Alternative. Each
impact topic includes a description of the
impacts of the alternative, a discussion of
cumulative effects, and a conclusion. At the
end of the chapter, a brief discussion of
sustainability and long-term management is
included for each alternative consisting of
unavoidable adverse impacts, irreversible
and irretrievable commitments of resources,
and effects on short-term uses and longterm productivity. The major assumptions
used in the analysis of effects are described
for each impact topic assessed.

decision-making process for federal actions
(40 CFR 1508.7). Cumulative impacts
are defined as “incremental impacts of
the action when added to other past, ongoing, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions, regardless of what agency (federal
or nonfederal) or person undertakes such
other action.” Cumulative impacts can result
from individually minor, but collectively
significant, actions taking place over a period
of time. The time horizon for the cumulative
impacts analysis depends on the impact
topic under consideration, but for most
topics, was plus or minus 20 years, unless
otherwise noted.
Cumulative impacts were determined by
combining the impacts of each management
alternative with known past, on-going,
and reasonably foreseeable future actions.
Other management actions that have the
potential to have a cumulative effect in
conjunction with measures that would be
implemented in this general management
plan were identified in chapter 1 under the
“Relationship of Other Planning Efforts to
This General Management Plan” section.
Cumulative impacts are considered for all
management alternatives, including the Noaction Alternative – Alternative A.

CLIMATE CHANGE
The lack of qualitative information about
climate change effects adds to the difficulty
of predicting how these impacts would
be realized in the national historic site; for
example, marsh areas may be affected by
sea level rise, and storm frequency and
intensity may affect cultural resources and
visitor amenities. The range of variability
in the potential effects of climate change
is large in comparison to what is known
about the future under an altered climate
in the national historic site in particular,
even if larger-scale climatic patterns have
been accurately predicted for the Atlantic
Coast (Loehman and Anderson 2009).
Therefore, the potential effects of this
dynamic climate on national historic site
resources were included in “Chapter 3:
Affected Environment.” These effects
are not analyzed in detail in “Chapter 4:
Environmental Consequences” under each
alternative because of the uncertainty and
variability of outcomes and because these
impacts are not expected to differ among the
alternatives.

In addition to specific agency actions and
programs, other activities would continue
within the national historic site or in the
region that would cumulatively impact
resources. These would include a variety of
past, on-going, and future actions and events
that would have effects on resources within
the boundaries of the national historic
site. These would include the effects of the
following past, on-going, and future actions.
Past Actions
•

CUMULATIVE IMPACT ANALYSIS
The Council on Environmental Quality
(1978) regulations for implementing the
National Environmental Policy Act require
assessment of cumulative impacts in the
146

Adjacent real estate development.
Development activities on
nearby lands outside the national
historic site contribute to habitat
fragmentation that affect the national
historic site’s fauna in terms of
foraging habits, nesting, resting, or

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

highest usage during the summer
months (NPS 2008b). Commercial,
personal, and emergency response
flights that utilize the airport cause
temporary impacts to soundscapes in
the national historic site. Past surveys
(1998) indicate moderate to major
concerns from air tour overflights at
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
(Vorhees and Krey 1999).

disruption of living patterns. For
species that are not mobile, such
as plants, habitats may have been
adversely affected, or individual
populations may have been moved or
eliminated. Cultural resources may
have been disturbed or eliminated as
development occurred on Roanoke
Island.
•

•

•

Dare County Land Use Plan.
The 2009 Dare County Land Use
Plan (updated and approved in
2011) identified the future land
uses of properties surrounding the
national historic site as community
residential. The properties on the
north end of Roanoke Island are
comprised of platted subdivisions
that are considered stable under the
plan. Areas designated as community
residential are predominately
developed with low density
residential dwellings, however
other uses include small businesses,
government services, education
services, and passive recreation.
The national historic site is zoned
conservation.

On-going Actions (past actions plus the
following)

Dare County Community
Transportation Service Plan
(Dare County 2010). The plan
provides recommendations over
a five-year planning horizon to
increase the mobility needs of
the general public and targeted
populations within Dare County.
Among the recommendations are
the exploration of charging a fare
and consideration of ways to launch
a trolley/shuttle service potentially
beginning with a pilot project on
Roanoke Island to serve touristbased demand.

•

Increased vehicle traffic. Town of
Manteo events, activities at other
regional attractions, and summer
beach traffic will continue to occur.

•

Construction of the Administrative
Headquarters and Visitor Center
Facility, Alligator River National
Wildlife Refuge. Completion of
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Administrative Headquarters and
Visitor Center Facility at Alligator
River National Wildlife Refuge
would provide visitors to Roanoke
Island opportunities to learn about
the region’s natural history and other
interpretive themes.

•

Installation of a county waterline.
An eight-inch waterline was installed
along old Highway 64 and planned
to be extended along Pearce Road
into the Heritage Point Community.
The water line will supply drinking
water to residences and businesses
as well as improve emergency water
response. Waterlines will be located
in the public right of way where
possible.

Future Actions (present actions plus the
following)

Continued overflights from Dare
County Regional Airport. The Dare
County Regional Airport is located to
the southeast of the national historic
site and operates year round, with

•

147

Potential development of
undeveloped land within the
boundary of the national historic
site. Future development of land

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

that is owned and managed by
the Roanoke Island Historical
Association within the boundary
of Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site may impact natural and cultural
resources. The level of disturbance
and impact would be dependent
on the size of the development
and the amount of land cleared for
construction. However, impacts
associated with future development
cannot be determined at this time.
•

Connection to the county
waterline and installation of
new waterlines throughout Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site.
While not currently planned, future
development on Roanoke Island
may require additional water lines
and other utilities to cross NPS
lands. Future compliance would be
required and determined during
design of utility systems.

•

Potential for military training
operations, overflights. Future
potential for the location of a Navy
Outlying Landing Field (OLF) along
coastal areas of North Carolina
may increase the frequency of air
traffic over or near the national
historic site. Location of the outlying
landing field would be subject to
federal compliance and agency
coordination.

•

•

Future revision(s) of the Land Use
Plan for Dare County. Revisions
to the Dare County Land Use Plan
may occur within the 15- to 20- year
planning horizon of this general
management plan. The national
historic site would continue to
participate in state, regional, and
local planning efforts.

•

Dare County Regional Airport
Expansion. Expansion of Dare
County Regional Airport runways
to accommodate small jet traffic
may increase overflight frequency
and impacts to the national historic
site’s natural soundscape. Currently,
the national historic site is not in
line with a regular flight pattern,
so overflights are sporadic and are
not a current concern. There is
potential for overflights to become a
concern in the future, if expansion
of the Dare County Regional Airport
takes place. An update on the future
projections for the Dare County
Regional Airport (e.g., frequency
of flights, etc.) is needed to provide
baseline sound data and to mitigate
potential future impacts of an
expansion of Dare County Regional
Airport.

FLOODPLAINS
Methods
Floodplain issues raised during public
meetings and planning workshops
were general in terms of protection of
national historic site resources and habitat
preservation. Potential adverse effects
of the alternatives on floodplains were
assessed based on a qualitative analysis of
the potential for locating facilities in or near
floodplains, the relative extent of the effects,
and the effectiveness of mitigation measures
employed. The geographic area analyzed is
the entire area within the boundaries of the
national historic site unless otherwise noted.

US 64 widening project. Project to
widen the 27.3-mile segment of US
64 from Columbia (Tyrrell County)
to US 264 (Dare County near Manns
Harbor) and replace the Lindsay C.
Warren Bridge across the Alligator
River (NCDOT N.D.). This effort
includes: widening of US 64 (multilanes) east of Columbia to east of the
Alligator River (Funded 2011-2015);
and widening of US 64 (multi-lanes)
east of the Alligator River to US 264
(Funded 2016-2020)

148

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

of risk associated with the chosen site,
and explain flood mitigation plans. The
Statement of Findings would be available
for public review and comment by including
the document in applicable National
Environmental Policy Act compliance
documentation. For future facilities in
the national historic site, site-specific
environmental assessments would be
prepared.

The major assumptions used in the
analysis were: (1) facilities would be sited
to avoid floodplains when possible and
if construction within a floodplain is
unavoidable, impacts would be mitigated
in accordance with NPS polices; (2) facility
construction would be dependent on
availability of funding and environmental
review; (3) for purposes of this analysis,
storm surge areas are considered in each
alternative’s impact scenario due to overlap
between floodplains and storm surge areas;
(4) impacts related to shoreline erosion will
be addressed under a shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment; and
(5) under all alternatives, best management
practices for construction would be
implemented on any construction project
proposed by the national historic site, and
potentially adverse effects of construction
on floodplains would be minimized by
implementation of site-specific mitigation
measures identified in environmental
assessments tiered to this general
management plan/environmental impact
statement. Effects of individual projects on
floodplains would be effectively assessed,
and mitigation measures employed.

Impact Threshold Definitions
The thresholds to determine the intensity
of impacts on floodplains are defined as
follows:
Negligible: Impacts would result in a change
to floodplain functions and values, but the
change would be so slight that it would
not be of any measurable or perceptible
consequence.
Minor: Impacts would result in a detectable
change to floodplain functions and values,
but the change would be expected to be
small, of little consequence, and localized.
There would be no appreciable increased
risk to life or property. Mitigation measures,
if needed to reduce adverse effects, would be
simple and successful.

It is NPS policy to preserve floodplain
values and minimize potentially hazardous
conditions associated with flooding.
(NPS Director’s Order 77-2)

Moderate: Impacts would result in a
change to floodplain functions and values
that would be readily detectable and
relatively localized. Location of operations
in floodplains could increase risk to life or
property. Mitigation measures, if needed to
reduce adverse effects, could be extensive,
but would likely be successful.

If, during the implementation phase,
a proposed action is located within an
applicable regulatory floodplain and
relocating the action to a non-floodplain site
is considered not to be a viable alternative,
then flood conditions and associated
hazards would be quantified as a basis
for management decision-making and a
formal Statement of Findings would be
prepared with environmental compliance
documentation. The Statement of Findings
would describe the rationale for selection
of a floodplain site, disclose the amount

Major: Impacts would result in a change to
floodplain functions and values that would
have substantial consequences on a regional
scale. Location of operations would increase
risk to life or property. Extensive mitigation
measures would be needed to reduce any
adverse effects, and their success would not
be guaranteed.

149

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Duration:
Long-term: The floodplain
		
takes longer than one year to
		
recover or the effect is almost
		permanent.
		Short-term: The floodplain
		
recovers in less than one year
		
from any action taken.

cumulative impacts on floodplains, including
the following:
Floodplains in the national historic
site would continue to be affected by
development outside the national historic
site including residential development
and shoreline protective measures outside
of the national historic site. These may
adversely influence floodplain function and
values within the national historic site and
additional studies would be necessary to
determine effects on a comprehensive basis.
Future transportation projects involving
the widening of US 64 and replacement of
the Lindsay C. Warren Bridge across the
Alligator River are unlikely to adversely
affect floodplains within the Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site. Collectively, these
past, ongoing, and future actions would
have long- and short-term, minor, adverse
impacts on floodplains.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
No new construction is proposed under
Alternative A and continued, routine
maintenance activities would occur.
Maintenance of existing facilities including
the trail system would occur. Natural
processes such as shoreline erosion
would be allowed to prevail in most areas.
Shoreline erosion is dramatically apparent
in coastal high hazards areas (Zone V)
along the north shore of Roanoke Island
that have not been hardened by rock
revetment, groins, breakwaters, and/or
offshore sills. The impacts of shoreline
erosion at the national historic site would
be addressed in a comprehensive manner
through the shoreline erosion management
plan. Placement of structural stabilization
measures could alter the hydrologic
relationship between open water and
the floodplain during high water events
(such as altered water flow, inundation
rates, groundwater, etc). Further studies
are necessary to determine the level
and type of effect in a comprehensive
manner. This would result in long-term,
negligible, and adverse effects by altering
shoreline and floodplain functions and the
interconnectivity between shoreline and
floodplain functions. Under Alternative
A, the Waterside Theatre area and Dough
Cemetery shorelines would continue to be
protected. Overall, continuation of existing
management practices under Alternative A
would have long-term, negligible, adverse
effects on floodplains.

Shoreline erosion is dramatically apparent
in coastal high hazards areas at the national
historic site.

When the long- and short-term, minor,
adverse effects of other past, ongoing,
and future projects and activities affecting
floodplains are combined with the longterm, negligible, adverse effects from
management actions proposed under
Alternative A, the resulting cumulative
effects are expected to continue to be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The adverse effects of Alternative A would
contribute a small increment to the overall
adverse cumulative impact.

Cumulative Impacts
Within the national historic site, the impacts
of other actions would contribute to
150

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

requirements would be applicable to action
alternatives.

Conclusions
Overall, continuation of existing
management practices under Alternative A
would have long-term, negligible, adverse
effects on floodplains. When the long- and
short- term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting floodplains are combined
with the long-term, negligible, adverse
effects from management actions proposed
under Alternative A, the resulting cumulative
effects are expected to continue to be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The adverse effects of Alternative A would
contribute a small increment to the overall
adverse cumulative impact.

Overall, implementation of management
actions proposed under Alternative B would
have long- and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects on floodplains.
Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
minor, adverse effects. When the long- and
short-term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting floodplains are combined
with the long- and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects of actions under Alternative
B, the resulting cumulative effects would be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The adverse effects of Alternative B would
contribute a small increment to the overall
adverse cumulative impact.

Impacts of Alternative B
Under Alternative B, planned construction
activities include a small, outdoor seating
area, expansion of parking at headquarters
(eight spaces), the extension of the Roanoke
Island multi-use trail into the national
historic site, and establishing a parallel
trail or loop trail to the Freedom Trail. Site
selection would avoid floodplains where
possible.

Conclusions
Overall, implementation of management
actions proposed under Alternative B would
have long- and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects on floodplains. When the
long- and short-term, minor, adverse effects
of other past, ongoing, and future plans,
projects, and activities affecting floodplains
are combined with the long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse effects of actions under
Alternative B, the resulting cumulative effects
would be long- and short-term, minor, and
adverse. The adverse effects of Alternative
B would contribute a small increment to the
overall adverse cumulative impact.

NPS policy gives preference to locating, or
relocating, proposed construction outside
and not affecting the regulatory floodplain.
Mitigation measures would be applied if
other management considerations exist
which clearly favor locating an action in
a regulatory floodplain, such as shoreline
protection structures which must be
located in the floodplain. Mitigation may
consist of any combination of structural
flood protection measures, specific
actions to minimize impacts to floodplain
natural resource values, effective flood
warning, and flood evacuation where
appropriate. Mitigation and compliance
with regulations and policies to prevent
impacts to water quality, floodplain values,
and loss of property or human life would
be strictly adhered to during and after
facility construction and upgrades. These

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Under Alternative C, the only planned
construction activities would be a small,
outdoor seating area, expansion of parking
at headquarters (eight spaces), and
establishing a parallel trail or loop trail to
151

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the Freedom Trail. Floodplains would be
avoided during the site selection and design
process. Similar to Alternative B, Alternative
C would have long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse effects on floodplains.

wetland maps and a conclusion was made
regarding potential effects where possible.
The National Wetlands Inventory location
map was used as the basis for the impact
assessment (USFWS 2011). The geographic
area analyzed is the entire area within the
boundaries of the national historic site
unless otherwise noted.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
minor, adverse effects. When the long- and
short-term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects,
and activities are combined with the longand short-term, negligible, adverse effects
of actions under Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects on floodplains would be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The adverse effects of Alternative C would
contribute a small increment to the overall
adverse cumulative impact.

It is NPS policy to 1) to provide leadership
and to take action to minimize the
destruction, loss, or degradation of
wetlands; 2) to preserve and enhance the
natural and beneficial values of wetlands;
and 3) to avoid direct or indirect support
of new construction in wetlands unless
there are no practicable alternatives to
such construction and the proposed
action includes all practicable measures to
minimize harm to wetlands.
(NPS Director’s Order 77-1)

Conclusions

In all cases, the national historic site would
adhere to section U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency 404(b) (1) guidelines
to avoid and minimize potentially adverse
effects on wetlands. Restoration or
enhancement of wetlands to reduce any
unavoidable losses would be taken as the last
step in this process, as required. In addition,
NPS guidelines for mapping and avoiding
wetlands would also be followed. The NPS
requirements are more restrictive than the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
404(b) (1) guidelines.

Similar to Alternative B, Alternative C would
have long- and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects on floodplains. When the
long-and short-term, minor, adverse effects
of other past, ongoing, and future plans,
projects, and activities are combined with
the overall effects under Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects on floodplains
would be long- and short-term, minor, and
adverse. The adverse effects of Alternative
C would contribute a small increment to the
overall adverse cumulative impact.

The major assumptions used in the analysis
were as follows: (1) effects of direct physical
disturbance (excavation or filling) to
wetlands within the national historic site
boundaries would be completely avoided
by complying with NPS Director’s Order
77-1: Wetland Protection, and by completion
of site-specific environmental assessments
tiered to this document; (2) that effects on
wetlands resulting from implementation
of an alternative would be a direct result
of construction and operation of national
historic site facilities; (3) impacts to wetlands

WETLANDS
Methods
Wetland protection was identified as an
issue since these natural resources could
potentially be affected by construction
and operation of new national historic
site facilities including trails. Potential
effects of the management alternatives on
wetlands were determined by comparing
potential locations of facilities with available
152

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative

as a direct result of shoreline erosion will
be addressed under a shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment;
and (4) the mitigation measures and best
management practices presented in chapter
2 would be implemented for projects that
have the potential to impact wetlands.

Under Alternative A, no new facilities
would be constructed by the NPS within the
national historic site boundaries; therefore,
there would not be construction-related
effects to wetlands. Natural processes such
as shoreline erosion would be allowed to
prevail in most areas, including the pond
on the north shore, adjacent to US 64.
This pond is considered a wetland. The
spit of shoreline dividing the pond would
be expected to be breached during storm
activity, thereby affecting the ponded
wetland status. The impacts of shoreline
erosion at the national historic site would
be addressed in a comprehensive manner
through the shoreline erosion management
plan. This would result in long-term,
beneficial impacts on wetland functions
by providing direction for future wetland
management.

Impact Threshold Definitions
The thresholds to determine the intensity of
impacts on wetlands are defined as follows:
Negligible: Wetland habitats would not
be affected or else the effects would be
at or below the level of detection and
would not be measurable or of perceptible
consequence to wetland plant and animal
populations.
Minor: Effects on wetland habitats would be
measurable or perceptible. While mortality
of individual plants and animals might
occur, the viability of wetland populations
and habitats would not be affected and the
community, if left alone, would recover.

A technical assistance request has been
made through the Natural Resource
Program Center to assist the Outer Banks
Group of the National Parks regarding
wetlands at the Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. The request is for assistance to
delineate wetlands and develop appropriate
management strategies for their continued
protection. The national historic site would
continue to monitor, manage and protect
wetlands under existing management
efforts. Overall, management actions taken
under Alternative A would have long-term,
beneficial effects on wetlands.

Moderate: A change in wetland habitats
would occur. The change would be
readily measurable in terms of abundance,
distribution, quantity, or quality of
populations of plants and animals.
Mitigation measures would be necessary to
reduce adverse effects and would likely be
successful.
Major: Effects on wetland habitats would
be readily apparent and measurable.
Extensive mitigation would be needed to
reduce adverse effects, and the success of
mitigation measures could not be assured.
Duration:
		
		
		

Cumulative Impacts
Within and in the vicinity of the national
historic site, the impacts of other actions
would contribute to cumulative impacts on
wetlands, including the following:

Long-term: Effects last more 		
than one year.
Short-term: Effects last less 		
than one year.

Connection to the Dare County waterline
and installation of new waterlines
throughout the national historic site may
affect wetlands if avoiding wetland areas
during construction activities was not
153

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

feasible. Wetlands would be delineated prior
to any construction activity, and avoided
where possible. These activities would be
subject to the Clean Water Act, Section 404
permitting, construction best management
practices and mitigation measures proposed
under site-specific assessments that would
tier to this general management plan/
environmental impact statement. This would
result in short- and long-term, negligible,
adverse impacts to wetlands.

the resulting cumulative effects would be
considered long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, and adverse. The beneficial effects
of Alternative A would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impact.

Past and potential future development of
land adjacent to and in the vicinity of the
national historic site would result in longterm, minor, adverse impacts on wetlands.
However, the Dare County Land Use Plan
and mitigation actions implemented in
response to individual developments would
serve to limit future adverse effects on
wetlands.
Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse impacts on
wetlands.

Great blue heron (Ardea herodias)

Impacts of Alternative B
Similar effects as those described under
Alternative A are applicable to Alternative
B based on the continuation of existing
resource management practices and plans
to delineate wetlands on-site. However, the
establishment of management zones under
Alternative B would protect the majority of
the national historic site under the Resource
Preservation Zone providing long-term
beneficial effects. Potential development of
limited new trails (establishing a parallel trail
to Freedom Trail and extension of the multiuse trail into the national historic site) would
avoid wetlands where possible. However, if
wetlands could not be avoided, the potential
negative impacts would be mitigated through
the use of elevated walkways above the
wetlands. An environmental assessment
would be completed for any proposed trail,
and mitigation measures would be employed
to avoid or minimize impacts on wetlands.
The overall beneficial effects provided by
existing resource management efforts and
establishment of management zones would
reduce adverse impacts caused by new trail

When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting wetlands are combined
with long-term, beneficial impacts to
wetlands under Alternative A, the resulting
cumulative effects would be considered
long- and short-term, negligible to minor,
and adverse. The beneficial effects of
Alternative A would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impact.
Conclusions
Overall, continuation of management
actions taken under Alternative A would
have long-term, beneficial effects on
wetlands. When the long- and shortterm, negligible to minor, adverse effects
of other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects, and activities affecting wetlands
are combined with long-term, beneficial
impacts to wetlands under Alternative A,
154

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

and facility development. Therefore, the
overall effect on the national historic site’s
wetlands as a result of implementation of
Alternative B would be long- and shortterm, and beneficial.

the establishment of management zones
under Alternative C would protect the
majority of the national historic site under
the Resource Preservation Zone providing
long-term, beneficial effects.

Cumulative Impacts

Under Alternative C, visitors would be
encouraged to experience outlying national
historic site resources independently
through formal interpretive trails. Potential
development of limited new trails
(establishing a parallel trail to Freedom Trail
and extension of the multi-use trail into the
national historic site) would avoid wetlands
where possible. However, if wetland
areas could not be avoided, the potential
negative impacts would be mitigated by
such means as elevated walkways above
the wetlands. Potential increases in limited
trail development would also result in
an introduction of visitors in previously
undisturbed areas of the national historic
site. This would provide an opportunity
for visitors to learn about wetlands and
increase stewardship of these areas. Signage
and education would encourage visitors
to remain on trails. An environmental
assessment would be completed for any
proposed trail or facility, and mitigation
measures would be employed to avoid or
minimize impacts on wetlands.

Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, and adverse effects.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting wetlands are combined
with the long- and short-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects would be considered
long- and short-term, negligible, and
adverse. The adverse effects of Alternative
B would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impact.
Conclusions
Overall, implementation of management
actions proposed under Alternative B would
have long- and short-term, beneficial effects.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting wetlands are combined
with the long- and short-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects would be considered
long- and short-term, negligible, and
adverse. The adverse effects of Alternative
B would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impact.

The overall beneficial effects provided by
existing resource management efforts and
establishment of management zones would
reduce adverse impacts caused by new trail
development. Therefore, the overall effect
on the national historic site’s wetlands as
a result of implementation of Alternative
C would be long- and short-term, and
beneficial.
Cumulative Impacts

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)

Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse effects. When
the long- and short-term, negligible to
minor, adverse effects of other past, on-

Similar effects as those described under
Alternative A are applicable to Alternative C
with regards to the continuation of existing
resource management practices. However,
155

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

going, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting wetlands are combined
with long- and short-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects would be considered
long- and short-term, negligible, and
adverse. The adverse effects of Alternative
C would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impact.

state listed species that are known or have
the potential to occur and the distribution
of their preferred habitat within the national
historic site are discussed in this section.
The geographic area analyzed is the entire
area within the boundaries of the national
historic site unless otherwise noted.
The NPS is required under the Endangered
Species Act to ensure that federally listed
species and their habitats are protected on
all lands within the agency’s jurisdiction. In
addition, the NPS manages state and locally
listed species in a manner similar to its
treatment of federally listed species to the
greatest extent possible. (NPS Management
Policies 2006)

Conclusions
Overall, management of the national
historic site under Alternative C would
have long-and short-term, beneficial effects
on wetlands. When the long- and shortterm, negligible to minor, adverse effects
of other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects, and activities affecting wetlands
are combined with the beneficial impacts
of Alternative C, the resulting cumulative
effects would be considered long-and shortterm, negligible, and adverse. The adverse
effects of Alternative C would contribute
a modest increment to reduce the overall
adverse cumulative impact.

Federally listed threatened, endangered, or
special concern species assessed include the
West Indian manatee, black rail, loggerhead
sea turtle, northern diamondback terrapin,
and the shortnose sturgeon. Actions
proposed under the alternatives discussed
in this general management plan would not
affect (a “no effect” Endangered Species Act
Section 7 determination) aquatic habitat of
the West Indian Manatee, loggerhead sea
turtle, and the short-nose sturgeon. While
these marine species of concern may have
been historically known, presently known,
or potentially occur in or near the national
historic site, actions proposed under this
general management plan would not directly
or indirectly affect listed species or adversely
modify designated critical habitat of these
species. These marine species would be
further addressed in the shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment prior
to any protection or modification of the
national historic site’s shoreline. No new
development would occur under any of the
alternatives on NPS marsh lands within the
national historic site boundary south of U.S.
64/264. Therefore, the West Indian manatee,
loggerhead sea turtle, and shortnose
sturgeon were dismissed from further

SPECIES OF CONCERN
Methods
This impact topic is included to address
planning team and other agency concerns
regarding protection of species of concern.
Impacts on species of concern were
evaluated and determined qualitatively
based on the existing literature, professional
judgment of NPS staff, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, North Carolina Natural
Heritage Program, and consultants. The
primary sources of information used in this
analysis include existing literature for each
species, national historic site management
documents, NPS research and documents,
North Carolina Natural Heritage Program
published and unpublished research, and
unpublished observations and insights
from knowledgeable national historic site
staff and experts. Based on this analysis,
anticipated impacts to federally listed and
156

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

analysis. (See also “Species of Concern”
section in chapter 3, and Appendix C).

Key ecosystem processes may experience
disruptions that may result in population or
habitat condition fluctuations that would be
outside the range of natural variation (but
would return to natural conditions).

Impacts associated with visitor use and
facility development (particularly trails) and
associated use are also described under the
vegetation and wetlands impact topics and
would also apply to the species of concern.
Therefore, the reader is encouraged to read
these descriptions of activities that have
potential to disturb and/or alter habitats
within the national historic site.

Major: Individuals or population of
a species of concern, habitat, or the
natural processes sustaining them would
be measurably affected. Key ecosystem
processes might be permanently altered
resulting at the population level and
permanently modifying habitat.

The NPS considers how to protect and
perpetuate federally and state listed species
during national historic site management
planning, and consults with lead federal
and state agencies as appropriate. NPS will,
to the greatest extent possible, inventory,
monitor, and manage state-listed species in a
manner similar to the treatment of federally
listed species.

Duration:
		
		
		
		
		

Long-term: Effects on listed
species would occur for 		
greater than one year.
Short-term: Effects on listed
species would occur for less
than one year.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative

Impact Threshold Definitions

Federally Listed Species. Under Alternative
A, species of concern in the national
historic site would continue to be managed
under existing practices. Development
and implementation of management plans,
including the resource stewardship strategy,
fire management plan, and shoreline
erosion management plan, would provide
long-term, beneficial effects through
improved management efforts with regard
to species of concern and their habitats.
This would include, respectively, providing
recommendations to manage species of
concern in concert with other national
historic site resources with input from
stakeholders and subject matter experts
on species of concern and habitats; using
prescribed burns and managing the effects
of fire to improve vegetation conditions and
habitats where appropriate, and increase
safe conditions within the national historic
site as well as adjacent lands; and provide
recommendations and management
alternatives to managing the national historic
site’s changing shoreline and associated
terrestrial habitats. A summary of these
other past, present and future plans is
included in chapters 1 and 2.

The thresholds to determine the intensity of
impacts on species of concern are defined in
the paragraphs that follow.
Negligible: No species of concern would
be affected, or the action would affect an
individual of a listed species or its critical
habitat, but the change would not be
measurable or perceptible and would be
within the range of natural variability.
Minor: The action would result in
detectable impacts to an individual (or
individuals) of a species of concern or its
habitat, but they would be within the range
of natural variability both spatially and
temporally. No interference with feeding,
reproduction, or other activities affecting
population viability would result from
impacts. Sufficient functional habitat would
remain to support viable populations.
Moderate: An action would result in
detectable impacts on individuals or
population of a species of concern, habitat,
or the natural processes sustaining them.
157

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Completion of an inventory and mapping
of rare plant species in the Outer Banks
Group of parks, as well as training for
national historic site staff would provide
long- and short-term, beneficial effects from
monitoring and protection of listed species.
The brackish marsh located south of U.S.
64/264 has been identified as preferred
habitat for the black rail and northern
diamondback terrapin. No new construction
would occur under Alternative A, causing
no effect to species of concern or their
habitat. Invasive species control, especially
of common reed in the brackish marsh area,
would continue to provide beneficial effects
to the habitat of federally listed species of
concern. Continuation of existing national
historic site management practices would
preserve habitat with beneficial effects to
federally listed species. Under Alternative A,
the overall effects to federally listed species
of concern would be long- and short-term,
and beneficial.

Alternative A, the overall effects to statelisted species of concern would be long- and
short-term, beneficial.
Cumulative Impacts
Within and in the vicinity of the national
historic site, the impacts of other actions
would contribute to cumulative impacts on
species of concern, including the following:
Construction of the Administrative
Headquarters and Visitor Center Facility
at Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge
may provide additional natural resource
interpretation and education to national
historic site visitors. Increased awareness of
species of concern in the Outer Banks region
of North Carolina would provide long-term,
beneficial effects.
Potential impacts to species of concern
associated with possible development of
land within the boundary of the national
historic site that is owned and managed by
the Roanoke Island Historical Association
could affect the Fort Raleigh Maritime
Forest and associated species. The level
of impact would be dependent on the size
of the development and the amount of
land cleared for construction, and cannot
be determined at this time. Development
activities on nearby lands outside the
national historic site contribute to habitat
fragmentation that effect species of concern
in terms of foraging habits, nesting, resting,
or disruption of living patterns. For species
that are not mobile, such as plants, habitats
or individual populations may be moved or
eliminated.

State-listed Species. North Carolina
lists the following species as threatened,
endangered, special concern or significantly
rare: bald eagle, black-throated green
warbler, peregrine falcon, Carolina
watersnake, giant swallowtail butterfly,
northern oak hairstreak butterfly, little
metalmark, blue witch grass, ringed witch
grass, moundlily yucca, twig-rush, saltmarsh
spikerush, and winged seedbox. These
species occur in a variety of habitats within
the national historic site. Because no new
construction would be proposed under
Alternative A, no physical disturbance or
alteration of state-listed species habitat
would occur. Continued control of nonnative invasive species (especially common
reed) within the national historic site would
result in conditions that are beneficial to
preserving habitat and minimizing impacts
to state-listed species. Completion of an
inventory and mapping of rare plant species
in the national historic site, as well as
training for national historic site staff would
provide long- and short-term, beneficial
effects to listed plant species. Under

Actions related to regional development
projects including future potential
expansion of Dare County Regional Airport
runways to accommodate small jet traffic,
potential military training operations
(overflights), and highway road widening
may contribute adverse effects to species
of concern. The NPS would continue to
coordinate with other agencies regarding
regional impacts that would affect species
158

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

Impacts of Alternative B

of concern or habitat within the national
historic site. Species-specific effects would
be analyzed in future compliance and
coordination with federal, state, and local
agencies prior to actions that may affect
listed species.

Federally Listed Species. Similar effects
as those described under Alternative A
are applicable to Alternative B based on
the continuation of existing resource
management practices and plans. Under
Alternative B, limited new construction
(expansion of parking at headquarters
[eight spaces]), establishing a parallel trail
to the Freedom Trail, extension of the
multi-use trail into the national historic
site, and construction of a small outdoor
seating area) would occur in the national
historic site north of U.S. 64/264. No
new facilities would be planned in the
marsh area south of U.S. 64/264 under
Alternative B, causing no effect to the black
rail or northern diamondback terrapin or
associated habitat. Creation of the Resource
Preservation Zone under Alternative B
would provide for protection of the majority
of the national historic site (including the
brackish marsh area) resulting in conditions
that are beneficial to preserving habitat and
minimizing habitat impacts to federally listed
species of concern. Similar to Alternative
A, continuation of invasive species control,
especially of common reed in the marsh
area south of U.S. 64/264, would continue
to provide indirect long-term, beneficial
effects to habitat of federally listed species
of concern: black rail and northern
diamondback terrapin. Under Alternative B,
the overall effects to federally listed species
of concern would be long-and short-term,
and beneficial.

Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have long- and short-term,
minor to moderate, adverse impacts on both
federally and state listed species of concern.
When the long- and short-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects, and
activities affecting federal and state listed
species are combined with the long- and
short- term beneficial impacts under
Alternative A, the resulting cumulative
effects would be long-term, minor, and
adverse. This is primarily the result of effects
of actions outside the national historic site
that contribute to habitat fragmentation.
The long-and short-term beneficial effects
of Alternative A would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impact.
Conclusions
Continuation of existing national historic
site management practices would result in
conditions that are beneficial to preserving
habitat and minimizing impacts on federally
listed species habitat. Under Alternative
A, the overall effects to federally and state
listed species of concern would be longand short-term, and beneficial. When the
long- and short-term, minor to moderate,
adverse effects of other past, on-going, and
future plans, projects, and activities affecting
federally and state listed species of concern
are combined with long- and short-term,
beneficial impacts under Alternative A, the
resulting cumulative effects would continue
to be long-term, minor, and adverse. The
beneficial effects of alternative A would
contribute a small increment to reduce the
overall adverse cumulative impact.

State-listed Species. General effects to
state-listed species of concern addressed
under Alternative A would also apply to
Alternative B. Continued control of nonnative invasive species (especially common
reed) within the national historic site would
result in conditions that are beneficial to
preserving habitat and minimizing impacts
to state-listed species. Completion of an
inventory and mapping of state-listed plant
species in the national historic site, as well as
training for national historic site staff would

159

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

provide long-term beneficial effects to listed
plant species.

species of concern: black rail and northern
diamondback terrapin. Under Alternative B,
the overall effects to state-listed species of
concern would be long- and short-term,
beneficial. When the long- and short-term
beneficial effects of management actions
implemented under Alternative B are taken
in combination with the long- and shortterm, minor to moderate, adverse effects of
other past, on-going, and future projects,
plans, or actions on federally and state listed
species of concern, the cumulative effects
would be long- and short-term, minor, and
adverse. The beneficial effects of Alternative
B would contribute a small increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impact.

Under Alternative B, limited new
construction in the national historic site
could potentially affect state-listed species
of special concern. Appropriate site-specific
environmental compliance would be
completed to determine the potential for
species or associated habitat to be present,
and impacts would be avoided. State-listed
plants would be relocated to more remote
areas away from trails as necessary to avoid
unintentional disturbance, trampling or
erosion effects. The majority of the national
historic site would be zoned as the Resource
Preservation Zone, thereby protecting
habitats of state-listed species. Resource
management and protection efforts would
continue to occur under Alternative B.
Under Alternative B, the overall effects to
state-listed species of concern would be
long- and short-term, and beneficial.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Federally Listed Species. Similar effects
as those described under Alternative A
are applicable to Alternative C based on
the continuation of existing resource
management practices and plans. Effects to
the federally listed black rail and northern
diamondback terrapin would be the same as
those described under Alternative B: longand short-term, and beneficial.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
minor to moderate, adverse effects. When
the long- and short-term beneficial effects
of management actions implemented under
Alternative B are taken in combination
with the long- and short-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future projects, plans, or
actions on federal and state listed species
of concern, the cumulative effects would be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The beneficial effects of Alternative B would
contribute a small increment to reduce the
overall adverse cumulative impact.

State-listed Species. Effects to the statelisted species of special concern would
be the same as those described under
Alternative B. Under Alternative C, the
overall effects to state-listed species of
concern would be long- and short-term, and
beneficial.
Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
minor to moderate, adverse effects. When
the long- and short-term, beneficial effects
of management actions implemented under
Alternative C are taken in combination
with the long- and short-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects of other past,

Conclusions
Similar to Alternative A, continuation of
invasive species control, especially common
reed in the marsh area south of U.S.
64/264, would continue to provide indirect
beneficial effects to habitat of federally listed
160

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

unpublished observations and insights from
knowledgeable national historic site staff.
The area analyzed for possible effects on
vegetation encompasses the national historic
site.

on-going, and future projects, plans, or
actions on federally and state listed species,
the cumulative effects would continue to be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
The beneficial effects of Alternative C would
contribute a small increment to reduce the
overall adverse cumulative impact.

The major assumptions used in the analysis
of effects on vegetation were that: (1)
increased visitor use could potentially
translate to greater impacts to vegetation
communities through increased trail usage
and incidental off-trail or unauthorized
trail activity; (2) the national historic site
would continue to identify and manage
non-native plant populations as staffing
and funding allows; (3) removal of the
Prince and Beehive houses proposed
under all alternatives may affect vegetation
during demolition, however these
impacts would be reduced as the area is
returned to its natural (undeveloped) state;
(4) impacts to vegetation as a direct result
of shoreline erosion will be addressed
under a shoreline erosion management
plan and related National Environmental
Policy Act assessment; and (5) under all
alternatives, best management practices for
construction would be implemented on
any construction project proposed by the
national historic site, and potentially adverse
effects of construction on vegetation would
be minimized by implementation of sitespecific mitigation measures identified in
environmental compliance documentation
tiered to this general management plan/
environmental impact statement. Effects of
individual projects on vegetation would be
effectively assessed, and mitigation measures
employed.

Conclusions
Effects to the federally and state listed
species of concern would be the same
as those described under Alternative B:
long- and short-term, beneficial. When the
long- and short-term, beneficial effects of
management actions implemented under
Alternative C are taken in combination
with the long- and short-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future projects, plans, or
actions on federally and state listed species
of concern, the cumulative effects would
continue to be long- and short-term,
minor, and adverse. The beneficial effects
of Alternative C would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impact.
VEGETATION
Methods
Vegetation issues identified during public
meetings and planning workshops were
primarily related to maintenance of the
cultural landscape at the national historic
site as well as control of invasive plants. To
address these issues, an assessment of the
effects of projected national historic site
management actions on vegetation was
made using qualitative estimates of the
expected levels of visitor use and expected
levels of land-disturbing activities within
the national historic site (removal of the
Prince and Beehive houses and trail work,
for instance), and the effects were compared
to Alternative A. The primary sources of
information used in this analysis include
NPS plant species inventories, North
Carolina Natural Heritage Program data,
NPS policy documents, NPS research, and

Vegetation at the national historic site was
inventoried in 2010 by the North Carolina
Natural Heritage Program. The site contains
four distinct vegetation communities:
Maritime Evergreen Forest, Successional
Wet Pine Flatwoods and Coastal Fringe
Sandhill, Tidal Cypress – Gum Swamp, and
Tidal Freshwater Marsh.

161

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Impacts of Alternative A

Visitor use can impact vegetation through
different means, including trampling of
vegetation when hiking off designated trails.
Introduction or spread of invasive species
can also result from visitors unwittingly
bringing seeds into areas of the national
historic site via clothing/shoes, dog fur,
as well as from horse hair and horse
excrement. New trail construction would
cause limited loss of vegetation and possibly
introduce non-native species. The impacts
of potential visitation increases have been
included in the analysis.

Under Alternative A, vegetation in the
national historic site would continue to be
managed under NPS management plans and
practices. Development and implementation
of management plans, including the resource
stewardship strategy, fire management
plan, and shoreline erosion management
plan would provide long-term, beneficial
effects through improved management
efforts with regard to the national historic
site’s vegetation and natural communities.
This would include, respectively, providing
recommendations to manage vegetation
in concert with other national historic site
resources with input from stakeholders and
subject matter experts on vegetation and
natural communities; using prescribed burns
and managing the effects of fire to improve
vegetation conditions where appropriate,
and increase safe conditions within the
national historic site as well as adjacent
lands; and provide recommendations and
management alternatives to managing the
national historic site’s changing shoreline
and associated terrestrial habitats. A
summary of these other past, present and
future NPS plans is included in chapters 1
and 2.

Impact Threshold Definitions
The thresholds to determine the intensity of
impacts on vegetation are defined as follows:
Negligible: Individual native plants may
occasionally be affected, but measurable or
perceptible changes in plant community size,
integrity, or continuity would not occur.
Minor: Effects on native plants would be
measurable or perceptible. The natural
function and character of the plant
community would not be affected and, if left
alone, would recover.
Moderate: A change would occur in the
natural function and character of the plant
community in terms of basic properties
(e.g., growth, abundance, reproduction,
distribution, structure, or diversity) but not
to the extent that the basic properties of the
plant community change.
Major: Effects on native plant communities
would be readily apparent and would
substantially and permanently change the
natural function and character of the plant
types.

Long-term: Takes more than 		
		
one year to recover.
		
Short-term: Recovers within 		
		one year.
Duration:

162

Under Alternative A, there would be no new
development within the national historic
site. Existing trails would continue to be
maintained and operated by the national
historic site. Visitors and island residents
would continue to use the national historic
site’s trails for interpretation and exercise,
and potential for visitor-created trails would
continue to occur. Visitor-created trails
and trampling of vegetation are likely to
occur near points of interest such as near
the earthen fort or off the Thomas Hariot
Nature Trail to access Albemarle Sound.
Impacts associated with off-trail visitor
use would be minimal and localized as the
national historic site contains two short
walking trails within its boundaries. Visitor
use related effects to the national historic
sites vegetation would result in long- and

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

short-term, negligible to minor, adverse
effects.

preserve the evergreen maritime forest as
succession would be suppressed by thinning
of understory hardwood species.

Demolition of the Prince and Beehive
houses may cause temporary impacts to
surrounding vegetation as the structures are
removed, however these impacts would be
largely reduced as areas where the structures
once stood are returned to a more natural
state, resulting in long-term beneficial
effects.

Continuation of current national historic site
resource management and invasive species
controls would provide long-term beneficial
effects to the national historic site’s Fort
Raleigh Maritime Forest Significant Natural
Heritage Area (see “Vegetation” section of
chapter 3 for more information). Continued
shoreline protection measures instituted
on the north shore of Roanoke Island and
continued maintenance of the shoreline to
protect national historic site resources have
localized, long-term, beneficial and longterm, minor to moderate, adverse effects
on shorelines and associated native plant
communities as areas of high importance are
protected while other areas would continue
to erode. The impacts of shoreline erosion
at the national historic site will be addressed
in a comprehensive manner through the
shoreline erosion management plan and
related National Environmental Policy Act
assessment.

Unintentional transport or improper
disposal of non-native invasive species
from surrounding development and visitor
use would continue to threaten natural
vegetation communities. Spread of invasive
species (non-native) plant would also
continue, although the magnitude of this
effect is unknown. The national historic site,
through the efforts of the Southeast Coast
Exotic Plant Management Team and staff
resource managers and maintenance, would
continue to identify and manage non-native
plant populations, reducing their effects
on native plant communities or possibly
eliminating some stands from the landscape.
Invasive plant populations were treated
and removed from the national historic
site most recently in 2010. However, there
is a high probability of additional species
and populations due to development along
national historic site borders as well as the
volume of traffic in the site. Continued
invasive plant controls would provide longterm beneficial effects to native vegetation by
reducing competition for available habitat.
The national historic site was treated for
gypsy moths in cooperation with the U.S.
Forest Service’s “Slow the Spread Project” in
1999, providing long-term beneficial effects
to the national historic site’s hardwood tree
species. These efforts would continue to
improve species composition and habitat
quality in the national historic site with longterm, beneficial effects.

Overall, continuation of current
management under Alternative A would
have long-term, beneficial impacts and longand short-term, negligible to minor, adverse
effects on vegetation communities.
Cumulative Impacts
Within and in the vicinity of the national
historic site, the impacts of other actions
would contribute to cumulative impacts on
vegetation, including the following:
Connection to the Dare County waterline
and installation of new waterlines
throughout the national historic site may
affect vegetation and natural communities.
These activities would be subject to
construction best management practices
and mitigation measures proposed under
site-specific environmental compliance
documentation that are tiered to this general
management plan/environmental impact
statement. Expansion of water lines within

The national historic site would also
continue mechanically thinning understory
brush for fire management as staff and
funding allow. These actions would also
163

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the national historic site would cause longand short-term, negligible, adverse effects on
vegetation.

adverse effects of other past, on-going, and
future plans, projects, and activities affecting
vegetation and natural communities are
combined with the long-and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse and beneficial
impacts under Alternative A, collectively
the resulting cumulative effects would be
considered long-term, and beneficial. The
beneficial effects of Alternative A would
contribute a modest increment to the overall
beneficial cumulative impact.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site resource
management staff would continue to manage
and protect the Fort Raleigh Maritime
Forest providing long-term, beneficial
effects. Formal designation has not occurred
with the North Carolina Natural Heritage
Program; however, the NPS manages
the Fort Raleigh Maritime Forest to
maintain this designation. Potential future
development of undeveloped land within
the boundary of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site that is owned and managed by
the Roanoke Island Historical Association
would affect the Fort Raleigh Maritime
Forest Significant Natural Heritage Area.
The level of impact would be dependent on
the size of the potential development and
the amount of land cleared for construction
with a resulting fragmentation of habitat.
Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse effects on vegetation
communities in the national historic site.

Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria), one of the
dominant species observed in the national
historic site.

Impacts of Alternative B

When the long- and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects of other past, on-going, and
future plans, projects, and activities affecting
vegetation and natural communities are
combined with the long-and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse and beneficial
impacts under Alternative A, collectively
the resulting cumulative effects would be
considered long-term, and beneficial. The
beneficial effects of Alternative A would
contribute a modest increment to the overall
beneficial cumulative impact.

Similar effects as those described under
Alternative A are applicable to Alternative
B, with continuation of existing resource
management practices and plans, as well as
control of invasive species. However, the
establishment of management zones under
Alternative B would protect the majority of
the national historic site under the Resource
Preservation Zone thereby providing
long-term, beneficial effects. Construction
of a small outdoor seating area near the
earthen fort in the Visitor Services Zone
may adversely affect vegetation and natural
communities (including the Fort Raleigh
Maritime Forest Significant Natural Heritage
Area) as there could be a localized loss of
native plants and habitat. The seating area
would be sited in previously disturbed areas
and would also be subject to environmental
review and mitigation, thereby reducing
adverse effects to vegetation and natural

Conclusions
Overall, continuation of current
management under Alternative A would
have long-term and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse and beneficial effects
on vegetation and natural communities.
When the long- and short-term, negligible,

164

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

communities. Native vegetation would be
planted to screen the maintenance and
headquarters area providing long-term,
beneficial effects. Increased interpretive
activities and directional signage would
increase visitor knowledge and reduce the
potential for vegetation to be trampled. This
would result in long-term and short-term,
beneficial effects to vegetation.

undisturbed areas of the national historic
site. Therefore, the overall effect on the
national historic site’s vegetation and natural
communities as a result of implementation
of management actions under Alternative
B would be long- and short-term, and
beneficial.

Potential development of limited new trails
(establishing a parallel trail to Freedom
Trail and extension of the multi-use trail
into the national historic site) would
result in a loss of habitat and loss of native
plants in the localized area where the trail
would be constructed. Potential increases
in limited trail development would also
result in an introduction of new visitors
in previously undisturbed areas of the
national historic site, as well as increase the
potential for spread of invasive species via
national historic site visitors. Environmental
compliance documentation would be
completed for any proposed trail, and
mitigation measures would be employed
to reduce the spread of invasive species,
manage visitor impacts, and limit impacts on
native vegetation and natural communities
providing long-term beneficial effects. These
actions would have long-term, negligible to
minor, adverse and beneficial effects on the
national historic site’s vegetation.

Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse effects. When the longand short-term, negligible, adverse effects
of other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects, and activities affecting vegetation
and natural communities are combined with
the long- and short-term beneficial impacts
of Alternative B, the resulting cumulative
effects would be considered long- and
short-term, and beneficial. The overall
effects of Alternative B would contribute a
modest increment to the overall beneficial
cumulative impact.

Cumulative Impacts

Conclusions
Overall, management of the national
historic site under Alternative B would have
long-and short-term, beneficial effects on
vegetation and natural communities. When
the long- and short-term, negligible, adverse
effects of other past, on-going, and future
plans, projects, and activities affecting
vegetation and natural communities are
combined with the overall long- and shortterm, beneficial impacts of Alternative
B, the resulting cumulative effects would
be considered long- and short-term and
beneficial. The overall effects of Alternative
B would contribute a modest increment to
the overall beneficial cumulative impact.

Proposed increases in national historic site
staff under Alternative B would provide
long-term, beneficial effects to native
vegetation and communities through
increased interpretation, maintenance, and
enforcement. Management actions would be
taken as needed to reduce visitor impacts on
vegetation and natural communities.
The overall beneficial effects provided
by existing resource management efforts
and plans, establishment of management
zones, and increased national historic site
staff would slightly reduce adverse impacts
caused by new trail and facility construction,
increased potential for off-trail impacts, and
spread of invasive species into previously

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Similar effects as those described under
Alternative A are applicable to Alternative
C. Continuation of existing resource
165

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

management practices and plans as well
as control of invasive species would occur
under Alternative C. The establishment of
management zones under Alternative C
would protect the majority of the national
historic site under the Resource Preservation
Zone thereby providing long-term beneficial
effects. The Resource Preservation Zone
under Alternative C provides for the largest
area zoned under the action alternatives.
Alternative C would also reduce heavily
landscaped and maintained areas, and
allow these areas to return back to
natural conditions or convert them to low
maintenance plantings. Native vegetation
would be planted to screen the maintenance
and headquarters area providing localized
long-term beneficial effects.

potential for off-trail impacts to vegetation
and natural communities. Construction
of a small outdoor seating area near the
earthen fort in the Visitor Services Zone
may adversely affect vegetation and natural
communities (including the Fort Raleigh
Maritime Forest Significant Natural
Heritage Area). Environmental compliance
documentation would be completed for
any proposed trail or facility, and mitigation
measures would be employed to reduce the
spread of invasive species, manage visitor
impacts, and limit impacts on vegetation and
natural communities. Increased interpretive
activities that increase visitor knowledge and
control of visitor use impacts in the vicinity
of the earthen fort would also provide
beneficial effects.
Proposed increases in national historic site
staff under Alternative C would provide
long-term, beneficial effects to native
vegetation and communities through
increased interpretation, maintenance, and
enforcement. The addition of an historian
under Alternative C may provide visitors
opportunities to learn about the national
historic site’s native vegetation and its
importance in telling the many stories of
the history of the national historic site.
Additional interpretation and education
about resource protection may reduce
some impacts associated with visitor use.
Management actions would be taken
as needed to reduce visitor impacts on
vegetation and natural communities (see also
user capacity analysis provided in chapter 2).

Live Oak (Quercus virginianus), a native
species.

Potential development of limited new trails
(establishing a parallel trail to Freedom
Trail and extension of the multi-use trail
into the national historic site) would result
in a loss of habitat and native plants in the
localized areas where the trails would be
constructed. This would have long- and
short-term, minor, adverse effects. Potential
increases in limited trail development
would also result in an introduction of new
visitors in previously undisturbed areas of
the national historic site, as well as increase
the potential for spread of invasive species
via national historic site visitors. Under
Alternative C, visitors would be encouraged
to experience outlying national historic site
resources independently though formal
interpretive trails, causing an increased

The overall beneficial effects provided
by existing resource management efforts
and plans, establishment of management
zones, and increased national historic site
staff would slightly reduce adverse impacts
caused by new trail construction and use,
increased potential for off-trail impacts, and
spread of invasive species into previously
undisturbed areas of the national historic
site. Therefore, the overall effect on the
national historic site’s native vegetation
and natural communities as a result of
implementation of management actions
166

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

under Alternative C would be long- and
short-term, and beneficial.

adverse impacts to cultural resources may
extend well beyond implementation of
the general management plan. Because of
the comprehensive coverage and expected
longevity of this general management plan,
the area of potential effects considered for
the impact analyses consists of the entire
national historic site and its immediate
environs.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible, adverse effects. When the longand short-term, negligible, adverse effects
of other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects, and activities affecting vegetation
and natural communities are combined
the overall long- and short-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects would be considered
long- and short-term, and beneficial. The
overall effects of Alternative C would
contribute a modest increment to the overall
beneficial cumulative impact.

The NPS is the steward of many of America’s
most important cultural resources. These
resources are categorized as archeological
resources, cultural landscapes, ethnographic
resources, historic and prehistoric structures,
and museum collections. (NPS Management
Policies 2006)
These impact analyses are intended to
comply with the requirements of both
National Environmental Policy Act and
Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act. In accordance with the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation’s
regulations implementing Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (36 CFR
Part 800, Protection of Historic Properties),
impacts to cultural resources were also
identified and evaluated by (1) determining
the area of potential effects; (2) identifying
cultural resources present in the area of
potential effects that are either listed in or
eligible to be listed in the National Register
of Historic Places; (3) applying the criteria of
adverse effect to affected National Register
of Historic Places eligible or listed cultural
resources; and (4) considering ways to avoid,
minimize, or mitigate adverse effects.

Conclusions
Overall, management of the national
historic site under Alternative C would have
long-and short-term, beneficial effects on
vegetation and natural communities. When
the long- and short-term negligible, adverse
effects of other past, on-going, and future
plans, projects, and activities affecting
vegetation and natural communities are
combined the overall long- and shortterm, beneficial impacts of Alternative
C, the resulting cumulative effects would
be considered long- and short-term and
beneficial. The overall effects of Alternative
C would contribute a modest increment to
the overall beneficial cumulative impact.
CULTURAL RESOURCES

Under the Advisory Council’s regulations, a
determination of either adverse effect or no
adverse effect must also be made for affected
National Register of Historic Places listed
or eligible cultural resources. An adverse
effect occurs whenever an impact alters,
directly or indirectly, any characteristic
of a cultural resource that qualifies it for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places, e.g. diminishing the integrity (or

Methods
Impacts to cultural resources are described
in terms of type, context, duration, and
intensity, which is consistent with the
regulations of the Council on Environmental
Quality that implement the National
Environmental Policy Act. Cultural
resources are nonrenewable; therefore,
167

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

the extent to which a resource retains its
historic appearance) of its location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling,
or association. Adverse effects also include
reasonably foreseeable effects caused by
the alternatives that would occur later in
time, be farther removed in distance, or
be cumulative (36 CFR 800.5, Assessment
of Adverse Effects). A determination of
no adverse effect means there is an effect,
but the effect would not diminish the
characteristics of the cultural resource
that qualify it for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places.

adverse effects generally consume, diminish,
or destroy the original historic materials or
form, resulting in a loss in the integrity of
the resource that can never be recovered.
Therefore, although actions determined to
have an adverse effect under Section 106
may be mitigated, the effect remains adverse.
A Section 106 summary is included under
each impact analysis section for the two
action alternatives for archeological
resources, ethnographic resources, cultural
landscapes, and historic structures. The
Section 106 summary is an assessment of the
effect of the undertaking (implementation of
the alternative) based upon the criterion of
effect and criteria of adverse effect found in
the Advisory Council’s regulations.
The following issues related to cultural
resources were identified by the NPS, other
agencies, and the public during internal
and public scoping. (See chapter 2 for a
complete list of identified issues.)

Cultural resources are non-renewable.
Archeological surveys at the national
historic site are key to cataloging and
telling the story of the site’s history and its
peoples for future generations.
Credit: First Colony Foundation

Council on Environmental Quality
regulations and the NPS’s Conservation
Planning, Environmental Impact Analysis
and Decision Making (Director’s Order
12) also call for a discussion of mitigation,
as well as an analysis of how effective
the mitigation would be in reducing the
intensity of a potential impact, e.g. reducing
the intensity of an impact from major to
moderate or minor. Any resultant reduction
in intensity of impact due to mitigation,
however, is an estimate of the effectiveness
of mitigation under the National
Environmental Policy Act only. It does not
suggest that the level of effect as defined by
Section 106 is similarly reduced. Cultural
resources are non-renewable resources and

•

Cultural resource management in the
form of archeological research.

•

Management of the landscape at
Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site including its boundaries and
shorelines.

•

Interpretation of the historical
Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad stops at Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site.

•

African American history.

ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Impact Criteria and
Thresholds for Archeological Resources
Negligible: Impact is at the lowest level of
detection. Impacts would be measurable
but with no perceptible consequences. For
purposes of Section 106, the determination
of effect would be no adverse effect.

168

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

Minor: Disturbance of a site(s) results in
little loss of integrity. The determination of
effect for Section 106 would be no adverse
effect.

to affect sensitive archeological resources.
The Prince house is located on stilts in an
area subject to a high degree of erosion so
it is unlikely that any in situ archeological
materials would be found beneath the
house. However, demolition activities
involving heavy equipment and removal of
construction debris would likely affect the
area around the house by compressing and
disturbing soils, contributing to erosion,
disturbing archeological strata and possibly
exposing buried materials. The Beehive
house is situated on a raised concrete block
foundation, and archeological materials
could be present beneath and around
the structure. These resources could be
disturbed during razing of the house. Once
disturbed, archeological materials cannot
be replaced or replicated, and lose much
of their potential significance. Given the
previously disturbed nature of the area,
however, the potential for damage to
archeological resources from razing the
two structures would be relatively low.
Disturbance associated with demolition
activities could result in permanent,
negligible to minor, adverse impacts to
archeological resources.

Moderate: Site(s) is disturbed but not
obliterated. The determination of effect for
Section 106 would be adverse effect.
Major: Site(s) is obliterated. The
determination of effect for Section 106
would be adverse effect.
Duration:
Short-term: Impacts would 		
		
last less than five years.
		
Long-term: Impacts would 		
		
persist for five or more years.		
		
Permanent: Impacts would 		
		last indefinitely.
The NPS will incorporate information about
archeological resources into interpretive,
educational, and preservation programs.
Artifacts and specimens recovered from
archeological sites, along with associated
records and reports, will be maintained
together in the park museum collection.
(NPS Management Policies 2006)

Prior to razing the Prince and Beehive
houses, a survey for archeological resources
in the general vicinity of the affected
structures would be conducted. The
excavation, recordation, and mapping of
any significant cultural remains, if present,
would be completed prior to demolition
of the houses to ensure that important
archeological data that otherwise would be
lost is recovered and documented. These
actions would result in long-term beneficial
effects to archeological resources in the
general vicinity of the Prince and Beehive
houses.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
With continuance of existing management
practices into the future, two primary
factors—human actions and natural
processes—would contribute to permanent,
negligible to minor adverse effects on
the national historic site’s archeological
resources from loss of data and sites or
diminished site integrity. Adverse effects
would be permanent because cultural
resources are nonrenewable, and once
damaged or lost, cannot be restored.
Meanwhile, visitor education and national
historic site management actions would
result in long-term beneficial impacts.

Most on-going, routine maintenance
activities would likely be conducted in
previously disturbed areas, and national
historic site staff would work with an
awareness of the potential for subsurface
cultural resources to prevent resource
disturbance. Few, if any, permanent,

Under Alternative A, removal of the
Prince and Beehive houses and routine
maintenance would have a limited potential
169

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

negligible to minor, adverse impacts would
be anticipated. The national historic site
would continue to address vegetation
growth as it impacts foundations and grave
sites in Dough Cemetery, resulting in longterm beneficial effects.

Continued shoreline protection measures
instituted on the north shore of Roanoke
Island and continued maintenance of the
shoreline to protect site resources has
had both adverse and beneficial effects on
shorelines and archeological sites located
in the vicinity of these areas. The extent of
these effects to archeological resources is not
thoroughly understood at this time. Longterm beneficial effects may occur because
some archeological sites would be covered
by water and sand thereby protecting them.
Other archeological resources may be lost
due to erosion and wave action, causing
permanent, major, adverse effects. The
assessment of shoreline erosion effects
requires a comprehensive look at the
resources, measures, and consideration
of other related actions. The impacts of
shoreline erosion at the national historic
site would be addressed in a comprehensive
manner through the shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment. This
plan and other plans such as a resource
stewardship strategy and a fire management
plan would provide direction for the future
management of archeological resources
which would have long-term, beneficial
effects on archeological resources.

Permanent, minor, adverse impacts on
archeological resources from visitor
activities such as parking along roadways
and in grassy areas, off-trail visitor use
(including walking on the earthworks), and
unauthorized collecting would be expected
to continue to occur. Continued ranger
patrol and emphasis on visitor education,
regarding the significance and fragility of
such resources and how visitors can reduce
their impacts to them, would discourage
vandalism and inadvertent visitor impacts.
On-going NPS management efforts,
interpretation, and visitor education would
continue to have long- and short-term
beneficial effects to archeological resources,
but because of staff constraints, some
desired interpretive needs would not be met.
NPS management policies and programs
provide an umbrella of protection for
cultural sites by establishing proactive
procedures for their identification,
evaluation, management, and interpretation.
Protection of resources at the national
historic site is a high priority. These resource
protection and management activities would
be expected to continue at existing levels
but would be insufficient to protect all sites
from these threats, resulting in permanent
and minor, adverse effects and long-term
beneficial effects.

While benefits would accrue from national
historic site management actions to protect
and stabilize sites threatened by natural
processes or inappropriate visitor use,
management of the national historic site’s
archeological resources is complicated by
the fact that no parkwide systematic cultural
resources survey has been conducted.
Unknown, undocumented sites cannot
be protected, and such sites could suffer
unintentional permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse consequences.

Under Alternative A, NPS cultural resource
management plans, the Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site Long-Range Interpretive Plan,
and other management plans for the
Outer Banks Group and for Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site would continue
to have long-term beneficial effects on
archeological resources because they would
be inventoried, monitored, excavated,
nominated to the National Register,
protected, and interpreted to the public.

NPS archeologists would continue
to monitor the condition of known
archeological sites and would undertake
appropriate protection measures when
possible to reduce or avoid site impacts,
resulting in long-term benefits. However,

170

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

existing national historic site staff would not
be able to meet all the needs for managing
the complex cultural resources at the
national historic site.

archeological sites that are as yet unknown.
The NPS ensures that surveys are conducted
and resource mitigation measures address
any archeological sites during the periods of
construction. NPS surveys and mitigation
measures would provide long-term
beneficial effects.

Adverse effects of human actions and
natural processes would be permanent
and negligible to minor while long- and
short-term beneficial impacts would result
from visitor education and national historic
site management actions. Therefore, the
overall effect on the national historic site’s
archeological resources under Alternative
A would be permanent, negligible to minor,
and adverse as well as long- and short-term
and beneficial.

Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have permanent, moderate,
adverse and long-term beneficial impacts
on archeological resources. When the
permanent, moderate adverse and long-term
beneficial effects of other past, present, and
future plans, projects and activities affecting
archeological resources in the national
historic site and immediately surrounding
areas are combined with the permanent,
negligible to minor, adverse and long- and
short-term, beneficial impacts of Alternative
A, the resulting cumulative effects would be
permanent, minor, adverse and long- and
short-term beneficial. Alternative A would
contribute a small increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.

Cumulative Impacts
Within and in the vicinity of the national
historic site, the impacts of other actions
would contribute to cumulative impacts
on archeological resources, including the
following:
Ground-disturbing construction activities
have affected prehistoric and historic sites.
Past and on-going construction activities
such as the local and regional transportation
corridors, installation of a county waterline
along old Highway 64, recreational facilities,
housing, harbors, etc. modify, add to, or
destroy archeological sites, both within and
adjacent to the national historic site. Similar
losses of archeological resources across the
surrounding area have reduced the integrity
and the numbers and types of sites available
for research and interpretation, leaving a
somewhat skewed vision of past cultures for
future generations. Construction activities
in and around the national historic site have
resulted in permanent, moderate, adverse
effects to archeological resources.

Conclusions
Under Alternative A, effects of human
actions on archeological resources would
be permanent, negligible to minor, and
adverse. Long- and short-term beneficial
effects to archeological resources would
result from visitor education and national
historic site management actions. When the
permanent, moderate adverse and long-term
beneficial effects of other past, present, and
future plans, projects and activities affecting
archeological resources in the national
historic site and immediately surrounding
areas are combined with the permanent
negligible to minor adverse and long- and
short-term beneficial impacts in Alternative
A, the resulting cumulative effects would be
permanent, minor and adverse and longand short-term beneficial. Alternative A
would contribute a small increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

Future connection to the county waterline
and installation of new waterlines within
the national historic site would have the
potential for permanent, moderate, adverse
impacts on archeological resources as
there is the potential for disturbance to

171

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Impacts of Alternative B

of Historic Places eligibility. Results of the
investigations would help guide precise
locations and design of these new facilities
to ensure resource protection. This would
result in long-term beneficial effects on
archeological resources.

Many of the same management actions
and maintenance activities addressed
under Alternative A are also applicable to
Alternative B. However, under Alternative B,
much of the national historic site would be
included in a Resource Preservation Zone,
which would provide for increased emphasis
on resource preservation. Avoiding future
ground disturbance within the management
zone provides additional protection for
archeological resources.

As with Alternative A, NPS archeologists
would continue to monitor the condition
of known archeological sites and undertake
appropriate protection measures to reduce
or avoid site impacts, providing long- and
short-term, beneficial effects.

Alternative B includes limited grounddisturbing activities discussed in the analysis
of Alternative A (removal of the Prince
and Beehive houses) as well as extension
of existing trails, creation of new trails,
expansion of parking at headquarters (eight
spaces), vegetative screening along the road
to the Waterside Theatre, and construction
of a small outdoor seating area near the
reconstructed earthworks. The impacts of
ground disturbing activities would be the
same as described for Alternative A. That is,
impacts would be permanent, negligible to
minor, and adverse.

Under Alternative B, one additional
archeological investigation would be
conducted between Pear Pad Road and
the Heritage Point subdivision. This area
has not been investigated to the extent that
other areas of the national historic site have
and it has the potential to yield information
about island historical themes apart from
the Roanoke voyages and the Lost Colony.
These themes include the Native American
culture, the Antebellum period, the Civil
War, the Freedmen’s Colony, and the Works
Progress Administration camp. These
investigations would lead to long-term,
beneficial impacts because additional
archeological sites could be identified in
accordance with Section 110 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (which stipulates
that federal agencies identify and protect
cultural resources), and because subsequent
research and analyses could substantially
add to both the regional and national
knowledge of the people, places, and events
associated with the history of the area.

Development of formalized programs and
directional signs would encourage visitors
to stay on designated trails, helping to
reduce the potential for unauthorized use of
informal trails that cause resource damage
(e.g. reducing incidents of unauthorized
collecting and erosion that could expose
sites). While new trail construction could
inadvertently uncover archeological
resources, such trails could decrease the
potential for creation of informal trails and
subsequent loss of archeological materials.
This element of Alternative B would result in
long-term beneficial impacts.

When compared with Alternative A,
Alternative B would increase reliance on
partnerships, cooperative agreements, and
on-site visitor center facilities to interpret
important stories about this historic area.
Increased involvement of these entities and
enhanced interpretive opportunities would
tend to increase a sense of stewardship for
the national historic site’s archeological
resources, a long-term beneficial effect.

NPS managers, archeologists, historians and
partners would collaborate to ensure that
cultural resource investigations of proposed
project area(s) would be completed prior
to final project design, and that sites
located during these investigations would
be evaluated for their National Register
172

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

The overall effect to archeological
resources associated with implementation
of management actions proposed under
Alternative B would be permanent,
negligible to minor, adverse and long- and
short-term beneficial.

When the permanent, moderate, adverse
and long-term, beneficial effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting archeological resources
are combined with the permanent, negligible
to minor, adverse and long- and shortterm, beneficial effects of Alternative B,
the resulting cumulative effects would be
permanent, minor, adverse and long- and
short-term, beneficial. Alternative B would
contribute a small increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be permanent, moderate,
adverse and long-term beneficial effects.
When the permanent, moderate, adverse
and long-term, beneficial effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting archeological resources
are combined with the permanent, negligible
to minor, adverse and long- and shortterm, beneficial effects of Alternative B,
the resulting cumulative effects would be
permanent, minor, adverse and long-term,
beneficial. Alternative B would contribute
a small increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

Section 106 Summary

After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative B would not
result in an adverse effect to archeological
resources. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.
Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)

Conclusions

Designation of the majority of the national
historic site as a Resource Preservation
Zone would provide for a greater emphasis
on resource preservation compared to
Alternative A. Formalized programs and
directional signs would help reduce the
potential for creation of informal trails,
resulting in fewer incidents of unauthorized
collecting and erosion of off-trail areas.
These elements of Alternative C would result
in long-term, beneficial impacts.

Limited new construction activities
proposed under Alternative B have
the potential to encounter previously
undisturbed archeological resources.
However, archeological investigations,
careful design, and site avoidance would
help ensure that any permanent adverse
impacts resulting from new construction
under this alternative would be negligible to
minor. Increased reliance on partnerships
and others would increase stewardship,
benefitting archeological resources.
New archeological investigations
would provide data for future resource
protection and prioritization of cultural
resource treatments. The overall effect to
archeological resources associated with
implementation of management actions
proposed under Alternative B would be
permanent, negligible to minor, adverse and
long- and short-term, beneficial.

Alternative C also proposes removal of the
Prince and Beehive houses, construction
of a small outside seating area near the
reconstructed earthworks, extension of
existing trails, creation of new trails (as
discussed in Alternative B), addition of
vegetative screening and expansion of
parking at headquarters (eight spaces).
Heavily landscaped and maintained areas
would be restored to natural conditions or
converted to low maintenance plantings.
173

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

This work would be done in a sensitive
manner so as to not adversely affect
archeological resources.

basis for setting future priorities for site
protection, preservation and interpretation.
Alternative C would emphasize research on
the history and archeology of the national
historic site and the associated peoples and
events. This research and analysis would
substantially add to both the regional and
national knowledge of the people, places,
and events associated with the history of the
area. The combined actions of Alternative
C would result in permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse and long-term, beneficial
impacts to archeological resources.

Results of archeological investigations,
resource documentation, and site evaluation
would help identify areas to be avoided
during construction and revegetation. It is
anticipated that permanent, adverse impacts
to archeological resources resulting from
new construction activities under Alternative
C would be negligible to minor.
NPS archeologists would continue
to monitor the condition of known
archeological sites, and would undertake
appropriate protection measures to reduce
or avoid site impacts. Establishment of
on-going archeological excavations with
partner organizations would be beneficial
by broadening the national historic site’s
knowledge base and by involving others
in research, helping to build stewardship.
These actions would result in longterm beneficial impacts to archeological
resources.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be permanent, moderate,
adverse and long-term beneficial effects.
When the permanent, moderate adverse
and long-term beneficial effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting archeological resources
are combined the long-term, beneficial
impacts and the permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse impacts of Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects are expected
to be permanent, minor, and adverse and
long-term beneficial. Alternative C would
contribute a modest increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.

Additional annual archeological
investigations and data recovery would
be conducted in the following locations:
between the Elizabethan Gardens and the
Dough Cemetery; between the Thomas
Hariot trail and the Elizabethan Gardens;
and at the Works Progress Administration
camp. These areas have been investigated
the least over the years and have the
potential to yield information about island
historical themes apart from the Roanoke
voyages and the Lost Colony. These themes
include the Native American culture, the
Antebellum period, the Civil War, the
Freedmen’s Colony, and the Works Progress
Administration camp. These investigations
would have long-term beneficial effects
because additional archeological sites could
be identified in accordance with Section
110 of the National Historic Preservation
Act. Identification, documentation and
evaluation of sites in these areas would not
only increase knowledge about past human
use of the area, it also would provide a sound

Conclusions
The combined actions of Alternative C
would result in permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse and long-term, beneficial
impacts to archeological resources
Alternative C includes new construction
activities that have the potential of
encountering previously undisturbed
archeological resources. However,
archeological investigations, site
documentation, and evaluation would help
ensure that any permanent adverse impacts
resulting from new construction under this
alternative would be negligible to minor.
174

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

ETHNOGRAPHIC RESOURCES

Alternative C would include a greater
degree of new archeological investigations
and research compared to Alternative A,
resulting in increased beneficial impacts
by providing data that could be used in
establishing priorities for future protection,
preservation, and interpretation. The
overall range of actions proposed under this
alternative would have permanent, negligible
to minor adverse, and long-term, beneficial
impacts on archeological resources. When
the permanent, moderate adverse and
long-term, beneficial effects of other past,
ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting archeological resources
are combined the long-term, beneficial
impacts and the permanent, negligible to
minor, adverse impacts of Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects are expected to
be permanent, minor, adverse and long-term
beneficial. Alternative C would contribute a
modest increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

Impact Criteria and
Thresholds for Ethnographic Resources
Negligible: Impacts would be at the lowest
levels of detection and barely perceptible.
Impacts would neither alter resource
conditions, such as traditional access or
site preservation, nor alter the relationship
between the resource and the associated
group’s body of practices and beliefs. For
purposes of Section 106, the determination
of effect would be no adverse effect.
Minor: Impacts would be slight but
noticeable and would neither appreciably
alter resource conditions, such as traditional
access or site preservation, nor alter the
relationship between the resource and
the associated group’s body of beliefs and
practices. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Section 106 Summary

Moderate: Impacts would be apparent and
would alter resource conditions or interfere
with traditional access, site preservation, or
the relationship between the resource and
the associated group’s beliefs and practices,
even though the group’s practices and beliefs
would survive. For purposes of Section 106,
the determination of effect would be adverse
effect.

After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative C would not
result in an adverse effect to archeological
resources. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Major: Impacts would alter resource
conditions. Proposed actions would block
or greatly affect traditional access, site
preservation, or the relationship between
the resource and the associated group’s
body of beliefs and practices to the extent
that the survival of a group’s beliefs and/
or practices would be jeopardized. For
purposes of Section 106, the determination
of effect would be adverse effect.

The variety and arrangement of cultural and
natural features in a landscape often have
sacred or other continuing importance in
the ethnic histories and cultural vigor of
associated peoples. These features and their
past and present-day uses will be identified,
and the beliefs, attitudes, practices,
traditions, and values of traditionally
associated peoples will be considered in
any treatment decisions. (NPS Management
Policies 2006)

Duration:
		

175

Short-term: Impacts would 		
last less than five years.
Long-term: Impacts would 		
persist for five or more years.
Permanent : Impacts would 		
last indefinitely.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative

historic site. This would result in long-term,
beneficial effects associated with increased
knowledge concerning these resources.
When the long-term, minor to moderate,
adverse effects and long-term, beneficial
effects of other past, ongoing, and future
plans, projects and activities affecting
ethnographic resources are combined with
long-term, beneficial impacts of Alternative
A, the resulting cumulative effects are
expected to be long-term, minor, and
adverse. Alternative A would contribute a
modest increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

A long-range interpretive plan was
completed for the national historic site in
2010. This plan guides the interpretation
of the national historic site’s human and
natural history with a modestly expanded
content and range of interpretive
programming. Because ethnographic
resources at the national historic site consist
mainly of associations of people to ancestors
connected to events and historical eras at
the national historic site rather than tangible
resources, new exhibits and enhanced
interpretation would serve to strengthen
these associations. These changes would
be especially important to those African
Americans who trace their heritage back to
the Freedmen’s Colony or the Underground
Railroad. The anticipated enhancement to
ethnographic associations, whether based
on new scholarship or simply an expanded
awareness, knowledge, or pride, would
result in long-term, beneficial impacts to
ethnographic resources.
Cumulative Impacts

A ranger-led interpretive program held at
the First Light of Freedom Memorial.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site and
surrounding area has had human inhabitants
from many different cultures, ranging
from the earliest prehistoric peoples to the
Freedmen’s Colony to Civil War soldiers
to 20th century settlers. Past effects on
ethnographic resources have been both
positive and negative. That is, despite the
fact that all of these cultural histories and
stories cumulatively contribute to the
importance of this site, and its archeological
remains and archival documents provide
physical evidence of their presence, it is
only in the past quarter century that the
strong ethnographic ties of some of these
groups have been recognized. This lack of
recognition and interpretation constitutes
a long-term, minor to moderate, adverse
effect. An ethnographic overview and
assessment would be completed to formally
identify and document the ethnographic
resources associated with the national

Conclusions
Alternative A would result in long-term,
beneficial effects to ethnographic resources
by means of strengthened connections
made through new exhibits and enhanced
interpretation based on the long-range
interpretive plan. When the long-term,
minor to moderate adverse effects and
long-term, beneficial effects of other past,
ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting ethnographic resources
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative A, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative A
would contribute a modest increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

176

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

Impacts of Alternative B

interpretation that would strengthen the
linkage between the national historic site and
its resources and African Americans tracing
their heritage to the Freedmen’s Colony or
Underground Railroad. When the longterm, minor to moderate, adverse effects
and long-term, beneficial effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting ethnographic resources
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative B
would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.

Under Alternative B, emphasis would
be placed on an expanded interpretive
mission. Part of the expanded interpretative
program would include increased coverage
of stories at the national historic site other
than the Roanoke Voyages (which would
be the emphasis of the Roanoke Island
Historical Association). In this scenario,
greater opportunity would exist for national
historic site visitors to learn about African
American history relevant to the area. Given
this change, the existing ethnographic
resource conditions, i.e. linkage of the
national historic site to African Americans
tracing their heritage back to the Freedmen’s
Colony or Underground Railroad, would
likely be strengthened. Alternative B would
result in a long-term beneficial impact to
ethnographic resources due to the expanded
interpretive mission and the likelihood
of strengthening existing linkages and
relationships.

Section 106 Summary
After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative B would not
result in an adverse effect to ethnographic
resources. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects and long-term,
beneficial effects. When the long-term,
minor to moderate adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting ethnographic resources
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative B
would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Under Alternative C, research on the history
and archeology of the national historic
site and the associated peoples and events
would be emphasized. Archeology would
be a central focus of ongoing research and
the addition of a historian to the staff would
provide opportunities to create closer
links with African Americans and Native
Americans who have cultural ties to the area.
In this alternative, a greater reliance is placed
on partnerships with groups such as the
First Colony Foundation, Roanoke Island
Historical Association, Roanoke Island
Festival Park, the North Carolina Maritime
Museum, The Elizabethan Gardens,
and the University of North Carolina. In
this scenario, given the strong focus on
archeology and research, opportunities for

Conclusions
Alternative B would have long-term,
beneficial impacts on ethnographic
resources, resulting from an expansion of

177

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

national historic site visitors to learn about
the Freedmen’s Colony and Underground
Railroad also expand. (See “Visitor Use and
Experience” for a more detailed analysis.)
Ethnographic resource conditions (that
is, the linkage of the national historic
site to African Americans tracing their
heritage back to the Freedmen’s Colony or
Underground Railroad) would likely expand
and improve compared to existing practices
under Alternative C. As such, Alternative C
would result in long-term, beneficial impacts
to ethnographic resources.

would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.
Section 106 Summary
After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative C would not
result in an adverse effect to ethnographic
resources. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long-term, minor to
moderate, adverse effects and long-term,
beneficial effects. When the long-term,
minor to moderate, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting ethnographic resources
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative C
would contribute a modest increment
to reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.

The treatment of a cultural landscape
will preserve significant physical attributes,
biotic systems, and uses when those uses
contribute to historical significance.
(NPS Management Policies 2006)
CULTURAL LANDSCAPE
Impact Criteria and
Thresholds for the Cultural Landscape
Negligible: Impacts would be at the lowest
levels of detection-barely perceptible and
measurable. For purposes of Section 106,
the determination of effect would be no
adverse effect.

Conclusions

Minor: Impacts would affect characterdefining features or patterns but would
not diminish the overall integrity of the
landscape. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Alternative C would have long-term,
beneficial effects on ethnographic resources.
Addition of a historian to the staff would
provide opportunities for closer links to
ethnographic groups with ties to this area,
and expanded interpretation opportunities
would include the Freedmen’s Colony and
Underground Railroad. When the longterm, minor to moderate, adverse effects
and long-term, beneficial effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting ethnographic resources
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative C

Moderate: Impacts would alter characterdefining features or patterns, diminishing
the overall integrity of the landscape to the
extent that its National Register eligibility
would be jeopardized. For purposes of
Section 106, the determination of effect
would be adverse effect.
Major: Impacts would alter characterdefining features or patterns, diminishing
178

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

the overall integrity of the landscape to the
extent that it would no longer be eligible
to be listed on the National Register. For
purposes of Section 106, the determination
of effect would be adverse effect.

plan, in addition to the Cultural Landscape
Inventory, would provide direction for the
future management of the cultural landscape
which would have long-term, beneficial
effects.

Duration:
Short-term: Impacts would
		
last less than five years.
		
Long-term: Impacts would
		
persist for five or more years.
		
Permanent : Impacts would
		last indefinitely.

Alternative A would result in long-term,
beneficial impacts to the cultural landscape
within the national historic site because of
continued protection of its contributing
elements.
Cumulative Impacts

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative

The vegetation of the national historic site
has undergone extensive changes due to
human intervention and natural processes.
Roadways, trails, and buildings have been
added, modified or removed. Non-native
plants were introduced, often resulting
in changes in native plant populations.
Archeological elements of the cultural
landscape may not be visible, yet many may
remain hidden below the ground surface.
Erosion and vegetation growth also have
changed the appearance of area shorelines.
Each period of human habitation and use in
this area brought a corresponding change in
the buildings, infrastructure, transportation
corridors, vegetation, and other component
elements of the area, resulting in the
present-day cultural landscape.

Under Alternative A, limited management
actions have been identified that would
affect the cultural landscape within the
national historic site. These actions include
possible targeted shoreline erosion control
measures to protect Dough Cemetery and,
possibly, removal of introduced/invasive
species from the national historic site
that may have, at one time, been part of
an earlier landscape. Although Dough
Cemetery cannot be considered individually
for National Register of Historic Places
inclusion, it is a contributing element to
the cultural landscape within the national
historic site. Continuation of shoreline
erosion control efforts to protect the
cemetery would result in long-term,
beneficial impacts to this element of the
cultural landscape. Archeological elements
of the landscape remain as well. (See also
discussion of archeological resources in
this chapter for more information on these
resources.)

Cultural landscapes evolve over time, and
it is clear that the past, ongoing, and future
plans, projects, and activities affecting the
cultural landscape of the national historic
site have resulted in both long-term,
beneficial and long-term, moderate, adverse
impacts. When the long-term, beneficial
and long-term, moderate, adverse effects
of other past, ongoing, and future plans,
projects and activities affecting the cultural
landscape are combined with long-term,
beneficial impacts of Alternative A, the
resulting cumulative effects are expected
to be long-term, minor, and adverse.
Alternative A would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impacts.

Assessment of shoreline erosion effects
requires a comprehensive look at the
resources, measures, and consideration
of other related actions. The impacts of
shoreline erosion at the national historic
site would be addressed in a comprehensive
manner through the shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment. This
plan and other plans such as a resource
stewardship strategy and a fire management
179

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

earthworks. Increased interpretive activity
would improve stewardship of the cultural
landscape, thereby reducing visitor impacts.
The overall impact of these projects and
proposed management action on the
cultural landscape would be long-term and
beneficial.

Conclusions
Alternative A would result in long-term,
beneficial impacts to the cultural landscape
within the national historic site because of
continued protection of its contributing
elements including Dough Cemetery. When
the long-term, beneficial and long-term,
moderate, adverse effects of other past,
ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting the cultural landscape
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative A, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative A
would contribute a small increment to
reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.
Impacts of Alternative B
Similar to Alternative A, possible targeted
shoreline erosion measures to protect
Dough Cemetery would be included in
Alternative B and would result in a longterm, beneficial impact to this contributing
element of the cultural landscape by
offering protection from erosion. Other
actions in Alternative B that would
affect the cultural landscape include the
construction of a small outdoor seating
area near the reconstructed earthworks;
trail improvements; expansion of parking
at headquarters (eight spaces); and the
establishment of vegetative screening
along the road to the Waterside Theatre.
The proposed new construction projects
would neither affect topography nor
appreciably alter the landscape’s spatial
organization, land use patterns, historic
structures, circulation systems, or views
and vistas. Any adverse impacts would be
negligible to minor and long-term. The
proposed outdoor seating area would be
small in size and designed to be contextsensitive. Establishment of vegetation along
the road leading to the Waterside Theatre
would be a long-term benefit because
it would minimize or screen distracting
vehicle movements from visitors who are
experiencing the nearby reconstructed

The Dough Cemetery is evidence of the
farming- and fishing-based community that
persisted on Roanoke Island throughout the
1800s.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long-term, moderate,
adverse and long-term, beneficial effects.
When the long-term, beneficial and longterm, moderate, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting the cultural landscape
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative B
would contribute a small increment to
reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.
Conclusions
Alternative B includes several actions that
would affect the cultural landscape, ranging
180

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

from the protection of Dough Cemetery
to potential construction of an outdoor
seating area, trail modifications, expansion
of parking at headquarters (eight spaces),
and the addition of vegetative screening.
These actions would have an overall longterm, beneficial effect on the landscape.
When the long-term, beneficial and longterm, moderate, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting the cultural landscape are
combined with long-term, beneficial impacts
of Alternative B, the resulting cumulative
effects are expected to be long-term, minor,
and adverse. Alternative B would contribute
a small increment to reduce the overall
adverse cumulative impacts.

benefit to the cultural landscape and instill
greater stewardship of cultural resources.

Section 106 Summary

When viewed in totality, the respective
impacts associated with Alternative C would
result in greater long-term, beneficial effects
to the cultural landscape compared to
Alternative A.

Under Alternative C, heavily landscaped
and maintained areas would be reduced in
size and affected areas would be restored
to natural conditions or converted to
low maintenance plantings. The Cultural
Landscape Inventory report considers
Mission 66-era vegetative plantings to be
a contributing element to the national
historic site’s overall eligibility as a cultural
landscape. As such, any reduction in Mission
66 vegetation would result in a long-term,
minor, adverse impact. Invasive species
would continue to be monitored and
controlled as funding allowed.

After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative B would not
result in an adverse effect to the cultural
landscape. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long-term, moderate,
adverse and long-term, beneficial effects.
When the long-term, beneficial and longterm, moderate, adverse effects of other
past, ongoing, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting the cultural landscape
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative C, the resulting
cumulative effects are expected to be longterm, minor, and adverse. Alternative C
would contribute a small increment to
reduce the overall adverse cumulative
impacts.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
As with Alternatives A and B, this alternative
includes possible targeted shoreline
erosion control measures to protect Dough
Cemetery, which would result in a longterm, beneficial impact to this contributing
element of the cultural landscape.
Alternative C also includes new walking
trails and a small outdoor seating area
near the reconstructed earthworks. These
proposed construction projects would not
appreciably alter overall vistas, historic
structures, or circulation patterns that
are included in the cultural landscape.
Improved signage and interpretive programs
would provide additional information to
visitors that would provide a long-term

Conclusions
The overall effect of implementation of
management actions proposed under
Alternative C would have greater longterm, beneficial effects than Alternative
A. The cumulative impacts to the cultural
landscape would be the same as described
181

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

in Alternative A. When the long-term,
beneficial and long-term, moderate, adverse
effects of other past, ongoing, and future
plans, projects and activities affecting the
cultural landscape are combined with longterm, beneficial impacts of Alternative C,
the resulting cumulative effects are expected
to be long-term, minor, and adverse.
Alternative C would contribute a small
increment to reduce the overall adverse
cumulative impacts.

Long-term: Impacts would 		
persist for five or more years.
Permanent : Impacts would 		
last indefinitely.
The Service will collect, protect, preserve,
provide access to, and use objects,
specimens, and archival and manuscript
collections in the disciplines of archeology,
ethnography, history, biology, geology, and
paleontology to aid understanding among
park visitors, and to advance knowledge in
the humanities and sciences.
(NPS Management Policies 2006)

Section 106 Summary
After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative C would not
result in an adverse effect to the cultural
landscape. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
Under an approved and funded project
included in all alternatives, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site would design and
install new exhibits for the recently repaired
and renovated Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center. Modern, interactive exhibits would
meet current NPS guidelines outlined in
the Museum Handbook: Museum Collection
Use and the Americans with Disabilities Act
standards for quality, scope, content, and
design. These exhibits would be in accord
with the recommendations of the national
historic site’s long-range interpretive plan.
These improvements to the display and
interpretation of museum collections
would help ensure the “well-being” and
long-term preservation of data and archival
materials while improving the usefulness of
the collection. Alternative A would result in
long-term, beneficial effects to the museum
collections interpreted at the national
historic site.

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS
Impact Criteria and
Thresholds for Museum Collections
Negligible: Impact is at the lowest levels
of detection — barely measurable with no
perceptible consequences.
Minor: Impact(s) would affect the integrity
of few items in the museum collection
but would not degrade the usefulness
of the collection for future research and
interpretation.
Moderate: Impact(s) would affect the
integrity of many items in the museum
collection and diminish the usefulness
of the collection for future research and
interpretation.

Over time, collections used as part of an
interpretive display have been damaged by
such factors as light, moisture, incorrect
handling, heat, insects, and mice and other
vermin, a long-term, minor adverse effect. By
installing modern exhibit facilities, displayed
artifacts and archival materials would be
better protected from these threats in the
future, a long-term benefit. There would

Major: Impact(s) would affect the integrity
of most items in the museum collection and
destroy the usefulness of the collection for
future research and interpretation.
Duration:
		

Short-term: Impacts would 		
last less than five years.
182

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

The overall effects of implementing
Alternative B on museum collections would
be long-term and beneficial.

be no focused effort to conduct research,
survey sites, or expand partnerships that
would benefit from museum collections.
This would not affect the capacity or status
of the existing museum collections, resulting
in no effect to museum collections.

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would
result in cumulative impacts on museum
collections.

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would
result in cumulative impacts on museum
collections.

Conclusions
Alternative B would have long-term,
beneficial impacts to displayed museum
collections resulting from improvements
in Lindsay Warren Visitor Center facilities.
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would
result in cumulative impacts on museum
collections.

Conclusions
Alternative A would have long-term,
beneficial effects on museum collections
resulting from installation of new, improved
exhibits at the national historic site’s
renovated visitor center. There are no other
past, ongoing, or future plans, projects, or
activities that would result in cumulative
impacts on museum collections.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
Additional annual archeological
investigations and data recovery conducted
between the Elizabethan Gardens and the
Dough Cemetery; between the Thomas
Hariot trail and the Elizabethan Gardens;
and at the Works Progress Administration
camp; could, potentially, increase holdings
within the collection even more so than
in Alternative A, resulting in a long-term,
beneficial impact. In addition, any items
recovered would be accessioned and
cataloged, preserved, protected, and made
available for access and use according to
NPS standards and guidelines.

Impacts of Alternative B
As discussed in the analysis for Alternative
A, new exhibits for the recently repaired
and renovated Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center would improve the display and
interpretation of museum collections, and
would result in greatly improved conditions
for data and archival materials under
Alternative B. These actions would result
in long-term, beneficial effects on museum
collections.
One additional archeological investigation
between Pear Pad Road and the Heritage
Point subdivision included in Alternative
B could increase holdings within the
collection; these items would be accessioned
and cataloged, preserved, protected, and
made available for access and use according
to NPS standards and guidelines. Expanded
interpretive activities would increase visitor
awareness and support for the management
and preservation of museum collections,
resulting in long-term, beneficial effects.

As discussed in the analysis for Alternative
A, new exhibits for the recently repaired
and renovated Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center would improve the display and
interpretation of museum collections, and
would result in greatly improved conditions
for data and archival materials under
Alternative C. These actions would result
in long-term, beneficial effects on exhibited
collections.

183

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Moderate: Impacts would alter a characterdefining feature(s), diminishing the overall
integrity of the building or structure to the
extent that its National Register eligibility
could be jeopardized. For purposes of
Section 106, the determination of effect
would be adverse effect.

Expanded education, research and
interpretive activity and increased
partnering would improve the use of
the collections and sharing of resources,
knowledge and appreciation of museum
collections. This would increase visitor
awareness and support for the management
and preservation of museum collections,
resulting in additional long-term, beneficial
effects. Improvements in the visitor center
and its exhibits under Alternative C would
also have a long-term beneficial effect on
displayed items.

Major: Impacts would alter characterdefining features, diminishing the integrity
of the building or structure to the extent that
it would no longer be eligible to be listed
on the National Register. For purposes of
Section 106, the determination of effect
would be adverse effect.

The overall effects of implementing
Alternative C on museum collections would
be long-term and beneficial.

Duration:
		

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would
result in cumulative impacts on museum
collections.

Short-term: Impacts would 		
last less than five years.
Long-term: Impacts would 		
persist for five or more years.
Permanent : Impacts would 		
last indefinitely.

The treatment of historic and prehistoric
structures will be based on sound
preservation practice to enable the longterm preservation of a structure’s historic
features, materials, and qualities. (NPS
Management Policies 2006)

Conclusions
The overall effects of implementing
Alternative C on museum collections would
be long-term and beneficial. There are no
other past, ongoing, or future plans, projects,
or activities that would result in cumulative
impacts on museum collections.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
In accordance with the Secretary of
Interior’s Standards and as funding permits,
the national historic site would continue
to carry out preservation of its historic
structures through routine maintenance
and upkeep to arrest deterioration and to
retain as much of the historic integrity of
these structures as possible. These measures
would have long-term, beneficial effects.

HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Impact Criteria and
Thresholds for Historic Structures
Negligible: Impacts would be at the lowest
levels of detection – barely perceptible and
measurable. For purposes of Section 106,
the determination of effect would be no
adverse effect.

Past, on-going, and future NPS cultural
resource management plans, the long-range
interpretive plan, and other management
plans for the Outer Banks Group and for
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
continue to have long-term beneficial
effects on historic structures because they

Minor: Impacts would affect characterdefining features but would not diminish
the overall integrity of the building or
structure. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.
184

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

and long-term, beneficial effects to historic
structures from implementation of existing
management plans. There are no other
past, ongoing, or future plans, projects, or
activities that would result in cumulative
impacts on historic structures.

provide park staff with the framework and
guidance necessary to ensure continued,
proper identification, evaluation, treatment,
and interpretation of the historic structures
within the national historic site. These
and other past and future management
plans, along with the ongoing maintenance
conducted by NPS staff, would continue
to provide long-term benefits to historic
structures.

Impacts of Alternative B
The structures would generally remain
as they exist now, undergoing routine
maintenance with no substantial impact to
their historic fabric, integrity, or characterdefining features other than the typical
effects of aging and natural processes. These
measures would have long-term, beneficial
effects and the effects of aging and natural
processes would result in permanent,
negligible, adverse impacts. However,
historic structures within the Resource
Preservation Zone would be somewhat
better protected from possible effects of
any future activity than under Alternative A.
Therefore, implementation of Alternative B
would result in both long-term, beneficial
and permanent, negligible, adverse impacts
to historic structures.

Assessment of shoreline erosion effects
requires a comprehensive look at the
resources, measures, and consideration
of other related actions. The impacts of
shoreline erosion at the national historic
site would be addressed in a comprehensive
manner through the shoreline erosion
management plan and related National
Environmental Policy Act assessment. This
plan would provide direction for the future
management of resources which would
have long-term, beneficial effects on historic
structures.
Historic structures would generally remain
as they exist now, undergoing routine
maintenance with no substantial impact to
their historic fabric, integrity, or characterdefining features other than the typical
effects of aging and natural processes. These
measures would have long-term, beneficial
effects and the effects of aging and natural
processes would result in permanent,
negligible, adverse impacts. Alternative
A would result in permanent, negligible,
adverse effects and long-term, beneficial
effects to historic structures.

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would result
in cumulative impacts on historic structures.
Conclusions
Alternative B includes no specific actions
that would lead to substantial changes to
the national historic site’s historic structures
other than the typical effects of aging and
natural processes, a permanent, negligible,
adverse impact. With continued protection
of these resources, especially within the
Resource Protection Zone, implementation
of Alternative B would also result in
long-term, beneficial impacts to historic
structures. There are no other past, ongoing,
or future plans, projects, or activities that
would result in cumulative impacts on
historic structures.

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would result
in cumulative impacts on historic structures.
Conclusions
Continuation of existing management
actions under Alternative A would result in
permanent, negligible, adverse impacts from
the effects of aging and natural processes,
185

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

past, ongoing, or future plans, projects, or
activities that would result in cumulative
impacts on historic structures.

Section 106 Summary
After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative B would
not result in an adverse effect to historic
structures. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Section 106 Summary
After applying the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation’s criteria of adverse
effects (36 CFR Part 800.5, Assessment of
Adverse Effects), the NPS concludes that
implementation of Alternative C would
not result in an adverse effect to historic
structures. For purposes of Section 106, the
determination of effect would be no adverse
effect.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
As with Alternative A, historic structures
would generally remain as they exist now,
undergoing routine maintenance with no
substantial impact to their historic fabric,
integrity, or character-defining features
other than the typical effects of aging and
natural processes, resulting in permanent,
negligible adverse impacts. The increased
emphasis on partnerships and research in
the national historic site would contribute
to the knowledge base of the national
historic site. Partnerships may provide
additional resources that would benefit
historic structures through enhanced
stewardship and increased educational
awareness of historic structures within the
national historic site. Both these elements
of Alternative C would be expected to lead
to long-term, beneficial effects. Alternative
C would therefore result in long-term,
beneficial and permanent, negligible adverse
impacts to historic structures within the
national historic site.

Enjoyment of park resources and values
by the people of the United States is part of
the fundamental purpose of all parks. (NPS
Management Policies 2006)
VISITOR USE AND EXPERIENCE
Methods
Visitor use and experience issues identified
during public meetings and planning
workshops generally included: (1) improving
interpretive and directional signage; (2)
assessing the adequacy of visitor facilities;
(3) improving access to the sound; and
(4) improving efforts to partner with
organizations to provide resource protection
and interpretive programming. To address
these issues, an assessment of the effects of
proposed national historic site management
actions on visitor use and experience was
made using qualitative estimates, and the
effects were compared to Alternative A. In
addition, information on visitor use and
experience was evaluated based on available
research and the professional judgment of
NPS staff. The area analyzed for possible
effects on visitor use and experience
includes the entire national historic site.

Cumulative Impacts
There are no other past, ongoing, or future
plans, projects, or activities that would result
in cumulative impacts on historic structures.
Conclusions
Alternative C would result in long-term,
beneficial and permanent, negligible,
adverse impacts to historic structures within
the national historic site. There are no other

The major assumptions used in the analysis
of effects on visitor use and experience
are: (1) under Alternative A, the existing
186

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

of the alternative and would likely express
a strong opinion about the change. Visitor
satisfaction would markedly change.

management direction for visitor experience
would be extended into the future, including
existing interpretive programming; (2)
increased visitor use could potentially
translate to greater impacts to national
historic site resources; (3) impacts to
visitor use as a direct result of shoreline
erosion would be addressed under a
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental impact assessment; and (4)
differences between beneficial and adverse
effects to visitor use and experience would
depend on individual expectations and
personal preferences; therefore, a range of
intensity of effect is reported to reflect the
spectrum of differences.

Duration:

Long-term: Changes would
be recognized for more than
one year.
Short-term: Changes would
be recognized for less than
one year.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
Under Alternative A, past, on-going, and
planned implementation of NPS resource
management, interpretive plans, and other
plans, such as the long-range interpretive
plan, resource stewardship strategy, and
shoreline erosion management plan, would
continue to have long-term, beneficial
effects on visitor use and experiences
at the national historic site. These plans
would provide guidance for interpretive
planning and resource protection that, when
implemented, would help address visitor
use and experience issues identified during
scoping. Coordinated efforts for regional
planning allow for increased partnering
and outreach to the community at large
to also address visitor use and experience
issues identified. This would have longterm, beneficial impacts. (A summary of
these other past, present and future plans is
included in chapters 1 and 2.)

Impact Threshold Definitions
Impact threshold definitions for visitor use
and experience are as follows:
Negligible: Visitors would likely be
unaware of any effects associated with
implementation of the alternative. There
would be no noticeable change in visitor use
and experience or in any defined indicator
of visitor satisfaction or behavior.
Minor: Changes in visitor use and/or
experience would be slight but detectable,
but would not appreciably diminish or
enhance the desired visitor experience.
Visitor satisfaction would remain stable.
Moderate: Few characteristics of the
desired visitor experience would change
and/or the number of participants engaging
in an activity would be altered. Visitors
would be aware of the effects associated with
implementation of the alternative and would
likely express an opinion about the changes.
Visitor satisfaction would begin to change as
a direct result of the effect.

The Lost Colony outdoor symphonic
drama and programs and events held by
The Elizabethan Gardens would continue
to occur into the future. The events and
programs result in long-term, beneficial
impacts on visitor use and experience.
The popularity of these events, however,
increases traffic into the national historic
site and parking constraints do occur during
peak times. Parking constraints would be
expected to continue into the future under
similar peak conditions, resulting in longand short-term, minor, adverse impacts on
visitor experience.

Major: Multiple characteristics of the
desired visitor experience would change
and/or the number of participants engaging
in an activity would be greatly reduced or
increased. The visitor would be aware of
the effects associated with implementation
187

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

The national historic site would design
and install new exhibits for the recently
repaired and renovated Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center. Modern, interactive exhibits
that meet current NPS and Americans with
Disabilities Act standards for quality, scope,
content and design would be provided
in accordance with recommendations
of the national historic site’s long-range
interpretive plan which was approved in
May 2010. These improvements would
improve visitor services with long-term,
beneficial effects.

agreements that would increase and enhance
resource protection and interpretive
programs, materials, and signage. The overall
effect of management actions proposed
under Alternative A on visitor use and
experience would be considered long-term,
minor to moderate, and adverse.

The national historic site’s boundary and
research and interpretive purpose were
expanded under PL 101-603 in 1990. Under
Alternative A, the national historic site would
continue to interpret the Roanoke Voyages
with limited opportunities to address
expanded interpretive themes through films,
exhibits, and other methods at the Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center and throughout the
national historic site. Interpretive activities
would continue to be limited as there would
be no increases in interpretive staff at the
national historic site. This would continue
to challenge the ability of the existing staff
to address this growing need, with resulting
long-term, moderate, adverse effects.

The Waterside Theatre filled to its 1,498
seat capacity during a summer production.

Cumulative Impacts
Other past, ongoing, and foreseeable
projects, plans, and activities that would
contribute to cumulative impacts on visitor
use and experience, including the following:
Completion of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service’s Administrative Headquarters and
Visitor Center Facility at Alligator River
National Wildlife Refuge would provide
visitors to Roanoke Island opportunities to
learn about the region’s natural history and
other interpretive themes not interpreted by
the national historic site, resulting in longterm, beneficial effects.

Under Alterative A, no new facilities would
be constructed by Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. The NPS would continue
to centralize visitor orientation services
at the Lindsay Warren Visitor Center.
Interpretation of the national historic
site’s modestly expanded interpretive
themes would continue to occur through
media, exhibits, and other methods at the
Lindsay Warren Visitor Center and from
selected areas within the national historic
site as existing staffing resources allow. The
national historic site would maintain their
current staffing levels. Current partnering
efforts would continue into the future, and
there would likely be future constraints
to meeting future demands. The level of
current staffing is inadequate to conduct
sufficient outreach to potential partners
and subsequently to develop partnering

Potential for military training operations
(overflights) and expansion of Dare County
Regional Airport runways to accommodate
small jet traffic may detract from some
visitors’ experiences at the national historic
site. These activities may cause unwanted
sound and disturb some visitors in the
national historic site, with long- and shortterm, minor, adverse effects. In addition,
increased vehicle traffic associated with
188

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

Town of Manteo events and activities at
other regional attractions may also impact
national historic site visitors by increasing
the time it takes to access the national
historic site, yet this would occur primarily
during special events causing long-and
short-term, minor, adverse effects.

national historic site would attempt to retain
more visitors on-site through expanded
interpretive efforts, facilities, partnering, and
availability of food services at the national
historic site. Interpretive signage would
be installed that would aid in clarifying
circulation patterns on national historic
site trails. A small outdoor seating area
would be established to provide interpretive
programming near the reconstructed
earthworks. Additional staff members
would be proposed to help maintain,
interpret, and protect national historic site
resources. Expanded partnerships would
provide visitors with an opportunity to
learn theatrical skills, address opportunities
for event collaboration, and expand visitor
experiences. Potential use of the Arts-inParks program would provide visitors the
opportunity to explore national historic
site resources in combination with the
performing arts. Alternative B provides
increased opportunities to improve and
maintain visitor satisfaction by addressing
the issues identified during scoping. The
overall effect of management actions
proposed under Alternative B on visitor use
and experience would be long- term and
beneficial.

Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse impacts on
visitor use and experience.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting visitor use and access
are combined with the long-term, minor to
moderate, adverse impacts of Alternative
A, the resulting cumulative effects would be
long- and short-term, minor, and adverse.
Alternative A would contribute a modest
increment to the overall cumulative impacts.
Conclusions
The overall effect of management actions
proposed under Alternative A to visitor
use and experience would be considered
long-term, minor to moderate, and adverse.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting visitor use and access
are combined with the long-term, minor
to moderate adverse impacts of Alternative
A, the resulting cumulative effects would
continue to be long- and short-term, minor,
and adverse. Alternative A would contribute
a modest increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, and adverse effects.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting visitor use and access
are combined with the long-term beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects would be long-term and
beneficial. Alternative B would contribute
a large increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

Impacts of Alternative B
All the studies and planning efforts to
provide improved access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be the
same as described in Alterative A, providing
long-term, beneficial effects. In addition,
other long- term, beneficial effects under
Alternative B would be provided. The
189

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

would provide visitors with opportunities
to experience outlying resources
independently. Interpretive trails would
be improved with signage that clarifies
circulation patterns.

Conclusions
The overall effect of management actions
proposed under Alternative B on visitor use
and experience would be long-term and
beneficial. When the long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, adverse effects of other
past, on-going, and future plans, projects
and activities affecting visitor use and access
are combined with the long-term, beneficial
impacts of Alternative B, the resulting
cumulative effects would be long-term and
beneficial. Alternative B would contribute
a large increment to the overall cumulative
impacts.

The NPS would also expand partnering
opportunities with other historical, tourismoriented organizations on Roanoke Island,
and other organizations thereby providing
an opportunity to reach more people and
share the stories about Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site and its rich cultural and natural
resources, resulting in long-and short-term
beneficial effects. Alternative C provides
increased opportunities to improve and
maintain visitor satisfaction by addressing
the issues identified during scoping through
the measures identified above. Alternative
C provides additional advantages in the
national historic site’s abilities to address
visitor concerns compared to Alternative
A, with resulting long- and short term
beneficial effects.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
All the studies and planning efforts to
provide better access, safety, and visitor
orientation on Roanoke Island would be
the same as described in Alternative A,
providing long-term, beneficial effects. In
addition, other long- term, beneficial effects
under Alternative C would be provided.
The national historic site would continue to
centralize orientation in the Lindsay Warren
Visitor Center and provide opportunities
for visitors to interact with archeologists,
historians, and researchers at the national
historic site, providing long- and shortterm benefits to visitors. Implementation of
the NPS researcher-in-the-park program
would have long- and short-term beneficial
effects by providing visitors the opportunity
to further explore national historic site
resources through research conducted on
site. Under Alternative C, additional staff
are proposed to help maintain, protect, and
interpret national historic site resources.
Included in the proposed additional staff is
an historian that would initiate, schedule,
and manage on-site research and provide
input for interpretation efforts, thereby
providing opportunities to benefit more
visitors in the long- and short-term. A small
outdoor seating area would be established
to provide interpretive programming near
the reconstructed earthworks. Creation
of interpretive trails with themed areas

The overall effect of management actions
proposed under Alternative C on visitor use
and experience would be long- and shortterm, and beneficial.
Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long- and short-term,
negligible to minor, and adverse effects.
When the long- and short-term, negligible
to minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting visitor use and experience
are combined with the long- and shortterm, beneficial impacts of Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longterm and beneficial. Alternative C would
contribute a large increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.

190

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

To address these issues, an assessment of
the effects of projected national historic
site management actions on operations was
made using qualitative measurements, and
the impacts were compared to Alternative
A. In addition, information on national
historic site operations was evaluated based
on the professional judgment of NPS staff.
The area analyzed for possible effects as
well as cumulative effects includes the entire
national historic site.

Conclusions
The overall effect of management actions
proposed under Alternative C on visitor use
and experience would be long- and shortterm, and beneficial. When the long- and
short-term, negligible to minor, and adverse
effects of other past, on-going, and future
plans, projects and activities affecting visitor
use and access are combined with the longterm beneficial impacts of Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longterm and beneficial. Alternative C would
contribute a large increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.

Major assumptions used in the analysis of
effects on national historic site operations
were that: (1) increased visitor use and
access to the national historic site could
potentially translate to a greater strain on
national historic site staff; (2) increased
education and interpretive programs and
increased partnering and/or research
initiatives would strain operations without
an increase in staff; (3) expansion of the
trail system would require increased staff
requirements including maintenance and
enforcement; (4) removal of the Prince and
Beehive houses would reduce maintenance
demands on staff as these areas are returned
to a natural state across all alternatives; and
(5) protection of sensitive resources from
shoreline erosion would require increased
maintenance demands on national historic
site staff.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
shares staff across the Outer Banks Group
that provide a full scope of functions and
activities to accomplish management
objectives and perform duties that include
resource protection and management,
visitor services, interpretation and education,
law enforcement, public health and safety,
and maintenance.

PARK OPERATIONS AND FACILITIES
Methods
This impact topic refers to the ability of NPS
staff to protect and preserve natural and
cultural resources at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site and provide opportunities for
enjoyable visitor experiences while leaving
national historic site resources unimpaired
for future generations, and the efficiency and
effectiveness with which NPS staff are able
to perform tasks. Issues related to operations
identified during public comment periods
and planning workshops generally
included: (1) the need for additional staff to
maintain facilities; (2) the desire to pursue
new partnerships with organizations to
enhance research, resource protection, and
interpretation; and (3) concerns associated
with the adequacy of existing facilities.

Although increased staffing and funding
are proposed under the action alternatives,
it should be noted that implementation
of the approved plan would depend on
future funding and servicewide priorities.
Approval of a general management plan
does not guarantee that funding and staffing
needed to implement the plan would be
forthcoming. Full implementation of the
general management plan could be many
years into the future.
Impact Threshold Definitions
Impact threshold definitions for park
operations are as follows:

191

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Negligible: Management actions would be
at or below levels of detection and would
not have an appreciable effect on national
historic site operations.

national historic site operations. Official
designation of the Fort Raleigh Maritime
Forest Significant Natural Heritage Area may
require increased management activities in
primary and secondary areas of concern
to maintain desired conditions, resulting in
long-term, minor, adverse effects to national
historic site operations as staff workloads are
adjusted to maintain the designated area.

Minor: Management actions would affect
operations in a way that would be difficult to
measure. Impacts on staff workload would
be short-term, with little material effect
on other on-going national historic site
programs. The change would be noticeable
to staff but not to the public.

Continued maintenance and protection
of shorelines may cause additional staffing
demands causing long-term, minor, adverse
impacts to national historic site operations.
By allowing natural processes to prevail in
most areas, excavation of cultural resources
in high erosion areas may be required,
including the potential relocation of Dough
Cemetery. Continued shoreline protection
measures instituted on the north shore of
Roanoke Island and continued maintenance
of the shoreline to protect national historic
site resources would have both long- and
short-term, minor, adverse and beneficial
effects on national historic site staff. The
impacts of shoreline erosion at the national
historic site would be addressed in a
comprehensive manner through the Outer
Banks Group shoreline erosion management
plan and related National Environmental
Policy Act assessment. Future resource
management decisions associated with
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental assessment.

Moderate: Changes in national historic site
operations would be readily apparent and
would have appreciable effects on national
historic site operations that are noticeable to
the staff and the public.
Major: Changes in national historic site
operations would be readily apparent
and would result in substantial changes in
national historic site operations that are
noticeable to the staff and public and are
markedly different from existing operations.
Duration:

Long-term: Changes would
be recognized for more than
one year.
Short-term: Changes would
be recognized for less than
one year.

Impacts of Alternative A, the No-action
Alternative
Under Alternative A, past, on-going, and
future NPS resource management and
interpretive plans (resource stewardship
strategy, fire management plan, and shoreline
erosion management plan) completed
for the Outer Banks Group including
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site would
continue to affect operations as each plan
is implemented. (A summary of these other
past, present and future plans is included
in chapters 1 and 2.) Completion and
implementation of a resource stewardship
strategy would identify resources of
management concern and establish methods
to evaluate and maintain those resources,
providing long-term beneficial effects to

In addition, completion of a fire
management plan would provide
management strategies to manage fuel
loading and protect national historic
site resources and surrounding lands.
Implementation of a fire management
plan would result in long-term beneficial
effects to national historic site operations
as management actions would reduce the
potential for resource damage and resulting
maintenance efforts. The current staffing
level is not adequate to meet the national
historic site’s operational and maintenance
demands and also fully support future
natural and cultural resource planning
192

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

The national historic site would maintain
existing partnerships with the Roanoke
Island Historical Association and the
First Colony Foundation. Expansion of
existing partnerships or development of
new partnerships would not likely occur
under Alternative A. The current level
of staff would be inadequate to perform
outreach to potential partners and to
develop partnerships that would provide
opportunities for new visitor services or
expand interpretive activities that would
benefit the national historic site, its staff and
visitors. Overall, continued management
actions under Alternative A would have a
long- and short-term, moderate, adverse
effect on national historic site operations.

efforts discussed above, resulting in longand short-term, minor, adverse affects to
national historic site operations.
Existing vehicle-use trends associated with
the continued production of The Lost Colony
and events and activities at The Elizabethan
Gardens would be expected to continue,
creating additional enforcement challenges
during peak summer seasons. Parking and
traffic enforcement at the national historic
site would cause short-term, moderate,
adverse effects to limited enforcement staff
thereby adversely affecting operations.
Under Alternative A, no new facilities
would be constructed within the national
historic site boundary. Current levels of
operation and maintenance would continue
into the future. National historic site staff
would continue to strive to meet visitor
needs and desires, yet would continue to be
constrained by funding and staff availability.
Removal of the Prince and Beehive houses
proposed under all alternatives would
require intensive staff resources during the
removal activity, and reduce maintenance
demands on staff over the long-term as
these areas are returned to a more natural
state, providing beneficial effects to staff
availability and maintenance operations at
the national historic site.

Cumulative Impacts
Completion of the construction of the
Administrative Headquarters and Visitor
Center Facility, Alligator River National
Wildlife Refuge may attract additional
visitors to the national historic site, thus
increasing the need for interpretation and
other visitor services. The opposite may be
true however, as more visitors may opt to
spend their time at Alligator River visitor
facilities and choose not to visit the national
historic site. However, the magnitude of
impact on Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site’s visitor services provided by NPS staff
is unknown at this time.

The national historic site’s boundary and
research and interpretive mission were
expanded under PL 101-603 in 1990. Under
Alternative A, the national historic site would
continue to interpret the Roanoke Voyages
with limited opportunities to address
expanded interpretive themes through films,
exhibits, and other methods at the Lindsay
Warren Visitor Center and throughout the
national historic site. The current level of
interpretive staff would be inadequate to
produce the kinds of interpretive materials
and programs that would meet the longterm expanded interpretive program
demands created by PL 101-603, causing
long-term, moderate, adverse effects.

Potential future development of parcels
adjacent to the national historic site would
cause additional opportunities for the
spread of invasive species that would require
management efforts to control. This would
have short-term, minor, adverse impacts to
national historic site operations.
Increased vehicular traffic, local events,
and activities at other regional attractions
could have spill-over effects on the national
historic site, with potential increases in
visitation. This would have short-term,
minor, adverse impacts to operations
because existing staff would not be able
to address increased demands for visitor
193

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

services, maintenance, interpretative and
enforcement activities.

proposed under Alternative B would provide
necessary maintenance availability to
implement resource plan recommendations
resulting in long- and short-term, beneficial
effects.

Collectively, past, ongoing, and future
actions would have short-term, minor,
adverse impacts on national historic site
operations.

Under Alternative B, limited new facilities
(extension of the Roanoke Island multiuse trail, parallel trail to Freedom Trail,
expansion of parking at headquarters
(eight spaces), and small outdoor seating
area) would provide visitors with increased
interpretive and recreational opportunities,
thus potentially increasing visitation or the
length of stay of individual visitors to the
national historic site. Visitor use of new
trails and the seating area would increase
maintenance and enforcement efforts over
the long-term. Construction of limited new
facilities would cause short-term, minor,
adverse impacts to staff that would be
required to oversee such activities, thereby
taking them away from other assigned
duties. Increased staffing demand associated
with peak summer visitation and limited
new facilities under Alternative B would be
reduced by an additional law enforcement
and maintenance staff, providing long-term
beneficial effects. Additionally, a partnerfunded feasibility study and assessment
of a range of alternatives for the design
and construction of a partner-funded and
operated visitor center annex would occur
under Alternative B. This action would cause
a short-term, negligible, adverse impact on
national historic site staff during review and
coordination of the feasibility study.

When the short-term, minor, adverse effects
of other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects and activities affecting national
historic site operations are combined with
long- and short-term, moderate, adverse
effects on national historic site operations
in Alternative A, the resulting cumulative
effects would be long- and short-term,
moderate, and adverse. Alternative A would
contribute a large increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.
Conclusions
Overall, continued management actions
under Alternative A would have a longand short-term, moderate, adverse effect
on national historic site operations. When
the short-term, minor, adverse effects of
other past, on-going, and future plans,
projects and activities affecting national
historic site operations are combined with
long- and short-term, moderate, adverse
effects on national historic site operations
in Alternative A, the resulting cumulative
effects would be long- and short-term,
moderate, and adverse. Alternative A would
contribute a large increment to the overall
cumulative impacts.
Impacts of Alternative B

Under Alternative B, the national historic
site would maintain and enhance existing
partnerships and establish new partnerships
for interpretive and theatrical education
purposes. Increased partnering would
likely provide additional resources to the
national historic site that would benefit
overall operations over the long- and shortterm. The national historic site would rely
more upon the Roanoke Island Historical
Association to tell the story of the Roanoke
Voyages, whereas the NPS would interpret
other themes and provide self-guided

The establishment of management zones
under Alternatives B provides effective
means to improve operations. Management
zones aid national historic site staff in
decision-making, resource management,
and enforcement. The establishment of
management zones would provide longterm beneficial effects to national historic
site operations. Plans discussed under
Alternative A would also be applicable to
Alternative B. However, additional staffing
194

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

minor, adverse effects. When the long- and
short- term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, on-going, and future plans, projects
and activities affecting national historic site
operations are combined with long- and
short-term, beneficial effects on national
historic site operations in Alternative B, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longand short-term, and beneficial. Alternative
B would contribute a large increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

interpretive opportunities on existing trails
and potential NPS Arts-in-Parks program
offerings. Additional interpretive staff would
be proposed to support the expanded
interpretive service program efforts and
inspire visitors to remain at the national
historic site for longer periods of time.
One additional archeological investigation
between Pear Pad Road and the Heritage
Point subdivision would also have the
potential to increase the responsibilities of
cultural resources staff and increase museum
collections management efforts. This would
have projected short-term, minor, adverse
effects.
Removal of the Prince and Beehive houses
proposed under all alternatives would
require intensive staff resources during the
removal activity, and reduce maintenance
demands on staff over the long-term as
these areas are returned to a more natural
state. This action would have short-term,
minor adverse effects to national historic
site operations and long-term beneficial
effects. Native vegetation plantings near
headquarters and the maintenance area
would reduce maintenance demands
on national historic site staff. Shoreline
protection would continue to occur and
be maintained at the Waterside Theatre
and Dough Cemetery which would require
continued monitoring by the existing staff
at the national historic site. Future resource
management decisions associated with
shoreline erosion would be deferred to the
shoreline erosion management plan and
environmental assessment.

The Lindsey Warren Visitor Center is a
6,000-square-foot facility that provides
access to park staff and volunteers that
orient visitors to Roanoke Island through
exhibits, artifacts, and a 17-minute national
historic site video. Credit: Doug Stover

Conclusions
Overall, continued management actions
under Alternative B would have a long- and
short-term beneficial effect on national
historic site operations. When the long- and
short-term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, on-going, and future plans, projects
and activities affecting national historic site
operations are combined with long- and
short-term, beneficial effects on national
historic site operations in Alternative B, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longand short-term, and beneficial. Alternative
B would contribute a large increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

Overall, management actions proposed
under Alternative B would have long- and
short-term beneficial effects on national
historic site operations.
Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are
the same as described under Alternative
A. There would be long-and short-term,
195

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

parks and organizations. Alternative C
would also seek to expand partnerships with
other tourism-oriented organizations on
Roanoke Island. New partnerships would
be developed with research organizations
that could provide research efforts on
other national historic site topics (beyond
the Roanoke Voyages), both cultural and
natural. Enhanced research opportunities
would continue through the partnership
with the First Colony Foundation and
others, for interpretive, archival, and
research purposes. These partnerships
would have long-term, beneficial effects to
national historic site operations as resources
would be made available to cooperatively
address operational needs.

Impacts of Alternative C
(NPS Preferred Alternative)
The establishment of management zones
under Alternatives C provides effective
means to improve operations. Management
zones aid national historic site staff in
decision-making, resource management,
and enforcement. The establishment of
management zones would provide longterm beneficial effects to national historic
site operations. Plans discussed under
Alternative A would also be applicable to
Alternative C. However, additional limited
staffing proposed under Alternative C
would provide maintenance availability to
implement resource plan recommendations,
resulting in long-and short-term, negligible,
adverse effects.

Under Alternative C, research efforts
would be managed by a full-time historian
that would initiate, schedule, and manage
research activities. Additional annual
archeological investigations and data
recovery would be conducted in the
following locations: between the Elizabethan
Gardens and the Dough Cemetery;
between the Thomas Hariot trail and the
Elizabethan Gardens; and at the Works
Progress Administration camp. Addition of
the historian would benefit operations in the
long-term.

Alternative C provides for limited new
facilities that include the extension of the
Roanoke Island multi-use trail, a parallel
trail to Freedom Trail, expansion of parking
at headquarters (eight spaces), and a small
outdoor seating area near the reconstructed
earthworks. Additional trails and seating
area would provide visitors with increased
interpretive and recreational opportunities,
thus increasing visitation within the national
historic site. Visitor use of new trails would
increase maintenance and enforcement
efforts over the long-term. Construction
of limited new facilities would cause
short-term, minor, adverse impacts to
national historic site staff. Additional law
enforcement and maintenance staff would
reduce increased staffing demand associated
with peak summer visitation and new
facilities under Alternative C.

Removal of the Prince and Beehive houses
proposed under all alternatives would
reduce maintenance demands on national
historic site staff as these areas are returned
to a more natural state. There would be an
increase in short-term demands on staff
during the removal; however, long-term
maintenance demands would be reduced,
with long-term, beneficial effects. Native
vegetation plantings near headquarters
and the maintenance area would reduce
maintenance demands on national historic
site staff. Shoreline protection would
continue to occur and be maintained at the
Waterside Theatre and Dough Cemetery
increasing demand on national historic
site staff; however natural processes would
continue to prevail in most areas. Future
resource management decisions associated

Under Alternative C, the national historic
site would implement recommendations
of the national historic site’s long-range
interpretive plan that includes improving
communication with partners, working
closely with partners to integrate interpretive
programming, continuing to host
archeological research, and coordinating
interpretive programming with other local

196

Chapter 4: Environmental Consequences

with shoreline erosion would be deferred
to the shoreline erosion management plan
and environmental assessment. Overall,
management actions proposed under
Alternative C would be long- and short-term
and beneficial.

available to the NPS with regard to managing
each park. An alternative is required to
allow for sustainable development, which
is defined as an action that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their
needs (World Commission on Environment
and Development in NPS 2001). This
section addresses the following three
components of the sustainability assessment
for the alternatives proposed in this general
management plan: adverse impacts that
cannot be avoided, relationship of shortterm uses and long-term productivity, and
irreversible and irretrievable commitments
of resources.

Cumulative Impacts
Impacts associated with other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable actions are the
same as described under Alternative A.
There would be short-term, minor, adverse
effects. Potential impacts to national historic
site operations Alternative C would be longand short-term and beneficial. When the
short-term, minor, adverse effects of other
past, on-going, and future plans, projects
and activities affecting national historic site
operations are combined with long- and
short-term, beneficial effects on national
historic site operations in Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longand short-term, and beneficial. Alternative
C would contribute a large increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

ADVERSE IMPACTS THAT
CANNOT BE AVOIDED
Unavoidable adverse impacts are those
environmental consequences of an action
that cannot be avoided, either through
mitigation or by changing the nature of the
action.
The NPS defines adverse impacts as those
that cannot be fully mitigated or avoided.
Some negligible to moderate, adverse effects
on natural and cultural resources would be
essentially unavoidable (e.g., soil erosion,
vegetation trampling or vegetation growth
on historic structures); however, the majority
of adverse effects may be mitigated or
avoided. There are no major, adverse effects
to cultural and natural resources identified
that are associated with implementation of
the management actions proposed under
any of the alternatives (A, B, or C).

Conclusions
Overall, continued management actions
under Alternative C would be long- and
short-term beneficial. When the shortterm, minor, adverse effects of other past,
on-going, and future plans, projects and
activities affecting national historic site
operations are combined with long- and
short-term, beneficial effects on national
historic site operations in Alternative C, the
resulting cumulative effects would be longand short-term, and beneficial. Alternative
C would contribute a large increment to the
overall cumulative impacts.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
LOCAL SHORT-TERM USES
AND LONG-TERM PRODUCTIVITY

SUSTAINABILITY AND
LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT

The NPS must determine if the effects of
project alternatives involve trade-offs of the
long-term productivity and sustainability
of national historic site resources for
the immediate short-term use of those
resources. It must also consider if the
effects of the alternatives are sustainable

The National Environmental Policy Act (sec.
101(b)) and the NPS Organic Act require
an assessment of the potential for each
alternative to produce long-term effects and
the potential of foreclosing future options
197

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

nonrenewable resources and the effects
that the uses of these resources would have
on future generations. Irreversible effects
primarily result from the use or destruction
of a specific resource (e.g., energy and
minerals) that cannot be replaced within a
reasonable time frame. Irretrievable resource
commitments involve the loss in value of an
affected resource that cannot be restored
as a result of the action (e.g., extinction of
a threatened or endangered species or the
disturbance of a cultural site). Excluding
the expenditure of resources for limited
construction purposes, there are no other
irreversible or irretrievable commitments of
resources associated with implementation
of the management actions proposed under
any of the alternatives (A, B, or C).

over the long-term without causing future
adverse environmental effects (National
Environmental Policy Act Section 102(c)
[IV]). None of the alternatives suggest
substantial loss or impairment of natural or
cultural resources as a consequence of their
implementation.
IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE
COMMITMENTS OF RESOURCES
The National Environmental Policy Act
requires that environmental analysis include
identification of “. . .any irreversible and
irretrievable commitments of resources
which would be involved in the proposed
action should it be implemented.”
Irreversible and irretrievable resource
commitments are related to the use of

198

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 5: CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION
The external scoping process provided
early identification of concerns, issues,
expectations, and values of existing and
potential visitors, neighbors, cooperating
associations, partners, scientists, scholars,
and other government agencies. Public
scoping meetings were advertised in August
2003. The public was invited to voice
issues and suggest ideas for the future of
the national historic site at three public
scoping meetings held on August 19, 20,
and 21, 2003, at the Dare County Public
Library (August 19) and The Elizabethan
Gardens conference room in Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site (August 20 and 21).
Press releases were issued prior to the public
meetings, and comment cards and Internet
addresses were provided for public use.

In this chapter...
•
•

Public Involvement
Consultations and Agency
Involvement

PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
Scoping is an early and open process for
determining the scope of a proposed action
or project and for identifying issues related
to the project. During scoping for this
general management plan / environmental
impact statement, NPS staff provided
an overview of the project, including
purpose and need and preliminary issues.
The public has been involved and was
asked to submit comments, concerns, and
suggestions relating to the project and
preliminary issues. The notice of intent to
prepare an environmental impact statement
was published in the Federal Register on
December 17, 2004.

A scoping letter was mailed to local, state,
American Indian Tribal Governments and
federal agency representatives, members
of Congress, and the public in February
2004 and July 2011. The scoping letter
contained information on the purpose and
need for the general management plan,
summary of the planning process to date,
and methods available to the public for
communicating with the NPS planning team
and participating in the planning effort,
including public meeting locations and
times.

The public had varied avenues by which it
participated during development of the plan:
participating in public meetings, responding
to newsletters, and submitting comments
on the national historic site’s website by
e-mail or letter. Input from the interested
public, organizations, and local, state, and
federal agencies was gathered throughout
the planning process. At the beginning of
the process, both internal NPS and external
input was obtained. Input gathered during
scoping was used to develop the alternatives
and assess and compare the effects of
management alternatives.

Meetings were held with stakeholders
March 9, 10, and 11, 2004, in the
conference room of the Outer Banks Group
Headquarters Building. These meetings
were accompanied by public open house
meetings, held March 10 and 11, 2004, at
Roanoke Island Festival Park in Manteo,
North Carolina. Stakeholders included
representatives from neighborhood
groups, visitors, and interested agencies
and organizations. Information regarding
the general management planning process
was also provided at the visitor center. Park
staff also provided information to visitors
regarding how to comment. A newsletter
describing the general management plan /
environmental impact statement process

Internal scoping consisted of initial
identification of issues by NPS staff based on
what they had encountered with respect to
managing park resources and experiences
with visitors who enjoy the national historic
site. An NPS staff scoping meeting was held
on October 2, 2002, at national historic site
headquarters to obtain initial input into the
process.
201

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

was prepared and distributed in the spring
of 2004.

agencies, any substantive comments on
the draft document, and NPS responses to
those comments. Following distribution
of the Final General Management Plan /
Environmental Impact Statement and a 30day no-action period, a Record of Decision
approving a final plan will be prepared for
signature by the NPS southeast regional
director. The record of decision documents
the NPS selection of an alternative for
implementation. Implementation of the plan
can proceed upon final approval.

Two public scoping comment periods
(conducted between August 2003 and
February 2004) were open for over 30
days, and 10 meetings were held with
the interested public and stakeholders to
obtain public comment. Approximately 122
comments were received during scoping.
The majority of comments pertained
to facilities, partnering, interpretation/
programming, resource management, and
commercial services. Issues identified are
summarized in chapter 1.

The general management plan /
environmental impact statement, newsletters
and other information is posted on the
Internet at the NPS planning website: http://
parkplanning.nps.gov/fora.

A second newsletter was prepared and
distributed in May 2007 that described
how the management alternatives were
developed based on agency and public
input, and announced public meetings to
present the preliminary alternatives. These
public meetings were conducted June 19 and
20, 2007. The alternatives were presented to
the interested public during three meetings
conducted at the Lindsay Warren Visitor
Center Auditorium, located 3 miles north
of Manteo, North Carolina on June 19 and
20, 2007. Press releases were issued prior
to the public meetings; fliers and signs were
posted to announce the meetings. Comment
forms were provided, and the public was
notified how to comment via the Internet.
The comment period on the preliminary
alternatives for the general management plan
was extended to September 30, 2007.

CONSULTATION WITH
OTHER AGENCIES/OFFICIALS
AND ORGANIZATIONS
In addition to the consultation described
above, additional consultation with agencies
was conducted prior to completing the draft
general management plan / environmental
impact statement. Agency coordination
letters are included in Appendix D.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800 and the
Programmatic Agreement between the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation,
the National Conference of State Historic
Preservation Officers, and the NPS, a letter
was sent to the North Carolina State Historic
Preservation Officer (February 2004)
and to the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (July 2011) to inform them a
general management plan / environmental
impact statement planning process was
underway for Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site and to initiate consultation with them.
The letters invited them to participate in
the planning process by reviewing and
commenting on the general management
plan / environmental impact statement. The
North Carolina Department of Cultural
Resources, State Historic Preservation
Office acknowledged receipt of the NPS’s

The Next Steps
Following the distribution of the Draft
General Management Plan / Environmental
Impact Statement, there will be a 60day public review and comment period
after which the NPS planning team will
evaluate comments from other federal
agencies, organizations, businesses, and
individuals regarding the draft plan. The
team will incorporate appropriate changes
into a Final General Management Plan /
Environmental Impact Statement. The final
plan will include letters from governmental
202

Chapter 5: Consultation and Coordination

coordination letter and their intent to
comment on the document upon availability.

is required, unless the federal agency
determines, with the written concurrence
of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the
National Marine Fisheries Service, that the
proposed action is not likely to adversely
affect any listed species or critical habitat.
It is NPS policy to survey for, protect, and
strive to recover all native species that are
listed under the Endangered Species Act.

While Section 106 summaries are included
for each alternative in the impact analysis
chapter (chapter 4) for archeological
resources, ethnographic resources, cultural
landscapes, and historic structures, the level
of detail regarding the actions proposed
in the alternatives is not sufficient to meet
§106 requirements as outlined under 36
CFR 800. The Section 106 summaries are
a preliminary determination of the effects
the proposed actions will have on cultural
resources. The national historic site will have
to complete formal Section 106 consultation
with the North Carolina State Historic
Preservation Office and Advisory Council
on Historic Preservation as needed, on the
proposed actions in the general management
plan / environmental impact statement
before implementing them.

In accordance with Section 7 of the
Endangered Species Act (16 USC 1531
et seq.), the NPS contacted the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service by letter to initiate
consultation regarding threatened and
endangered species. The North Carolina
Wildlife Resources Commission, Division
of Wildlife Management, Nongame &
Endangered Wildlife was also contacted by
letter. Consultation letters were also sent
to the Environmental Protection Agency,
Region 4, and other agencies. Responses
have not been received. A list of agencies
contacted is provided in the section that
follows.

Federal regulations for the implementation
of Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended,
require consultation with federally
recognized American Indian tribes (36 CFR
800.2) on a government-to-government
basis, as specified in Executive Order 13175.
Consultation letters were sent to the Eastern
Band of Cherokee, Cherokee Nation,
Tuscarora Nation, and United Keetoowah
Band of Cherokee Indians. A sample
consultation letter is included in Appendix
D. Responses have not been received.

A scoping session is held at the national
historic site.

The North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources,
Division of Coastal Management responded
to the NPS acknowledging that the NPS will
provide the rationale for consistency with
the Coastal Zone Management Act upon
transmittal of the general management plan /
environmental impact statement.

PUBLIC AND AGENCY INVOLVEMENT
The draft general management plan /
environmental impact statement for Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site represents
thoughts of the NPS and the public.
Consultation and coordination among
the agencies and the public were vitally
important throughout the planning
process. The public had four primary
avenues by which it participated during the

In accordance with 50 CFR 402(a), federal
agencies are required to review all actions
to determine whether an action may affect
listed species or critical habitat. If such a
determination is made, formal consultation
203

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

•

development of the plan: participation in
public meetings, responses to newsletters,
comments submitted through the Planning,
Environment, and Public Comment system
(PEPC) (available on the internet at http://
parkplanning.nps.gov/fora), and comments
submitted through the mail.

•
•
•
•
•

AGENCIES, ORGANIZATIONS, AND
INDIVIDUALS RECEIVING A COPY OF
THIS DOCUMENT OR NOTIFICATION
OF AVAILABILITY

Organizations and Businesses

Federal Agencies
•
•
•
•

•

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Raleigh
Ecological Services Field Office
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Region 4
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

American Indian Tribal Governments
•
•
•
•

Eastern Band of Cherokee, Cherokee,
North Carolina
Cherokee Nation, Tahlequah, Oklahoma
Tuscarora Nation, Lewistown New
York
United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee
Indians, Tahlequah, Oklahoma

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Leadership and Officers
of the North Carolina Legislature
•
•
•
•
•

The Honorable Marc Basnight, NC State
Legislature
Office of Congressman Walter B. Jones
The Honorable William Culpepper, NC
State Legislature
Office of Senator John Edwards
Office of Senator Elizabeth Dole

Other State and Local
Government Officials
•
•

Dare County Manager
Town of Manteo, Mayor

National Parks and Conservation Association
Friends of Roanoke Island
The Wilderness Society
The Elizabethan Gardens of the Garden
Club of North Carolina
Nags Head Woods Preserve
Sierra Club, North Carolina Chapter
University of Virginia
College of the Albermarle
Taft and Taft Law Firm
East Carolina University
North Carolina Audubon Society
North Carolina Aquarium
Eastern National Parks and Monuments
Association
Virginia Company Foundation
New York University, Department of
History
Enviro-Services, Inc.
James River Institute for Archeology
Center for Biological Diversity
The Coastland Times
Roanoke Island Business Association
Island Breeze
The Elizabethan Gardens, Inc.
Defenders of Wildlife
Outer Banks History Center
Heritage Point Properties
The Lost Colony, Executive Manager
White Doe Inn
University of Illinois, English Department

Media

State and Local Agencies
•
•

North Carolina State Historic Preservation Office
Dare County Schools
Dare County Commission
North Carolina Underwater Archeology
Unit
Outer Banks Visitors Bureau
North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission, Division of Wildlife Management, Nongame & Endangered
Wildlife

•

NC Division of Coastal Management
Outer Banks Chamber of Commerce
204

Outer Banks Sentinel

Chapter 5: Consultation and Coordination

LIST OF PREPARERS
Information summarizing the names and experience for the preparers is listed in Table 16.
Table 16. List of Preparers
Name

Degree

Professional Discipline

Years of Experience

National Park Service, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
John Anglin

B.S. Wildlife Biology and Operations Chief for the DiviEcology
sion of Law Enforcement and
Emergency Services

30

Bridget Bohnet

B.A. Recreation Management

Bodie Island District Ranger

18

Josh Boles

B.A. Philosophy

Supervisory Park Ranger

5

Rob Bolling

B.S. History

Park Ranger

22

Thayer Broili

M.S. Environmental
Management

Chief of Resource Management

38

Mary Doll

B.A. Outdoor Recreation Chief of Interpretation
B.S. Criminal Justice

30

Darrell Echols

B.S. Marine Biology

Deputy Superintendent

22

Ellen Hand

B.A. Pre-law

Administrative Officer (Former)

28

Cyndy Holda

B.A. Parks & Recreation/ Public Affairs Specialist
Physical Education

30

Mike Murray

B.A. Biology

Superintendent (retired)

33

Paul Stevens

B.S. Parks and Conservation Management

Chief of Law Enforcement
and Emergency Services

27

Doug Stover

M.A. Landscape Architecture

Historian

30

Barclay Trimble

B.B.A. Accounting

Superintendent

21

John Wescott

B.A. Political Science
and History

Facility Operations Specialist

35

Angela Woody

Certificate Business
Communication

Budget Analyst

18

National Park Service, Denver Service Center
Greg Cody
B.A. History, M.A. His(reviewed GMP/EIS) tory

Cultural Resource Technical
Specialist

19

Pam Holtman
B.A. Economics, M.A.
(reviewed GMP/EIS) History

Cultural Resource Specialist,
Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative

11

Ryan Sharp
(responsible for
User Capacity section)

Visitor Use Specialist (former)

2

NEPA Technical Specialist and
Natural Resource Specialist

32

Ph.D. Natural Resources
Management

Paul Wharry
B.A. Biology
(reviewed GMP/EIS)

205

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table 16. List of Preparers
Name

Degree

Professional Discipline

Years of Experience

National Park Service, Southeast Regional Office
David Libman

B.AE (Aerospace Engineering), M.C.P. (Master of City Planning/
Environmental Planning
Emphasis)

Park Planner

38

Ben West

B.S. Biology, M.S. Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology

Division Chief

20

Amy Wirsching

M.S. Natural Resources,
B. Design Architecture

Community Planner

8

Steve Bach

Ph.D., Botany, M.S.,
Botany, B.S., Biology

Principal Scientist (Retired)

37

Alyse Getty

B.A. Environmental
Science, B.A. Political
Science

Project Manager

31

Drew Getty

MCRP, Environmental
Planning, B.S. Environmental and Natural
Resource Management

Environmental Planner

4

Ivie Goorsky

B.S. Mechanical Engineering

Senior Engineer (PE)

8

John Hoesterey

M.A. Geography,
Regional Planning and
Economics
B.A. Zoology

Technical Director

35

Cortnie Lewis

B.S. Zoology
M.S Wildlife Science

Scientist

12

Alexa Miles

M.S. Landscape Architecture
B.A. Environmental
Studies

Environmental Planner

9

Diane Rhodes

M.A. Anthropology, B.S. Senior Cultural Resource
Elementary Education
Specialist

35

Seth Wilcher

M.H.P. Historic Preserva- Cultural Resource Specialist
tion,
B.S. History / Education

6

Parsons

206

This page intentionally left blank.

REFERENCES
Butterfliesandmoths.org
N.D.

Culver S.F., C.A.G. Pre, D.J. Mallinson, S.R.
Riggs, D.R. Corbett, J. Foley, M. Hale, L.
Metger, J. Ricardo, C.G. Smith, C.W. Smith,
S.W. Snyder, and D. Twamley

Butterflies and Moths of
North America, Collecting
and Sharing Data About
Lepidoptera. Hosted by the
Big Sky Institute at Montana
State University. Available on
the internet at: http://www.
butterfliesandmoths.org/
species/Callophrys-hesseli.

2007

Dare County, North Carolina

Cely, John
N.D.

2010a Dare County Land Use Plan
Update 2009. Adopted by
the Dare County Board of
Commissioners December
6, 2010. Certified by the NC
Coastal Resources Commission
on February 24, 2011 Available
on the internet at: http://www.
darenc.com/Forms/LUSE/LUP.
pdf

Black-throated Green Warbler
(Wayne’s race), Dendroica
virens wayneii. South Carolina
Department of Natural
Resources Fact Sheet. Available
on the internet at: http://
www.dnr.sc.gov/cwcs/pdf/
Blackthroatedgreenwarbler.pdf.

Cook, Will
2011

2010b Dare County Community
Transportation Service Plan,
Final Plan. April 2010. Available
on the Internet at: http://www.
ncdot.org/nctransit/download/
CTSP/Dare.pdf.

Moundlily Yucca (Yucca
Gloriosa). Duke University.
Updated March 5, 2011.
Available on the internet at:
http://www.duke.edu/~cwcook/
trees/yugl.html.

2011

Cowardin, L.M., V. Carter, F. C. Golet, and
E. T. LaRoe
1979

Classification of Wetlands and
Deepwater Habitats of the
United States. U.S. Department
of the Interior Fish and Wildlife
Service Office of Biological
Services. Washington, D.C.
20240.

Roanoke Island Water System
Expansion Project. Dare
County Water Department.
Updated July 1, 2011. Available
on the internet at: http://
www.darenc.com/water/
RIWaterExpansionProject/
RIWSEPInformation.htm

Dodd , Kenneth C.
1992

Crumley, Brian T.
2005

“Late Holocene Barrier Island
Collapse: Outer Banks, North
Carolina, USA.” Sedimentary
Record 5:4–8.

Roanoke Island, 1865 to 1940,
Special History Study. Prepared
for the National Park Service,
Southeast Regional Office,
Atlanta, GA.

Loggerhead sea turtle Caretta
caretta. In Rare and Endangered
Biota of Florida, Vol. III.
Amphibians and Reptiles. Paul
E. Moler, ed. Ray E. Ashton,
series ed. University Press of
Florida. Gainesville, FL.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
2006
209

Flood Insurance Rate Map,
Panels 9860, 9870 and 9871.

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

September 20, 2006. Available
on the Internet at: www.
ncfloodmaps.com.

1996

First Colony Foundation
2011

The First Colony Foundation.
Accessed June, 2011.Available
on the internet at: www.
firstcolonyfoundation.org .

Loehman, Rachel and Greer Anderson
2009

Fussell, John
1997a Survey for Special Status Birds
within Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, Final Report.
October 15, 1997. Conducted by
John Fussell, Contract Biologist
for the U.S. Park Service.

1988

An Assessment of Maritime
Forest Resources on the North
Carolina Coast. NC Division of
Coastal Management.

Meehl, G. A., T. F. Stocker, W. D. Collins,
P. Friedlingstein, A. T. Gaye, J. M. Gregory,
A. Kitoh, R. Knutti, J. M. Murphy, A. Noda,
S. C. B. Raper, I. G. Watterson, and Z. –C.
Zhao.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group
II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change,
M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani,
J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der
Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds.,
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

2007

Karl, T. R., J.M. Melillo, and T.C. Peterson
2009

Understanding the Science
of Climate Change Talking
Points: Impacts to the Atlantic
Coast. Available on the internet
at: http://www.nature.nps.
gov/climatechange/docs/
AtlanticCoastTP.pdf

Lopazanski, Michael J., Jonathan P. Evans,
and Richard E. Shaw

1997b Survey for Special Status Plants
within Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, Final Report.
October 18, 1997. Conducted by
John Fussell, Contract Biologist
for the U.S. Park Serivce.

2007

Regionwide Archeological
Survey Plan: Southeast Field
Area, National Park Service.
Southeast Archeological
Center, National Park Service,
Tallahassee.

Global Climate Change Impacts
in the United States. US Climate
Change Science Program and
NOAA. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England.
http://www.globalchange.
gov/publications/reports/
scientificassessments/usimpacts.

Global Climate Projections.
in Solomon, S., D. Qin, M.
Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and
H. L. VIIS Geologic Resources
Inventory Report 29 Miller,
editors. Climate Change 2007:
The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group
I to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, New York, USA.
http://www.ipccwg1.unibe.ch/
publications/wg1-ar4/wg1-ar4.
html (accessed July 12, 2010.).

National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science
2011

Keel, Bennie C., John E. Cornelison, Jr., and
David M. Brewer
210

North Carolina Sea Level Rise,
Introduction to the North
Carolina Project. National

References

Centers for Coastal Ocean
Science. Updated February 16,
2011. Available on the internet
at http://www.cop.noaa.gov/
stressors/climatechange/current/
slr/overview.aspx.

1999

National Register of Historic
Places Registration Form: Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site.
Prepared by Christine Trebellas
and William Chapman for the
National Park Service, Southeast
Support Office. Available on
the Internet at: http://pdfhost.
focus.nps.gov/docs/NRHP/
Text/66000102.pdf

2000

Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Resource Management
Plan. On file, Southeast
Archeological Center, National
Park Service, Tallahassee.

2001

NPS Outer Banks Group Fire
Management Plan, Including:
Cape Hatteras National
Seashore, Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, and Wright
Brothers National Memorial.
April 2001.

2002

Outer Banks Group Parks
Visitor Study, Summer 2002.
Prepared by the University of
Idaho, Park Studies Unit and
the National Park Service.
Published December 2003. On
file at Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, Manteo, NC.

National Marine Fisheries Service
1998

2005

Recovery Plan for the
Shortnose Sturgeon (Acipenser
brevirostrum). Prepared by the
Shortnose Sturgeon Recovery
Team for the National Marine
Fisheries Service, Silver
Spring, Maryland. 104 pages.
Available on the internet at:
http://www.fws.gov/ecos/ajax/
docs/recovery_plan/sturgeon_
shortnose_1.pdf.
Loggerhead sea turtle, Caretta
caretta, species account.
Available on the internet at
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/
prot_res/species/turtles/
loggerhead.html.

National Park Service
1978

1992

National Register of Historic
Places Inventory - Nomination
Form: Lane’s New Fort In
Virginia / Cittie of Raleigh.
Prepared by Ronald G. Warfield
for the National Park Service,
Cape Hatteras National
Seashore. Available on the
Internet at: http://pdfhost.
focus.nps.gov/docs/NRHP/
Text/66000102.pdf

2003a Wetlands in the National Parks.
Available on the Internet at:
http://www.nature.nps.gov/
water/wetlbro.cfm
2003b Press Release: A Weekend of
Freedmen’s History. Issued by
the National Park Service, Outer
Banks Group. February 10,
2003.

Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Nomination to the
National Register of Historic
Places. National Park Service,
Washington, D.C., Ms on
file National Park Service,
Southeast Archeological Center,
Tallahassee.1994
Revised Statement for
Management: Basic Operations
Statement for Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, North
Carolina.

2003c Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Visitor Study Summer 2002,
Report 136b conducted by the
University of Ohio Park Studies
Unit.
2006a Management Policies, 2006.
Washington, D.C.: National Park
Service.

211

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

2006b Strategic Plan for Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site, October
1, 2006 – September 30, 2011.
2007

Statement. United States
Department of The Interior,
National Park Service.

Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Project Management
Information System - record
number 16702.

2011a Shoreline Erosion at Culturally
Significant Sites Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site Report
for 2010 TAR # 119.

2008a Fort Raleigh NHS, 2008 Visitor
Survey Card Data Report.
Prepared by the University of
Idaho Park Studies Unit for
the National Park Service,
Department of the Interior.

2011b Ethnographic Resources.
Available on the Internet
at: http://www.nps.gov/
ethnography/parks/resources/
index.htm.
2011c Preservation Brief 36: Protecting
Cultural Landscapes: Planning,
Treatment and Management of
Historic Landscapes. Available
on the Internet at: http://www.
nps.gov/hps/tps/briefs/brief36.
htm.

2008b Nationwide Survey of
Acoustical Environments in
Parks. Fall 2008. Outer Banks
Group Survey Response.
2010a Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Long Range Interpretive
Plan. Prepared by Fort
Raleigh National Historic
Site, Harpers Ferry Center
Interpretive Planning, and Ecos
Environmental Design, Inc. May
2010.

2011d The Freedmen’s Colony on
Roanoke Island. Available on
the Internet at: http://www.
nps.gov/fora/historyculture/
freedmenscolony.htm.
2011e Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, Visitor Statistics. National
Park Service Public Use
Statistics Office. Available on the
internet at: http://www.nature.
nps.gov/stats/viewReport.cfm.

2010b Species of Management
Concern, Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site, FY10 Species
Data. GPRA Goal Ia2B.
2010c National Park Service Cultural
Landscape Inventory, Fort
Raleigh National Historic
Site. May 2010. National
Park Service, United States
Department of the Interior.

2011f News Release – NPS Establishes
Fire Breaks Adjacent to Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site,
May 24, 2011.
NatureServe

2010d Southeast Coast Exotic Plant
Management Team Summary
(Calendar Year 2010). Cape
Hatteras National Seashore,
Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, and Wright Brothers
National Memorial. United
States Department of the
Interior, National Park Service.

2010

NatureServe Explorer, An
Encyclopedia of Life. Updated
August 2010. Available on
the internet at: http://www.
natureserve.org/explorer/index.
htm.

North Carolina Coastal Resources
Commission

2010e		 Final Cape Hatteras
National Seashore Off-Road
Vehicle Management Plan
/ Environmental Impact

2010

212

North Carolina Sea-Level

References

Rise Assessment Report,
March 2010. Prepared by
the N.C. Coastal Resources
Commission’s Science Panel on
Coastal Hazards.

department of Environment and
Natural Resources. Available
on the internet at: http://www.
ncnhp.org/Images/Federal%20
E&T%20NC-5.pdf.
2011

North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety
2008

North Carolina Floodplain
Management: 2008 Quick
Guide. Available on the Internet
at: http://www.nccrimecontrol.
org.

North Carolina Division of Coastal
Management
2006

Recommendations for
Appropriate Shoreline
Stabilization Methods for
the Different North Carolina
Estuarine Shorline Types.
Prepared by North Carolina
Estuarine Biological and
Physical Processes Work Group
and North Carolina Division of
Coastal Management, August
2006.

2009

Estuarine Shoreline
Stabilization: Stabilization
Options. August 6,
2009. Available on the
Internet at: http://www.
nccoastalmanagement.net/
estuarineshoreline/options.
html.

Prentice, G., and L. Groh
2010

North Carolina Natural Heritage Program
N.D.

2001

2-mile Radius Search, NC
Natural Heritage Program
Virtual Workroom. GIS Data
Sources: NCNHP, CGIA,
NCDOT, USGS. Updated
March 30, 2011. Available on
the internet at: http://nhpweb.
enr.state.nc.us/public/forms/
eo/eo_py_eo_select.phtml?sh
owOnMap=1&srid=32119&X
=906042.2954510034&Y=247
301.0382938&scaleX=17.016
687298333273&scaleY=17.00
7217800000024&mapID=&s_
oper_type=point_info&which_
layer=grp_eo_py&browse_
target_window=&browse_
source_window=&browse_
field0=&browse_
field1=&browse_
field2=&browse_
field3=&browse_db_
column0=&browse_db_
column1=&browse_db_
column2=&browse_db_
column3=.

North Carolina Natural
Heritage Program. North
Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural
Resources. Available on the
internet at: http://www.ncnhp.
org/index.html.

Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site Archeological Overview
and Assessment. Prepared
for the National Park Service,
Southeast Archeological Center,
Tallahassee, FL.

Riggs, S.R., and D.V. Ames
2003

Guide to Federally Listed
Endangered and Threatened
Species of North Carolina.
North Carolina natural Heritage
Program, Division of Parks and
Recreation, North Carolina

Drowning the North Carolina
Coast: Sea-Level Rise and
Estuarine Dynamics. North
Carolina Sea Grant College
Program Pub. No. UNCSG-03-04. 152 pp.

Riggs, S.R., D.V. Ames, S.J. Culver, D.J.
Mallinson, D.R. Corbett, and J.P. Walsh
2009
213

“Eye of a Human Hurricane:

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

United States Department of Interior

Pea Island, Oregon Inlet, and
Bodie Island, Northern Outer
Banks, North Carolina.” In
America’s Most Vulnerable
Coastal Communities:
Geological Society of America
Special Paper 460, ed. F.T.
Kelley, O.H. Pilkey, and J.A.G.
Cooper, 43–72. DOI: 10.1130
/2009.2460(04).

2010

United States Fish and Wildlife Service

Schafale, Mike
2010

2010

Site Survey Report, Fort Raleigh
Maritime Forest and Vicinity.
September 24, 2010.

Snakes and Spiders
2011 Timber Rattlesnkes – Facts and
Snake Identification. Accessed
July 25, 2011. Available on
the internet at: http://www.
snakesandspiders.com/timberrattlesnake-facts-and-snakeidentification/.

2011b Species of Concern. U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, Ecological
Services Midwest Region.
Available on the internet at:
http://www.fws.gov/midwest/
eco_serv/soc/index.html.

Fort Raleigh National Historic
Site, Historic Resource Study.
Prepared for the National Park
Service, Southeast Regional
Office, Atlanta, GA.

United States Office of Coast Survey
2011

United States Army Corps of Engineers
1979

US Army Corps of Engineers
Wetlands Delineation Manual.
Available on the Internet at:
http://www.wetlands.com/regs/
tlpge02e.htm.

Sea Level Rise Modeling.
Accessed August 4, 2011.
Available on tine internet at:
http://www.nauticalcharts.noaa.
gov/csdl/sealevelrise.html.

Vorhees, Philip H. and Lindsay Krey
1999

United States Department of Agriculture
2003

Endangered Species,
Threatened Species, Federal
Species of Concern, and
Candidate Species, Dare
County, North Carolina.
Updated: 09-22-2010. Available
on the internet at: http://www.
fws.gov/nc-es/es/cntylist/dare.
html.

2011a National Wetland Inventory
Maps. Available on the Internet
at: http://fws.gov/nwi.

Trebellas, Christine and William Chapman
1999

Cooperative Agreement
between National Park Service,
Outer Banks Group Fort
Raleigh National Historic Site
and Roanoke Island Historical
Association, Inc. Agreement
No. H5191100020.

Gypsy Moth: Slow the Spread
Program, Factsheet. April 2003.
Available on the internet at:
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/
publications/plant_health/
content/printable_version/
fs_phgmprogress.pdf.

214

Prevalence and severity of
overflights on U.S. National
Parks: Results of the 1998
survey of national park
superintendents. Institute of
Noise Control Engineering.
Noise Control Engineering
Journal 47 (3), 1999 May-June.

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
The controlling definitions for terms under
the President’s Council on Environmental
Quality National Environmental Policy
Act regulations are contained at 40 Code
of Federal Regulations; the numbers
in parentheses refer to the appropriate
section. These definitions are provided as a
supplement to those regulatory definitions.
Access — a way or means of approaching.
Access may or may not be a road.
Appropriate use — a use that is suitable,
proper, or fitting for a particular park, or to a
particular location within a park.
Archeological resource — any material
remains or physical evidence of past human
life or activities which are of archeological
interest, including the record of the effects
of human activities on the environment.
An archeological resource is capable
of revealing scientific or humanistic
information through archeological research.
Carrying capacity — the maximum
population of a particular species that
a particular region can support without
hindering future generations’ ability to
maintain the same population. A visitor, or
user, carrying capacity is the type and level
of use that can be accommodated while
sustaining the desired resource and visitor
experience conditions.
Categorical exclusion (1508.4)—an action
with no measurable environmental impact
which is described in one of the categorical
exclusion lists in section 3-3 or 3-4 and for
which no exceptional circumstances (section
3-5) exist.
Climate — in a narrow sense is usually
defined as the “average weather,” or more
12 rigorously, as the statistical description
in terms of the mean and variability of 13
relevant quantities over a period of time
ranging from months to thousands or
14 millions of years. The classical period
is 30 years, as defined by the World 15
Meteorological Organization. These
quantities are most often surface variables
such 16 as temperature, precipitation, and
wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state,
17 including a statistical description, of the

climate system.
Climate change — refers to a statistically
significant variation in either the mean
state of 20 the climate or in its variability,
persisting for an extended period (typically
decades or 21 longer). Climate change
may be due to natural internal processes
or external 22 forcings, or to persistent
anthropogenic changes in the composition
of the atmosphere 23 or in land use.
Connected actions (1508.25) —
actions that are closely related. They
automatically trigger other actions that have
environmental impacts, they cannot or will
not proceed unless other actions have been
taken previously or simultaneously, or they
are interdependent parts of a larger action
and/or depend on the larger action for their
justification.
Conservation planning and impact
assessment — within the National Park
Service, this process is synonymous with the
National Environmental Policy Act process.
This process evaluates alternative courses
of action and impacts so that decisions are
made in accord with the conservation and
preservation mandate of the NPS Organic
Act.
Conserve — to protect from loss or harm;
preserve. Historically, the terms conserve,
protect, and preserve have come collectively
to embody the fundamental purpose of
the NPS— preserving, protecting and
conserving the national park system.
Cooperating agency (1508.5) — a federal
agency other than the one preparing
the National Environmental Policy Act
document (lead agency) that has jurisdiction
over the proposal by virtue of law or special
expertise and that has been deemed a
cooperating agency by the lead agency. State
or local governments, and/or Indian tribes,
may be designated cooperating agencies as
appropriate (see 1508.5 and 1502.6).
Critical habitat — specific c areas within a
geographical area occupied by a threatened
or endangered species which contain those
physical or biological features essential
to the conservation of the species, and
215

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

park management functions. Includes areas
where park development or intensive use
may have substantially altered the natural
environment or the setting for culturally
significant resources.
Direct effect (1508.8) — an impact that
occurs as a result of the proposal or
alternative in the same place and at the same
time as the action.
Environmental assessment (EA) (1508.9)
— a brief National Environmental Policy
Act document that is prepared to (a) help
determine whether the impact of a proposal
or alternatives could be significant; (b) aid
the National Park Service in compliance
with the National Environmental Policy
Act by evaluating a proposal that will have
no significant impacts, but that may have
measurable adverse impacts; or (c) evaluate
a proposal that either is not described on
the list of categorically excluded actions, or
is on the list but exceptional circumstances
(section 3-5) apply.
Environmental impact statement (1508.11)
— a detailed National Environmental Policy
Act document that is prepared when a
proposal or alternatives have the potential
for significant impact on the human
environment.
Environmental screening process — the
analysis that precedes a determination
of the appropriate level of National
Environmental Policy Act documentation.
The minimum requirements of the
environmental screening process are a site
visit, consultation with any agency that has
jurisdiction by law or special expertise, and
the completion of a screening checklist.
The process must be complete for all
NPS actions that have the potential for
environmental impact and are not described
in section 3-3.
Environmentally preferable alternative
(1505.2, Q6a) — of the alternatives analyzed,
the one that would best promote the policies
in the National Environmental Policy
Act section 101. This is usually selected
by the interdisciplinary team members.
It is presented in the NPS National
Environmental Policy Act document (draft
and final environmental assessment or

which may require special management
considerations or protection; and specific
areas outside the geographical area occupied
by the species at the time of its listing, upon
a determination by the Secretary of the
Interior that such areas are essential for the
conservation of the species. (See 16 USC
1342)
Cultural resources (NPS-28, appendix
A) — aspects of a cultural system that are
valued by or significantly representative
of a culture or that contain significant
information about a culture. A cultural
resource may be a tangible entity or
a cultural practice. Tangible cultural
resources are categorized as districts, sites,
buildings, structures, and objects for the
National Register of Historic Places, and as
archeological resources, cultural landscapes,
prehistoric and historic structures, museum
objects, and ethnographic resources for NPS
management purposes.
Cultural landscape — a geographic
area, including both cultural and natural
resources and the wildlife or domestic
animals therein, associated with a historic
event, activity, or person, or exhibiting other
cultural or esthetic values. There are four
non-mutually exclusive types of cultural
landscapes: historic sites, historic designed
landscapes, historic vernacular landscapes,
and ethnographic landscapes.
Cumulative actions (1508.25) — actions
that, when viewed with other actions in
the past, the present, or the reasonably
foreseeable future, regardless of who has
undertaken or will undertake them, have an
additive impact on the resource the proposal
would affect.
Cumulative impact (1508.7) — the impacts
of cumulative actions.
Desired conditions — a park’s natural and
cultural resource conditions that the NPS
aspires to achieve and maintain over time,
and the conditions necessary for visitors
to understand, enjoy, and appreciate those
resources. These conditions are identified
through a park’s planning process.
Developed area — an area managed to
provide and maintain facilities (e.g., roads,
campgrounds, housing) serving visitors and
216

Glossary

environmental impact statement) for public
review and comment.
Ethnographic landscape — an area
containing a variety of natural and cultural
resources that traditionally associated
people define as heritage resources. The area
may include plant and animal communities,
structures, and geographic features, each
with their own special local names.
Ethnographic resources — objects
and places, including sites, structures,
landscapes, and natural resources, with
traditional cultural meaning and value
to associated peoples. Research and
consultation with associated people
identifies and explains the places and
things they fi nd culturally meaningful.
Ethnographic resources eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places are
called traditional cultural properties.
Exceptional circumstances —
circumstances that, if they apply to a
project described in the NPS categorical
exclusion lists (sections 3-3 and 3-4), mean
a categorical exclusion is inappropriate
and an environmental assessment or an
environmental impact statement must
be prepared because the action may
have measurable or significant impacts.
Exceptional circumstances are described in
section 3-5.
Finding of no significant impact (FONSI)
(1508.13) — a determination based on
an environmental assessment and other
factors in the public planning record for
a proposal that, if implemented, would
have no significant impact on the human
environment.
General management plan (GMP) — a
plan which clearly defines direction for
resource preservation and visitor use in a
park, and serves as the basic foundation for
decision making. GMPs are developed with
broad public involvement.
Geologic resources — features produced
from the physical history of the earth, or
processes such as exfoliation, erosion and
sedimentation, glaciation, karst or shoreline
processes, seismic, and volcanic activities.
Greenhouse gases — gaseous constituents
of the atmosphere, both natural and 3

anthropogenic, that absorb and emit
radiation at specific wavelengths within the
4 spectrum of infrared radiation emitted
by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere
and 5 clouds. This property causes the
greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H2O),
carbon 6 dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide
(N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone (O3)
are the primary 7 greenhouse gases in the
Earth’s atmosphere. Beside CO2, N2O and
CH4, the Kyoto 8 Protocol deals with the
greenhouse gases sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6), 9 hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and
perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Historic property — a district, site,
building, structure, or object significant
in the history of American archeology,
architecture, culture, engineering, or politics
at the national, state, or local level.
Human environment (1508.14) — defined
by the Council on Environmental Quality
as the natural and physical environment,
and the relationship of people with that
environment (1508.14). Although the
socioeconomic environment receives
less emphasis than the physical or
natural environment in the Council on
Environmental Quality regulations, the
National Park Service considers it an integral
part of the human environment.
Impact — the likely effect of an action
or proposed action upon specific
natural resources, cultural resources,
socioeconomics, visitor use and experiences,
or park operations. Impacts may be direct,
indirect, individual, cumulative, beneficial,
or adverse. (Also see Unacceptable impacts.)
Impact topics — specific natural, cultural,
or socioeconomic resources that would
be affected by the proposed action or
alternatives (including no-action). The
magnitude, duration, and timing of the effect
to each of these resources are evaluated
in the impact section of an environmental
assessment or environmental impact
statement.
Impairment — an impact that, in the
professional judgment of a responsible NPS
manager, would harm the integrity of park
resources or values and violate the 1916 NPS
Organic Act’s mandate that park resources
217

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

conditions and visitor experiences.
Manager — the managerial-level employee
who has authority to make decisions or
to otherwise take an action that would
affect park resources or values. Most often
it refers to the park superintendent or
regional director, but may at times include,
for example, a resource manager, facility
manager, or chief ranger to whom authority
has been re-delegated.
Major federal action (1508.18) — actions
that have a large federal presence and that
have the potential for significant impacts
to the human environment. They include
adopting policy, implementing rules or
regulations; adopting plans, programs, or
projects; ongoing activities; issuing permits;
or financing projects completed by another
entity.
Memo to file — a memo to the planning
record or statutory compliance file that NPS
offices may complete when (a) National
Environmental Policy Act has already
been completed in site-specific detail for a
proposal, usually as part of a document of
larger scope, or (b) a time interval has passed
since the National Environmental Policy Act
document was approved, but information in
that document is still accurate.
Mitigated Environmental Assessment
(Q40) — an environmental assessment that
has been rewritten to incorporate mitigation
into a proposal or to change a proposal to
reduce impacts to below significance.
Mitigation (1508.20) — a modification
of the proposal or alternative that lessens
the intensity of its impact on a particular
resource.
Native American — of or relating to, a tribe,
people, or culture that is or was indigenous
to the United States.
National Environmental Policy Act
process — the objective analysis of a
proposal to determine the degree of its
environmental and interrelated social
and economic impacts on the human
environment, alternatives and mitigation
that reduce that impact, and the full and
candid presentation of the analysis to, and
involvement of, the interested and affected

and values remain unimpaired.
Implementation plan — a plan that focuses
on how to implement an activity or project
needed to achieve a long-term goal. An
implementation plan may direct a specific
project or an ongoing activity.
Indirect impact (1508.8) — reasonably
foreseeable impacts that occur removed in
time or space from the proposed action.
These are “downstream” impacts, future
impacts, or the impacts of reasonably
expected connected actions (e.g., growth of
an area after a highway to it is complete).
Interpretation — the translation of
scientific and academic information
about park resources into forms that are
meaningful to the public, helping them
understand and appreciate their natural and
cultural heritage.
Issues — in the National Environmental
Policy Act, issues are environmental, social,
and economic problems or effects that may
occur if the proposed action or alternatives
(including no-action) are implemented or
continue to be implemented.
Law — The U.S. Congress directs the
National Park Service and other federal
agencies to carry out certain activities or to
achieve certain conditions that it specifies
in laws. The National Park Service must
comply with these laws and may be sued in
court for failure to comply.
Lead agency (1508.16) — the agency either
preparing or taking primary responsibility
for preparing the National Environmental
Policy Act document.
Life Cycle Costing (Analysis) — an
accounting method that analyzes the total
costs of a product or service, including
construction, maintenance, manufacturing,
marketing, distribution, useful life, salvage,
and disposal.
Management prescriptions — a planning
term referring to statements about desired
resource conditions and visitor experiences,
along with appropriate kinds and levels of
management, use, and development for each
park area.
Management zone — an area with a park
that will be managed distinctively from
other areas, to achieve different resource
218

Glossary

public.
NPS Preferred Alternative (1502.14 (e)) —
the alternative identified as preferred at the
draft environmental impact statement stage
or environmental assessment. Identification
of the NPS Preferred Alternative helps the
public focus its comments during review
of the National Environmental Policy Act
document.
Natural Resources — the ecological
features of a park, such as geologic forms
and processes, communities of native
plants and animals and the processes that
sustain them (natural succession, natural
fire, natural flood/drought cycles, etc.), air
quality and air quality related values such
as visibility, water bodies and hydrologic
processes, and paleontological remains.
Notices of availability — separate notices
submitted to the Federal Register that the
draft environmental impact statement and
the final environmental impact statement are
ready for distribution.
Notice of intent (1508.22) — the notice
submitted to the Federal Register that an
environmental impact statement will be
prepared. It describes the proposed action
and alternatives, identifies a contact person
in the National Park Service, and gives time,
place, and descriptive details of the agency’s
proposed scoping process.
Organic Act (NPS) — the 1916 law (and
subsequent amendments) that created
the National Park Service and assigned it
responsibility to manage the national parks.
Paleontological/paleoecological
resources — resources such as fossilized
plants, animals, or their traces, including
both organic and mineralized remains
in body or trace form. Paleontological
resources are studied and managed in their
paleoecological context (that is, the geologic
data associated with the fossil that provides
information about the ancient environment).
Park — any one of the hundreds of areas
of land and water administered as part of
the national park system. The term is used
interchangeably in this document with
“unit,” “park unit,” and “park area.”
Park purpose — the reasons why a park is
so important that it has been set aside as a

unit of the national park system.
Park significance — the relative
international, national, or regional
importance of the resources that
contributed to the park’s addition to the
national park system.
Plan — the documentation of a decision
or decisions and all the factors that were
considered during the decision making.
The National Park Service produces four
kinds of plans: general management plans,
strategic plans, implementation plans, and
annual performance plans. Each of these is
described separately in the glossary.
Planning — structured decision making.
Policy — The National Park Service
establishes specific criteria and produces for
how it will conduct its activities and carry
out its mission. These policies apply to all
NPS activities in all units of the National
Park System. Park managers must comply
with NPS policies, and the National Park
Service may be sued in court for failure to
comply with its own policies.
Preservation — for the purposes of the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
the Treatment of Historic Properties,
preservation means the act or process of
applying measures necessary to sustain the
existing form, integrity and materials of an
historic property.
Programmatic documents — broader
scope environmental assessments or
environmental impact statements that
describe the impacts of proposed policy
changes, programs, or plans.
Proposal (1508.23) — the stage at which
the National Park Service has a goal and is
actively preparing to make a decision on one
or more alternative means of accomplishing
that goal. The goal can be a project, plan,
policy, program, and so forth. The National
Environmental Policy Act process begins
when the effects can be meaningfully
evaluated.
Public involvement (also called public
participation) — the active involvement of
the public in NPS planning and decisionmaking processes. Public involvement
occurs on a continuum that ranges from
providing information and building
219

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Soundscape (natural) — the aggregate of all
the natural, nonhuman-caused sounds that
occur in parks, together with the physical
capacity for transmitting natural sounds.
Stakeholder — an individual, group or other
entity that has a strong interest in decisions
concerning park resources and values.
Stakeholders may include, for example,
recreational user groups, permittees, and
concessioners. In the broadest sense, all
Americans are stakeholders in the national
parks.
Strategic Plan — a plan describing what
a park staff hopes to achieve within the
next six years. These plans, required by the
Government Performance and Results Act,
should include measureable results oriented
goals that the park staff can use to prioritize
work and measure progress.
Superintendent — the senior on-site NPS
official in a park. Used interchangeably with
“park superintendent,” “park manager,” or
“unit manager.”
Tiering (1508.28) — the use of broader,
programmatic National Environmental
Policy Act documents to discuss and analyze
cumulative regional impacts and define
policy direction, and the incorporation by
reference of this material in subsequent,
narrower documents to avoid duplication
and focus on issues “ripe for decision” in
each case.
Unauthorized trail — visitor established
trail not approved or maintained by the
National Park Service and subject to closure
due to safety and resource concerns.
Vessel — under 36 Code of Federal
Regulations 1.4, vessels are defined as every
type or description of craft, other than a
seaplane on the water, used or capable of
being used as a means of transportation on
water, including a buoyant device permitting
or capable of free flotation.
Visitor — anyone who physically visits
a park for recreational, educational or
scientific purposes, or who otherwise uses a
park’s interpretive and educational services,
regardless of where such use occurs (e.g., via
Internet access, library, etc.).

awareness, to partnering in decision making.
Record of decision (1505.2) — the
document that is prepared to substantiate a
decision based on an environmental impact
statement. It includes a statement of the
decision made, a detailed discussion of
decision rationale, and the reasons for not
adopting all mitigation measures analyzed, if
applicable.
Regulation — Federal agencies establish
specific criteria and procedures for how they
will comply with laws. These regulations
must be reviewed and approved through a
formal process, then they are compiled in
the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The
National Park Service must comply with
all applicable federal regulations, including
those promulgated by other agencies having
legal jurisdiction over certain aspects of all
federal activities, and it may be sued in court
for failure to comply.
Resource — something of value (an asset).
Park managers often speak in terms of
aesthetic, cultural, and natural resources of
parks, meaning the parks’ major features.
[See also aesthetic resource, cultural
resource, and natural resource.] The term
is also used less frequently to describe
the funding and manpower available to
managers.
Road — a way made for traveling between
places. A road is a more formal means of
providing access and can vary in type and
quality of surface and can vary in width.
Roads are generally intended for vehicular
access, while access may be by vehicle or
pedestrian mode.
Sacred sites — certain natural and cultural
resources treated by American Indian tribes
and Alaska Natives as sacred places having
established religious meaning, and as locales
of private ceremonial activities.
Scoping (1508.25) — internal NPS
decision-making on issues, alternatives,
mitigation measures, the analysis boundary,
appropriate level of documentation, lead
and cooperating agency roles, available
references and guidance, defining purpose
and need, and so forth. External scoping is
the early involvement of the interested and
affected public.
220

INDEX
A

Floodplains xiii, xv, xvi, 25, 36, 101, 102,
111, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 245

Air quality 39, 79, 219, 238, 239

H

American Indians 39

Historic structures xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii,
32, 36, 118, 122, 124, 130, 131, 168, 180, 181,
184, 185, 186, 197, 203, 216

B
Boundary adjustments 71

I

C

Interpretation i, iii, iv, vi, vii, ix, x, xiii, xiv,
xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii, 6, 11, 13, 31, 32, 35, 36,
60, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67, 73, 80, 82, 83, 86, 93,
118, 122, 128, 130, 131, 134, 135, 137, 138,
158, 162, 165, 166, 168, 170, 171, 174, 175,
176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185,
186, 188, 190, 191, 193, 197, 202, 203, 205,
216, 218, 237, 242

Cultural landscapes 30, 212
Cultural resources iii, iv, x, xii, xiii, xiv, xvii,
xviii, xix, 3, 12, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 26, 29, 34,
36, 38, 43, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 66, 70,
74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 84, 99, 100, 118, 125, 126,
132, 133, 143, 144, 146, 148, 167, 168, 169,
170, 171, 172, 181, 191, 192, 195, 197, 198,
202, 203, 216, 217, 220, 239, 245, 246

Interpretive themes iv, v, ix, x, xi, xv, xviii,
11, 15, 16, 48, 50, 60, 66, 69, 147, 188, 193

D

Invasive species xiv, 78, 158, 159, 160, 162,
163, 164, 165, 166, 179, 181, 193, 243

Desired conditions xix, 23, 24, 25 47, 48, 49,
71, 72, 76, 81, 192, 216

M

E

Maritime forest xiv, 108, 115, 116, 118, 158,
163, 164, 166, 192, 210, 214

Environmental Justice 40
Erosion iv, v, viii, ix, xii, xiii, xiv, xvi, xvii, 24,
26, 35, 37, 38, 53, 57, 60, 61, 65, 66, 70, 71,
75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 93, 101, 102, 103, 107,
108, 118, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131,
133, 134, 136, 137, 139, 149, 150, 153, 156,
157, 160, 161, 162, 163, 169, 170, 172, 173,
179, 180, 181, 185, 187, 191, 192, 195, 197,
217

Monument vii, x, 8, 12, 15, 62, 67, 108, 128,
130, 137

Ethnographic resources xiv, xv, xvii, 30, 36,
77, 81, 118, 120, 126, 127, 167, 168, 175, 176,
177, 178, 203, 212, 216, 217

National Environmental Policy Act iv, xiii, 3,
9, 23, 24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 34, 36, 37, 43, 47, 48,
57, 76, 81, 82, 85, 99, 143, 144, 146, 149, 153,
156, 161, 163, 167, 168, 170, 179, 185, 192,
197, 198, 215, 216, 218, 219, 220, 238, 245,
246

Museum collections xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii,
13, 14, 22, 31, 36, 77, 129, 130, 136, 167, 182,
183, 184, 195, 246
N

F
Fire 27, 34, 42, 51, 52, 53, 54, 60, 78, 80, 81,
135, 157, 162, 163, 170, 179, 192, 211, 212,
219

National Historic Preservation Act v, xiii, 12,
22, 29, 30, 32, 56, 60, 76, 143, 144, 167, 172,
221

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

174, 203, 237, 242

203

National Register of Historic Places 12, 29,
30, 32, 36, 74, 122, 124, 125, 131, 144, 167,
168, 172, 179, 211, 216, 217, 238

Traffic xv, 39, 73, 75, 80, 117, 132, 147, 148,
158, 163, 187, 188, 193
Trails vi, vii, viii, x, xii, xiii, xiv, xvii, xviii,
15, 51, 54, 62, 64, 67, 70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78,
79, 80, 132, 133, 137, 138, 152, 154, 155, 157,
160, 162, 165, 166, 172, 173, 179, 181, 189,
190, 194, 195, 196

Natural resources iii, iv, xv, xvi, xix, 3, 10,
12, 14, 16, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 35, 38, 50, 52,
54, 56, 57, 77, 82, 84, 99, 127, 133, 137, 143,
152, 190, 197, 203, 205, 206, 209, 213, 216,
217, 219, 220, 242, 244

U

P

User capacity 9, 48, 71, 72, 73, 76, 166, 205

Parking vi, vii, ix, x, xii, xiii, xv, xviii, 6, 8, 36,
37, 39, 40, 51, 52, 53, 55, 62, 64, 65, 67, 70,
73, 74, 75, 93, 101, 114, 122, 128, 136, 151,
159, 170, 172, 173, 180, 181, 187, 193, 194,
196

V
Vegetation vi, ix, xii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, 36, 38,
42, 62, 65, 70, 76, 78, 80, 81, 101, 102, 105,
106, 107, 108, 114, 115, 117, 125, 128, 129,
157, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 170,
179, 180, 181, 195, 196, 197

Partner iii, vi, vii, viii, x, xi, xii, xvii, 8, 21, 50,
51, 52, 53, 55, 61, 62, 64, 67, 69, 70, 83, 93,
133, 174, 186, 194

Vehicles viii, 39, 65, 111, 136

Planning process 8, 9, 10, 15, 23, 36, 37, 42,
85, 201, 202, 203, 216
Purpose and need 3, 23, 201, 220

Visitor experience iv, vi, x, xi, xviii, 15, 33,
34, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 60, 62, 66, 67, 69,
72, 74, 75, 76, 84, 86, 133, 187, 215

R

W

Regional Plans 39, 41

Water quality 25, 37, 102, 108, 151, 239

S

Water treatment plant vii, x, 62, 67, 134, 135,
136

Section 7 107, 156, 203, 240

Wetlands xiv, xv, xvi, 22, 25, 26, 36, 43, 80,
101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 110, 113,
152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 209, 211, 214,
242, 245

Section 106 167, 168, 169, 173, 175, 177,
178, 179, 181, 182, 184, 186, 203, 238
Significant Natural Heritage Area xiv, 12, 15,
38, 115, 163, 164, 166, 192

Wildlife 15, 27, 37, 38, 78, 79, 80, 85, 86, 102,
103, 106, 117, 127, 147, 156, 158, 188, 193,
203, 204, 205, 206, 209, 214, 216, 237, 240,
241, 244, 245

Soils 24, 39, 102, 169
soundscape 15, 33, 37, 77, 148, 220, 246
Sustainability 76, 84, 146, 197
T
Threatened and endangered species 27, 43,
222

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX A
PARK LEGISLATION

This page intentionally left blank.

Appendix A

F.R. 2241 Issued April 5, 1941
ORDER DESIGNATING THE FORT
RALEIGH NATIONAL HISTORIC
SITE, ROANOKE ISLAND, N.C.
A.J. Writz, Acting Secretary of the
Interior
17 F.R. 236, January 3, 1952
FORT RALEIGH NATIONAL
HISTORIC SITE ON ROANOKE
ISLAND, DARE COUNTY, N.C.,
ADDITION OF CERTAIN LANDS
Oscar L. Chapman, Secretary of the
Interior
Public Law 87-148, August 17, 1961
AN ACT TO REVISE THE
BOUNDARIES OF THE FORT
RALEIGH NATIONAL HISTORIC
SITE IN NORTH CAROLINA AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES
87th Congress
Public Law 101-603, November 16, 1990
AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO
ACQUIRE CERTAIN LANDS TO BE
ADDED TO THE FORT RALEIGH
NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE, IN
NORTH CAROLINA
101st Congress

227

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

228

Appendix A

229

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

230

Appendix A

231

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

232

Appendix A

233

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

234

APPENDIX B
SERVICEWIDE MANDATES AND POLICIES PERTAINING TO FORT RALEIGH
NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX B: LIST OF RELEVANT
LEGISLATION, REGULATORY
MANDATES, AND POLICIES

therein and to provide for the enjoyment
of the same in such manner and by such
means as will leave them unimpaired for the
enjoyment of future generations.”

This section provides an overview of
selected laws and policies that are applicable
to the management of Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site. The information provided is
not comprehensive and is meant to identify
major relevant legislation, regulatory
mandates, and policies.

The General Authorities Act amends the
Organic Act to broaden the types of areas
that are included in the national park system,
such as national seashores, recreation areas,
and parkways. The Redwood Act further
amends the General Authorities Act to
reassert system-wide the high standard
of protection set forth in the Organic Act.
In the Redwood Act, “Congress further
reaffirms, declares, and directs that the
promotion and regulation of the various
areas of the Nation Park System shall be
consistent with and founded in the purpose
established by the first section of the Act
of August 25, 1916, to the common benefit
of all the people of the United States.
The authorization of activities shall be
construed and the protection, management,
and administration of these areas shall be
conducted in light of the high public value
and integrity on the National Park System
and shall not be exercised in derogation of
the values and purposes for which these
various areas have been established, except
as may have been or shall be directly and
specifically provided by Congress.”

LEGISLATION
Fort Raleigh National Historic Site specific
legislation is provided in Appendix A.

SERVICEWIDE LAWS AND
POLICIES
This section summarizes the major
appropriate legal and administrative
mandates that apply to managing all units
of the NPS. These are measures that the
NPS must strive to meet, regardless of
the alternative selected for the long-term
management of the park. The body of
laws and executive orders that guide park
management, with their legal citations, are
identified.
The National Park Service Organic Act
and the Redwood Act Amendment to the
National Park Service General Authorities
Act

Both the Organic Act and the General
Authorities Act, as amended by the
Redwood Act, define a single standard for
the management of the park service: to
safeguard the units of the national park
system, conserving resources and values for
enjoyment of all people of the United States
and prohibiting impairment. Director’s
Order 55, Interpreting the National Park
Service Organic Act, serves as the NPS
interpretation of the meaning of the Organic
Act and the General Authorities Act, as
amended.

One of the most important statutory
directives for the National Park Service
(NPS) is provided by the interrelations
of the NPS Organic Act of 1916 and the
Redwood Act Amendment to the NPS
General Authorities Act of 1970. The
Organic Act mandates that the National
Park Service “shall promote and regulate
the use of Federal areas known as national
parks, monuments, and reservations by
such means and measures as conform to
the fundamental purpose of said parks,
monuments, and reservations, which
purpose is to conserve the scenery and the
natural and historic objects and the wildlife

National Historic Preservation Act
The National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 authorized the Secretary of the Interior
to “expand and maintain a national register
237

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

National Environmental Policy Act

of districts, sites, buildings, structures,
and objects significant in American
history, architecture, archeology, and
culture.” Section 106 of the act requires
federal agencies to consider the effects of
their undertakings on National Register
properties and to allow the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation “a
reasonable opportunity to comment” on
such undertakings. The National Register
of Historic Places was expanded from
the original roster of historic landmarks
and areas of the National Park System
to a comprehensive inventory of historic
properties nationwide. National Park
Service actions affecting properties listed
on the National Register of Historic Places
are subject to review by state historic
preservation officers and the Advisory
Council.

The National Environmental Policy Act of
1969 states as policy that federal agencies
must assess the environmental impacts
of any proposed action that they fund,
support, permit, or implement. It specifically
directs federal agencies to document the
environmental impact of the proposed
action, any adverse environmental effects
which cannot be avoided should the
proposed action be implemented, and
alternatives to the proposed action.
The act also established the Council on
Environmental Quality, which is charged
with the implementation and oversight
of the National Environmental Policy
Act. The Council on Environmental
Quality subsequently developed the
legal requirements (40 Code of Federal
Regulations 1500-1508) that all federal
agencies must follow in evaluating the
environmental effects of proposed
actions. These procedures involve three
levels of documentation: categorical
exclusions; environmental assessments;
and environmental impact statements. In
the National Park Service, construction
activities, natural or cultural resource
management projects, and park plans trigger
the majority of National Environmental
Policy Act documents. The National
Environmental Policy Act enables the
National Park Service to integrate
compliance with other legal mandates and
provides a format for public involvement.
Director’s Order 12 sets forth the policy and
procedures by which the service will comply
with the National Environmental Policy Act.

Section 110 requires among other things
that the park to “establish a preservation
program to protect and preserve historic
properties in consultation with others”
and that this program ensure “that historic
properties under the jurisdiction or control
of [the National park Service], are identified,
evaluated, and nominated to the National
Register.” Further, Section 110 requires
“that such properties under the jurisdiction
or control of [the park] as are listed in or
may be eligible for the National Register
are managed and maintained in a way that
considers the preservation of their historic,
archaeological, architectural, and cultural
values in compliance with section 106 of
this Act and gives special consideration to
the preservation of such values in the case
of properties designated as having National
significance.” Section 112 requires that
studies or other actions taken with regard
to historic properties be done by personnel
or contractors who meet appropriate
professional qualifications standards
developed by the Secretary of the Interior.
It also requires that the park maintain
data from historic properties studies in an
appropriate database available to prospective
researchers.

Clean Air Act
The Clean Air Act provides a legal
framework for the National Park Service to
preserve and protect parks’ lated values. The
act establishes national ambient air quality
standards for certain criteria pollutants.
Major provisions of the act are intended to
set a goal for cleaner air by setting national
primary and secondary ambient air quality
238

Appendix B

Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
as the regulatory mechanism to achieve
water quality goals by regulating pollutant
discharge to navigable streams, lakes, and
rivers. Through standards promulgated
by individual states, the Clean Water Act
requires the NPS to protect its water
resources from point and nonpoint sources
of pollution. Many NPS construction
activities are regulated by the Clean
Water Act under stormwater permitting
requirements.

standards. Primary standards define levels of
air quality necessary to protect public health,
while secondary standards define levels
necessary to protect public welfare from any
known or anticipated adverse effects of a
pollutant.
Under the Clean Air Act, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency is
required to set new source performance
standards, based on best-demonstrated
technology and to establish national
emission standards for hazardous air
pollutants. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency is also required to
develop programs for prevention of
significant deterioration of air quality in
attainment areas. Air pollution permits in
attainment areas mandate installation of
pollution controls that represent the best
available control technology.

Under Section 303 (d) of the Clean Water
Act, states are required to develop lists
of streams and water bodies that do not
meet ambient water quality standards. The
resulting inventory of impaired streams,
called the 303 (d) list, is updated every two
years by states and is the basis for decisions
related to restoring water quality. The law
requires that the states establish priority
rankings for waters on the lists and develop
total maximum daily loads for these waters.
A total maximum daily load is a calculation
of the maximum amount of a pollutant that
a waterbody can receive and continue to
meet its designated use.

The Clean Air Act also requires states to
develop and submit a state implementation
plan for achieving national ambient air
quality standards within each state. The
state implementation plan must establish
state air quality control regions and specify
emission limits, schedules, and timetables
for compliance from both stationary and
mobile sources. The Clean Air Act requires
federal facilities to comply with state air
pollution requirements. The Clean Air Act
reinforces the NPS Organic Act role as a
protector of natural and cultural resources
within the national park system. Under the
Clean Air Act, the National Park Service
is responsible for protecting air quality
within park unit boundaries, and for taking
appropriate action to do so, when reviewing
emission sources within and outside of the
park system.

Based on an evaluation of the states’
implementation of their Clean Water Act 303
(d) responsibilities, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency developed changes
and improvements to the total maximum
daily load regulations. On July 13, 2000,
the agency issued a final total maximum
daily load rule that will improve current
regulations. Congress has required the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(delegated to the Virgin Islands Department
of Environmental Protection) to establish
total maximum daily loads for the territory,
under the current total maximum daily load
regulation.

Clean Water Act
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
1972, as amended by the Clean Water Act
and the Water Quality Act of 1987, forms
the legal framework to support maintenance
and restoration of water quality. The
Clean Water Act establishes the National

Endangered Species Act
The Endangered Species Act of 1973,
amended in 1982 and 1987, is intended to
prevent the further decline of endangered
and threatened plant and animal
239

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

The Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act
(16 U.S.C. 661, 666c)

species and to help in the restoration of
populations of these species and their
habitats. The Endangered Species Act,
jointly administered by the Department
of Commerce and the Department of the
Interior, requires that each federal agency
consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service to determine whether endangered
or threatened species are known to exist or
have critical habitats on or in the vicinity of
the site of a proposed action.

The Fish and Wildlife Coordination
Act protects the quality of the aquatic
environment needed for fish and wildlife
resources. The Act requires consultation
with the Fish and Wildlife Service and the
fish and wildlife agencies of States where
the “waters of any stream or other body of
water are proposed or authorized, permitted
or licensed to be impounded, diverted . .
. or otherwise controlled or modified” by
any agency (except TVA) under a Federal
permit or license. NOAA Fisheries was
brought into the process later, as these
responsibilities were carried over, during
the reorganization process that created
NOAA. Consultation is to be undertaken
for the purpose of “preventing loss of and
damage to wildlife resources,” and to ensure
that the environmental value of a body of
water or wetland is taken into account in
the decision-making process during permit
application reviews. Consultation is most
often (but not exclusively) initiated when
water resource agencies send the FWS or
NOAA Fisheries a public notice of a Section
404 permit. FWS or NOAA Fisheries may file
comments on the permit stating concerns
about the negative impact the activity will
have on the environment, and suggest
measures to reduce the impact.

Section 7(c) of the Endangered Species Act
authorizes the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
to review proposed major federal actions
to assess the potential impacts to listed
species. In accordance with Section 7 (c),
the National Park Service, in consultation
with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, must
identify and promote the conservation of
all federally listed species and their critical
habitat within park boundaries.
Antideficiency Act
The Antideficiency Act is a series of
statutes (originating from 16 Stat. 251 in
1870) that prohibit federal managers from
making or authorizing expenditures in
excess of the amount available to them
from appropriations or other funds, unless
authorized by law. Based on this, the plan/
EIS created must be able to be implemented
through expected funding sources.

Fish & Wildlife Act of 1956 - 16 U.S.C. §§
742a-742j

National Parks Omnibus Management Act
of 1998

The Fish and Wildlife Act establishes a
comprehensive national fish, shellfish, and
wildlife resources policy with emphasis on
the commercial fishing industry. The Act
emphasizes that the Act be administered
with regard to the inherent right of every
citizen and resident to fish for pleasure,
enjoyment, and betterment and to
maintain and increase public opportunities
for recreational use of fish and wildlife
resources. Further, the Act established a
Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife and a
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries within the
US Fish and Wildlife Service.

Both the National Parks Omnibus
Management Act of 1998 (NPOMA)
(16 USC 5901 et seq.) and NEPA are
fundamental to NPS park management
decisions. Both acts provide direction for
articulating and connecting the ultimate
resource management decision to the
analysis of impacts, using appropriate
technical and scientific information. Both
also recognize that such data may not be
readily available and provide options for
resource impact analysis in this case.

240

Appendix B

The Act requires the Secretary of the
Interior to:
•

Develop measures for “maximum
sustainable production of fish”;

•

Make economic studies of the
industry and recommend measures
to insure stability of the domestic
fisheries;

•

Undertake promotional and
information activities to stimulate
consumption of fishery products;
and

•

standards fixed by the Secretary of the
Interior. A state may submit programs or
projects for fish restoration in two ways:

Take steps “required for the
development, advancement,
management, conservation,
and protection of the fisheries
resources,” and take steps “required
for the development, management,
advancement, conservation, and
protection of fish and wildlife
resources” through research,
acquisition of land and water or
interests therein, development of
existing facilities, and other means.

•

The state prepares and submits to
the Secretary a comprehensive fish
and wildlife resource management
plan which insures the perpetuation
of these resources for the economic,
scientific, and recreational
enrichment of the people; or

•

The State fish and game department
submits to the Secretary full and
detailed statements of any fish
restoration and management project
proposed for that State.

Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation
and Management Act (Public Law 94-265)
The purpose of the Magnuson-Stevens
Fishery Conservation Management Act is
(1) to maintain without change the existing
territorial or other ocean jurisdiction of
the United States for all purposes other
than the conservation and management of
fishery resources, as provided for in this
Act; (2) to authorize no impediment to, or
interference with, recognized legitimate uses
of the high seas, except as necessary for the
conservation and management of fishery
resources, as provided for in this Act; (3) to
assure that the national fishery conservation
and management program utilizes, and is
based upon, the best scientific information
available; involves, and is responsive to the
needs of, interested and affected States and
citizens; considers efficiency; draws upon
Federal, State, and academic capabilities
in carrying out research, administration,
management, and enforcement; considers
the effects of fishing on immature fish
and encourages development of practical
measures that minimize bycatch and avoid
unnecessary waste of fish; and is workable
and effective; (4) to permit foreign fishing
consistent with the provisions of this Act;
(5) to support and encourage active United
States efforts to obtain internationally
acceptable agreements which provide for

Fish & Wildlife Conservation Act
(Nongame Act) - 16 U.S.C. §§ 2901-2911
The Act encourages states to develop
conservation plans for nongame fish and
wildlife of ecological, educational, aesthetic,
cultural, recreational, economic or scientific
value. Pursuant to amendments adopted in
1988 and 1989 the Secretary of the Interior
is directed to undertake certain activities to
research and conserve migratory nongame
birds.
Fish Restoration & Management
Projects Act - 16 U.S.C. §§ 777 et seq.
Under the Act, the Secretary of the Interior
is authorized and directed to cooperate
with State fish and game departments in
fish restoration and management projects
by agreeing upon the fish restoration and
management projects to be aided under
241

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

effective conservation and management of
fishery resources, and to secure agreements
to regulate fishing by vessels or persons
beyond the exclusive economic zones of
any nation;(6) to foster and maintain the
diversity of fisheries in the United States;
and (7) to ensure that the fishery resources
adjacent to a Pacific Insular Area, including
resident or migratory stocks within the
exclusive economic zone adjacent to such
areas, be explored, developed, conserved,
and managed for the benefit of the people of
such area and of the United States.

private sector recovery of shipwrecks
consistent with the protection of
historical values and environmental
integrity of the shipwrecks and the
sites.
In managing the resources subject to the
provisions of this Act, States are encouraged
to create underwater parks or areas to
provide additional protection for such
resources. Funds available to States from
grants from the Historic Preservation Fund
shall be available, in accordance with the
provisions of title I of the National Historic
Preservation Act [16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.], for
the study, interpretation, protection, and
preservation of historic shipwrecks and
properties.

Migratory Game Fish Study Act of 1959
(16 USC 760(e))
Provides for a continuing study of migratory
marine fishes, including the effects of fishing
on the species.

The United States asserts title to any
abandoned shipwreck that is:

Federal Aid in Sport Fish Restoration
Act (16 U.S.C. 777-777k, 64 Stat. 430)
The Federal Aid in Sport Fish Restoration
Act, also referred to as the Dingell-Johnson
Act or Wallop-Breaux Act, provides Federal
aid to the States for management and
restoration of fish having “material value in
connection with sport or recreation in the
marine and/or freshwaters of the United
States.” Amendments to the Act provide
funds to states for aquatic education,
wetlands restoration, boat safety and clean
vessel sanitation devices (pumpouts), and a
non-trailerable boat program.

•

guarantee recreational exploration of
shipwreck sites; and

•

allow for appropriate public and

•

embedded in coralline formations
protected by a State on submerged
lands of a State; or

•

on submerged lands of a State and is
included in or determined eligible for
inclusion in the National Register

The Act authorizes the EPA and the
Secretary of the department in which the
U.S. Coast Guard is located, currently the
Department of Homeland Security, to
administer and implement the requirements
of the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from ships, the
MARPOL Protocol, and this Act.

The ASA declares the US policy that States
carry out their responsibilities to develop
appropriate and consistent policies to:
protect natural resources and habitat
areas;

embedded in submerged lands of a
State;

Act to Prevent Pollution from
Ships of 1980 - 33 USC § 1901-1911

Abandoned Shipwreck Act of
1987 - 43 U.S.C. § 2101-2106

•

•

The Act describes penalties for violation of
MARPOL and allows the EPA and USCG
to promulgate regulations necessary and
proper for the administration of the Act,
issue certifications, conduct inspections, and
engage in enforcement actions.
242

Appendix B

Disaster Mitigation Act Public Law 106-390

protection of selected species of birds that
combine to form a common resource.

The Disaster Mitigation Act, implemented
by FEMA, reinforces the importance of predisaster infrastructure mitigation planning
to reduce disaster losses nationwide. The
Act is aimed primarily at the control and
streamlining of the administration of federal
disaster relief and programs to promote
mitigation activities. The Act also establishes
minimum mitigation standards for public
and private structures.

National Invasive Species
Act of 1996 – Public Law 104-332

Federal Power Act –
16 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

National Oceanographic
Partnership Act - Public Law 104-201

The Federal Power Act calls for cooperation
between the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) and other Federal
agencies in licensing and relicensing power
projects. Under this act FERC is authorized
to issue licenses for the construction,
operation and maintenance of dams, water
conduits, reservoirs, and transmission lines
to improve navigation and to develop power
from any streams or other bodies of water
over which it has jurisdiction.

NOPA Creates the National Oceanographic
Partnership Program and its governing body,
the National Ocean Research Leadership
Council, to promote the national interest
in natural security, economic development,
quality of life, and strong science education
and communication through improved
knowledge of the ocean.

This Act reauthorized and modified
NANPCA as well as extended it to cover
the Hudson River region. The Act required
record keeping, reporting, sampling and
monitoring of vessels for compliance with
the voluntary guidelines issued by the US
Coast Guard.

Oceans Act of 2000 – Public Law 106-256
The Oceans Act establishes a Commission
which develops a National Oceans Report
which makes recommendations to the
President and Congress on ocean and
coastal issues. The President then responds
to these recommendations in a “National
Ocean Policy” that he submits to Congress.

The 1992 amendments (Public Law 102486), directed the Secretary of Energy, in
consultation with the Secretaries of the
Interior and the Army, to study cost-effective
opportunities to increase hydropower
production from federally owned or
operated facilities. The amendments also
authorized a study on the Nation’s principal
river basins to find opportunities to more
efficiently generate hydroelectric power
from federal facilities.

The Commission establishes a multidisciplinary science advisory panel that
assists the Commission in preparing
its report, ensuring that the scientific
information considered is based on the best
available data.

Migratory Bird Treaty
Act – 16 U.S.C. § 703 et seq.

The Commission must provide a copy of
their draft report to the Governor of each
coastal state whose comments will be
included in the Commission’s final report.
Under this Act the President of the United
States must develop his National Ocean
Policy in consultation with the states.

This Act provides for the protection of all
migratory birds and their parts (including
eggs, nests, and feathers). The Act
implements the international conventions
entered into between the United States and
Canada, Japan, Mexico, and Russia, for the

243

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Ocean Dumping Act 16 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq.

Rivers & Harbors Act of 1899
(RHA) - 33 U.S.C. § 401 et seq.

The ODA amends and consist of Titles I
and II of the Marine Protection, Research,
and Sanctuaries Act. This Act provides
the basic authority for the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) to regulate
ocean dumping. Title I prohibits any person,
without a permit, from:

Under sections 9 & 10 of the RHA, the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers is authorized to
regulate the construction of any structure or
work within navigable waters.

•

•

Transporting from the U.S. any
material for the purpose of dumping
it into ocean waters (defined to mean
those waters of the open seas lying
seaward of the baseline from which
the territorial sea is measured). In the
case of a vessel or aircraft registered
in the U.S. or flying the U.S. flag,
or in the case of a U.S. agency, the
act prohibits any person, without a
permit, from transporting from any
location any material for the purpose
of dumping it into ocean waters; and
Dumping any material transported
from a location outside the U.S. into
the territorial sea, or the contiguous
zone extending 12 nautical miles
seaward from the baseline of the
territorial sea to the extent that
it may affect the territorial sea
or the territory of the U.S. EPA
issues permits regulating the ocean
dumping of all material except
dredged material, which is permitted
by COE.

•

USACE jurisdiction under RHA
is limited to “navigable waters,” or
waters subject to the ebb and flow
of the tide shoreward to the mean
high water mark that may be used
to transport interstate or foreign
commerce.

•

After receiving an application for a
section 10 RHA navigation permit,
USACE issues a public notice to
solicit information from the public,
adjacent property owners, and state,
local, and federal agencies.

•

USACE is required to consult with
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and the National Marine Fisheries
Service to protect and conserve
wildlife resources

Submerged Lands Act –
43 U.S.C. § 1301 et seq.
The SLA gave title to and ownership of the
lands beneath navigable waters, with the
boundaries of the states, to the respective
states, along with the natural resources
within such lands. The Act also gave the
states the right and power to manage,
administer, lease, develop and use the lands
and resources granted.

Oil Pollution Act –
33 U.S.C. §§ 2701-2761

Additionally, the SLA approved and
confirmed the seaward boundary of the
states as “a line three geographical; miles
distant from its coast line or, in the case
of the Great Lakes, to the international
boundary.” The SLA also respected the
boundaries of TX and FL to be three marine
leagues.

The OPA imposes liability for cleanup
and damages on “each responsible party
for a vessel or a facility from which oil is
discharged, or which poses the substantial
threat of a discharge of oil, into or upon the
navigable waters or adjoining shorelines or
the exclusive economic zone.”

244

Appendix B

restoration and preservation of such land
areas as natural undeveloped floodplains,
and to prescribe procedures to implement
the policies and procedures of this executive
order.

Water Resources Development Act
(WRDA) - 33 U.S.C. § 2201 et seq.
The WRDA authorizes and directs the Army
Corps of Engineers (Corps) on projects
for navigation, flood control, flood damage
reduction, environmental restoration,
recreation, hurricane and storm damage
reduction, ecosystem restoration, shore
protection and damage reduction, aquifer
storage and recovery, snagging and sediment
removal, beneficial use of dredged materials
and navigation mitigation throughout the
country.

Executive Order 11990, Protection
of Wetlands (May 24, 1977), requires
federal agencies to take action to
avoid adversely impacting wetlands
wherever possible, to minimize wetlands
destruction, and to preserve procedures
to implement the policies and procedures
of this executive order. It is the intent
of these executive orders that, wherever
possible, federal agencies implement the
floodplains/wetlands requirements through
existing procedures, such as those internal
procedures established to implement
National Environmental Policy Act. The
National Park Service often integrates
compliance with the executive orders with
other legal mandates, such as National
Environmental Policy Act.

Watershed Protection & Flood
Prevention Act - 16 U.S.C. §§ 1001-1009
The act authorizes federal assistance to local
organizations for planning and carrying out
projects in watershed areas for conservation
and use of land and water, and for flood
prevention.
The Secretary of Agriculture is required
to submit to Congress plans for works of
improvement in watershed or sub-watershed
areas where the federal contribution exceeds
$5 million or the plan includes a structure
with a capacity greater than 2,500-acre feet.
These plans must be submitted for comment
to the secretary of the interior if they include
works of improvement for reclamation or
irrigation or affect lands or wildlife under
the Department of the Interior’s jurisdiction.

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
DIRECTORS ORDERS AND
MANAGEMENT POLICIES
NPS Management Policies 2006
This is an update to the 2001 Management
Policies. The policies are derived from the
laws that have been enacted to establish
and govern the NPS and the National Park
System. This document serves as the basic,
Servicewide policy manual used by park
superintendents and other NPS managers
to guide their decision-making. The manual
prescribes policies which enable the NPS
to preserve park resources and values
unimpaired for the enjoyment of future
generations, as required by law. The policies
have been updated to keep pace with new
laws that have been enacted, changes in
technology and American demographics,
and new understandings of the kinds of
actions that are required to best protect
the natural and cultural resources of the
parks. The policies stress the importance of:
using the parks for educational purposes;

EXECUTIVE ORDERS
Executive Orders on Wetlands and
Floodplains
Executive Order 11988, Floodplain
Management (May 24, 1977), requires
federal agencies to evaluate the potential
effects of actions in floodplains to avoid
adversely impacting floodplains wherever
possible. Executive Order 11988 also
requires federal agencies to ensure that
planning programs and budget requests
reflect consideration of flood hazards and
floodplain management, including the
245

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Director’s Order 24:
Museum Collections Management

demonstrating environmental leadership
in the parks; managing park facilities and
resources in ways that will sustain them
for future generations of Americans to
enjoy; and working with partners to help
accomplish the NPS mission. The new
Management Policies is available on the NPS
World Wide Web site at http://www.nps.gov/
policy/MP2006.pdf.

This lays the foundation by which the
NPS meets its responsibilities toward
museum collection. Director’s Order 24
provides policy guidance, standards, and
requirements for preserving, protecting,
documenting, providing access to, and use
of, NPS museum collections.

Director’s Orders

Director’s Order 28:
Cultural Resources Management

The NPS has several sources of detailed
written guidance to help manager’s make
day-to-day decisions. Elements of NPS
guidance are included in Director’s Orders,
Handbooks, and Reference Manuals.
Selected Director’s Orders are summarized
in the following paragraphs. For a
comprehensive list of all Director’s Orders,
refer to the NPS Office of Policy website
(www.nps.gov/applications/npspolicy/
DOrders.cfm).

Director’s Order 28, issued pursuant to 16
United States Code (1 through 4), addresses
cultural resource management. The National
Park Service will protect and manage
cultural resources in its custody through
effective research, planning, and stewardship
and in accordance with the policies and
principles contained in the National Park
Service Management Policies 2006.

Director’s Order 12

Director’s Order 28A: Archeology

Director’s Order 12 describes the policy
and procedures by which the National
Park Service will comply with the National
Environmental Policy Act. The Council on
Environmental Quality, part of the Executive
Office of the President, is the “caretaker”
of National Environmental Policy Act. The
National Park Service is required to abide
by all National Environmental Policy Act
regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations
1500-1508) and any other procedures and
requirements imposed by other higher
authorities, such as the Department of the
Interior.

Director’s Order 28A provides a
management framework for planning,
reviewing and undertaking archeological
activities and other activities that may affect
archeological resources within the National
Park System.
Director’s Order 47: Soundscape
Preservation and Noise Management
The purpose of this Director’s Order is to
articulate National Park Service operational
policies that will require, to the fullest extent
practicable, the protection, maintenance,
or restoration of the natural soundscape
resource in a condition unimpaired by
inappropriate or excessive noise sources.

Director’s Order 17: National Park
Service Tourism

NORTH CAROLINA LAWS

The purpose of this Tourism Policy is
to promote and support sustainable,
responsible, informed, and managed visitor
use through cooperation and coordination
with the tourism industry.

This section lists the major legal and
administrative mandates that apply to the
NPS in North Carolina. These are measures
that the NPS must strive to meet, regardless

246

Appendix B

of the alternative selected for the long-term
management of the park.

North Carolina General
Statutes, Chapter 113: Conservation and
Development

North Carolina General Statutes
Chapter 70: Indian Antiquities,
Archaeological Resources and
Unmarked Human Skeletal Remains
Protection

North Carolina General Statutes,
Chapter 139: Soil and Water Conservation
Districts
North Carolina Coastal Area
Management Act of 1972

North Carolina General Statutes,
Chapter 113A: Pollution Control and
Environment.

247

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX C
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT SUPPORTING INFORMATION

This page intentionally left blank.

Appendix C

Appendix C is organized into the following sections:
C.1 – Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web Soil Survey, Soil Map – Dare County,
North Carolina
C.2 – Federal Emergency Management Agency Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels for
Dare County, North Carolina - Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Area
C.3 – Special Status Species Supporting Information

251

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

C.1. Natural Resources Conservation Service, Web Soil Survey, Soil Map – Dare County, North

Carolina

252

253

254

Appendix C

255

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

C.2. Federal Emergency Management Agency Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels for
Dare County, North Carolina - Fort Raleigh National Historic Site Area

256

257

258

259

260

Appendix C

C.3. Special Status Species Supporting Information

261

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

Table C.3.1. Information on Listed Species that May Occur Near Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site not Affected by Actions Proposed in this General Management Plan
Common
Name
Status
Habitat and Occurrence
(Scientific
Name)
West Indian
Federal:
West Indian manatees occur in warm shallow waters (near shore, salt water
manatee
Endangered bays, and estuarine habitats) of subtropical regions of the Atlantic coast
ranging from coastal North Carolina to the Florida Keys, into the Gulf of
(Trichechus
NC:
Mexico and west to the Louisiana coast. In areas north of Florida, the species
manatus)
Endangered is primarily a migrant or irregular visitor and has been recorded in North
Carolina waters from June to October. Seasonal migrations along the
Atlantic coast range from 125 to 190 miles (O’Shea and Ludlow 1992 in
NatureServe 2010). Manatees may overwinter (October to April) in North
Carolina in warm water discharges from coastal power plants. Manatees
observed along the coast are often in water 3-5 meters deep (prefer a depth
of 1-2 meters), usually in areas lacking strong current and are consistently
associated with freshwater sources (Lefebvre et al. 1989 in NatureServe
2010). Manatees consume almost exclusively submerged aquatic vegetation
and sometimes shoreline vegetation. The North Carolina Natural Heritage
Program reports the last manatee sighting in October of 1986 within 2 miles
of the national historic site (NCNHP 2011). Threats include habitat loss and
degradation, and mortality from boat collisions, hunting, fishing, red tide
poisoning, entrapment in water control structures, entanglement in fishing
gear, and exposure to cold temperatures (Nature Serve 2010).

Loggerhead
sea turtle
(Caretta
caretta)

Federal:
Threatened
NC:
Threatened

Rationale: The last recorded observation of the west Indian manatee was in
1986 within 2 miles of the national historic site, with a poor chance of
persisting for an extended period of time (NCNHP 2011). Actions proposed
under this general management plan would not directly or indirectly affect
the listed West Indian manatee or adversely modify designated critical
habitat. The West Indian manatee would be further addressed under the
Outer Banks Group Shoreline Erosion Management Plan and related
National Environmental Compliance Act assessment prior to any protection
or modification of the national historic site’s shoreline. Therefore this species
was not further assessed under this General Management
Plan/Environmental Impact Statement.
The loggerhead sea turtle is a federally-listed threatened species inhabiting
continental shelves, bays, estuaries, and lagoons in temperate, subtropical,
and tropical waters. Loggerhead sea turtles have a varied diet but feed
mainly on mollusks, crustaceans, and horseshoe crabs (Dodd 1992). In the
Atlantic, the range of the Loggerhead sea turtle extends from
Newfoundland to as far south as Argentina. During the summer, nesting
occurs in the lower latitudes. Mating takes place in late March to early June,
and eggs are laid throughout the summer. The primary Atlantic nesting sites
are along the east coast of Florida, with additional sites in Georgia, the
Carolinas, and the Gulf Coast of Florida. The loggerhead sea turtle was
listed as threatened throughout its range in 1978, with the most significant
threats to the loggerhead sea turtle populations being coastal development,
commercial fisheries, and pollution. Loggerhead sea turtles are the most
abundant species in U.S. coastal waters, and are often captured incidentally
by shrimp trawling (NMFS 2005).
Rationale: Actions proposed under this general management plan would
not directly or indirectly affect the listed Loggerhead sea turtle or adversely

262

Appendix C

Table C.3.1. Information on Listed Species that May Occur Near Fort Raleigh National
Historic Site not Affected by Actions Proposed in this General Management Plan
Common
Name
Status
Habitat and Occurrence
(Scientific
Name)
West Indian
Federal:
West Indian
manatees
occur
in warm
waters
salt
modify
designated
critical
habitat.
Theshallow
loggerhead
sea(near
turtleshore,
would
bewater
manatee
Endangered further
bays, and
estuarineunder
habitats)
of subtropical
regions
of the Atlantic
addressed
the Outer
Banks Group
Shoreline
Erosion coast
ranging from coastal
North
Carolina
to the
Florida Keys,Compliance
into the Gulf
(Trichechus
Management
Plan and
related
National
Environmental
Actof
NC:
Mexico
and
west
to
the
Louisiana
coast.
In
areas
north
of
Florida,
the
species
manatus)
assessment prior to any protection or modification of the national historic
Endangered site’s
is primarily
a
migrant
or
irregular
visitor
and
has
been
recorded
in
North
shoreline. Therefore this species was further assessed under this
Carolina Management
waters from June
to October. Seasonal
General
Plan/Environmental
Impactmigrations
Statement.along the
Atlantic coast range from 125 to 190 miles (O’Shea and Ludlow 1992 in
Shortnose
Federal:
The shortnose sturgeon is found along the Atlantic coast from New
NatureServe 2010). Manatees may overwinter (October to April) in North
sturgeon
Endangered Brunswick
Florida.
Historically,
the
species
waspower
widelyplants.
reported
in North
Carolina into
warm
water
discharges
from
coastal
Manatees
Carolina
rivers,
however
current
distribution
is
not
well
known.
This
(Acipenser
observed along the coast are often in water 3-5 meters deep (prefer species
a depth
NC:
occurs
sparsely in
the Cape
Fearlacking
River drainage,
Albemarle
Sound,
and
brevirostrum)
of 1-2 meters),
usually
in areas
strong current
and are
consistently
Endangered Pamlico
Sound
report).
The species
alsoinbeen
reported in
associated
with(unconfirmed
freshwater sources
(Lefebvre
et al.has
1989
NatureServe
the
Cape
Fear
River,
Pee
Dee
River,
and
Roanoke
River
(close
proximity
to
2010). Manatees consume almost exclusively submerged aquatic vegetation
the
mouth).
Shortnose
sturgeon
migrate
ocean/
estuaries
into
andriver’s
sometimes
shoreline
vegetation.
The
North from
Carolina
Natural
Heritage
freshwater
rivers the
between
Februarysighting
and May,
and spawn
April within
through
June.
Program reports
last manatee
in October
of 1986
2 miles
of the national
historic
site (NCNHP
include
habitat
loss of
and
Spawning
habitat
generally
consists 2011).
of sandThreats
to boulder
sized
substrate
degradation,
and mortality
collisions,
hunting,
fishing,
redper
tide
inland
freshwater
rivers withfrom
low boat
to moderate
flow
(0.2-1.8
meters
poisoning,
entrapment2010).
in water
control
entanglement
fishing
second)
(NatureServe
Ocean
and structures,
estuary habitat
consists ofindeep
gear, and
cold
temperatures
(Nature
Serve 2010).
pools,
softexposure
substratetoand
vegetated
bottoms.
Shortnose
sturgeons feed on

mollusks, crustaceans, insect larvae, and polychaete worms
Rationale: The last Threats
recordedtoobservation
the west
Indian manatee
was in
(NatureServe2010).
the species of
include
overfishing,
degradation
1986
within
miles ofsiltation,
the national
site,and
with
a poor
of with
of
habitat
by2erosion,
toxichistoric
pollution,
dams
thatchance
interfere
persisting for an extended period of time (NCNHP 2011). Actions proposed
upstream
migration to spawning areas (NCNHP 2010). The last recorded
under this general management plan would not directly or indirectly affect
observation occurred near the national historic site on May 18, 1998
the listed West Indian manatee or adversely modify designated critical
(NCNHP
2011).
habitat. The
West Indian manatee would be further addressed under the
Outer Banks Group Shoreline Erosion Management Plan and related

Loggerhead
sea turtle
(Caretta
caretta)

Federal:
Threatened

Sand heather
(Hudsonia
tomentosa)

NC:
Significantly
Rare

NC:
Threatened

Rationale:
The Shortnose
sturgeon has
been
verified
to protection
still exist
National Environmental
Compliance
Act recently
assessment
prior
to any
within
2 miles ofofthe
butshoreline.
there is insufficient
or modification
thenational
nationalhistoric
historicsite,
site’s
Therefore this species
information
to estimate
viability/ecological
integrity (NCNHP 2010).
was not further
assessedits
under
this General Management
Actions
proposed under
thisStatement.
general management plan would not directly or
Plan/Environmental
Impact
indirectly
affect the
sturgeonthreatened
or adverselyspecies
modifyinhabiting
The loggerhead
sea listed
turtle Shortnose
is a federally-listed
continental critical
shelves,habitat.
bays, estuaries,
lagoons
in temperate,
designated
The Westand
Indian
manatee
would be subtropical,
further
and tropical
waters.
turtles
have a Erosion
varied diet
but feed
addressed
under
theLoggerhead
Outer Bankssea
Group
Shoreline
Management
mainly
onrelated
mollusks,
crustaceans,
and horseshoe
crabsAct
(Dodd
1992). Inprior
the to
Plan
and
National
Environmental
Compliance
assessment
Atlantic,
the range
of the Loggerhead
sea turtle
extends
from
any
protection
or modification
of the national
historic
site’s
shoreline.
Newfoundland
to as far
south
Argentina.
During
the
summer,
Therefore
this species
was
not as
further
assessed
under
this
Generalnesting
occurs
in
the
lower
latitudes.
Mating
takes
place
in
late
March
to early June,
Management Plan/Environmental Impact Statement.
and eggs are laid throughout the summer. The primary Atlantic nesting sites
Sand heather occurs in dunes and maritime forest openings, and flowers
are along the east coast of Florida, with additional sites in Georgia, the
May-June (Fussell, 1997b). The species was extirpated from the national
Carolinas, and the Gulf Coast of Florida. The loggerhead sea turtle was
historic
due to dune
erosion its
and
succession
of with
the Maritime
listed assite
threatened
throughout
range
in 1978,
the mostEvergreen
significant
Forest
(pers.
comm.
NCNHP
2010
in
NPS
2011)
threats to the loggerhead sea turtle populations being coastal development,
commercial fisheries, and pollution. Loggerhead sea turtles are the most

Rationale:
Sand heather
was extirpated
from
the
national
historic
site due
abundant species
in U.S. coastal
waters, and
are
often
captured
incidentally
to
erosion
and(NMFS
succession
by dune
shrimp
trawling
2005).of the Maritime Evergreen Forest. Therefore
this species was not further assessed under this General Management
Plan/Environmental
Statement.
Rationale: Actions Impact
proposed
under this general management plan would
not directly or indirectly affect the listed Loggerhead sea turtle or adversely

263

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement
Table C.3.1. Listed Species of Concern
Common Name
Shortnose sturgeon
West Indian manatee
Loggerhead sea turtle
Northern diamondback
terrapin
Black rail
Blue witch grass

Scientific Name
Acipenser brevirostrum
Trichechus manatus
Caretta caretta
Malaclemys terrapin terrapin

Federal Status
Endangered
Endangered
Threatened
Species of Concern

State Status
Endangered
Endangered
Threatened
Special Concern

Laterallus jamaicensis
Dichanthelium caerulescens

Species of Concern

Special Concern
Endangered

Bald eagle

Haliaeetus leucocephalus

Bald and Golden Eagle
Protection Act

Threatened

Carolina watersnake

Nerodia sipedon
williamengelsi
Hudsonia tomentosa
Dichanthelium annulum
Yucca gloriosa
Papilio cresphontes
Satyrium favonius ontario

Sand heather
Ringed witch grass
Moundlily yucca
Giant swallowtail butterfly
Northern oak hairstreak
butterfly
Source: NPS 2011.

264

Special Concern
Significantly Rare
Significantly Rare
Significantly Rare
Significantly Rare
Significantly Rare

Appendix C
Table C.3.2. Government Performance and Results Act, Species Of Management, Fort Raleigh
National Historic Site
Common Name
Scientific name
Federal
State Status
NPS Desired Condition
Status
Details
black-throated green Dendroica virens
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park
warbler - coastal
Significantly Rare
waynei
plain population
peregrine falcon
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park;
Falco peregrinus
Endangered
annual nest and fledge
chicks
little metalmark
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park
Calephrys hesseli
Significantly Rare
timber rattlesnake
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park
Crotalus horridus
Special Concern
northern
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park
Malaclemys terrapin
diamondback
Special Concern
terrapin
terrapin
Carolina water snake Nerodia sipedon
State Listed NPSpecies Present in Park
Special Concern
williamengelsi
twig-rush
State Listed Fussell 1997 reported
Cladium mariscoides
Significantly Rare - observation; species
Other
threatened by beach
migration
saltmarsh spikerush
State Listed Fussell 1997 reported
Eleocharis halophila
Threatened
tentative observation of
species; probably present;
threatened by common reed
and development
winged seedbox
State Listed Fussell 1997 reported
Ludwigia alata
Significantly Rare - observation; species
Peripheral
threatened by beach
migration and common reed
in marsh
moundlily yucca
State Listed NPSpecies Probably Present;
Yucca gloriosa
Significantly Rare - present on Harriot Nature
Peripheral
Trail; need to confirm ID
Source: NPS 2010

265

266

7

21

Hudsonia
tomentosa

Malaclemys
terrapin

20

4

Dichanthelium
caerulescens

Nerodia
sipedon

14

Dichanthelium
annulum

14

21

Acipenser
brevirostrum

Maritime
evergreen
forest

EO
Nb

Scientific
name

Carolina

Diamondback
Terrapin

Sand Heather

Blue Witch
Grass

Ringed Witch
Grass

Shortnose
Sturgeon

1992

2010-0628

1887-PRE

1936-0604

1898-0610

1958-0909

1998-0518

E

C

H

X

H

H

E

Very Low

High

Very Low

Low

Very Low

Low

Medium

SC

SC

T

E

SR-P

E

FSC, in part

E

S3

S1

S3

S2

S1S2

S1

S1

G5T3

G2G3

G4

G5

G2G3

GNR

G3

Habitat Comments

Salt of brackish marshes (endemic to

Salt or brackish marshes, estuaries [NHP
previously tracked records at the
subspecies level; as there is uncertainty
about identity of turtles in NC at the
subspecies level, and as it is listed as
State Special Concern by WRC only at
the species level, NHP is now tracking
only at the species level. NOTE: The
northern subspecies (essentially Dare
County) – M.t. terrapin – has a U.S.
status of FSC; the southern subspecies
(essentially the southern half of the
coast) –M.t. centrata – has no U.S.
status.

Openings in maritime forest, blowouts,
and dunes

Wet savannas with a calcareous
influence

Dry sandy or rocky open woods and
borders of thickets

Brackish water of larger rivers and
estuaries; spawns in freshwater areas.

Table C.3.3. North Carolina Natural Heritage Program 2-Mile Radius Search Results
State
Federal
Common
Date Last
EO
EO
State Global
Protected Protection
Name
Observed Rank Accuracy
Rank
Rank
Status
Status

267

2

21

Satyrium
favonius
Ontario

Trichechus
manatus

West Indian
manatee

1986-10

1977

2007-0918

D

H

C?

Very Low

Low

Medium

E

SR

SR

E

S1N

S2S3

S2S3

G2

G4T4

G5

Warm waters of estuaries and river
mouths

Oak-dominated woods, usually in dry
sites; host plants – oaks (quercus)

Primarily coastal in maritime forests of
thickets; also in foothills and mountains
near hoptree; host plants – prickly-ash
(Zanthoxylum), hoptree (Ptelea)

North Carolina)

Habitat Comments

F - Failed to find Recent surveys failed to relocate an EO previously reported, but there is no evidence occurrence has been destroyed.

E - Verified extant (viability/ecological integrity not assessed) The EO has recently been verified to still exist, but there is insufficient information to estimate its viability/ecological integrity.

D - Poor estimated viability/ecological integrity The EO has a poor chance of persisting for an extended period of time.

C - Fair estimated viability/ecological integrity The EO has a fair chance of persisting for an extended period of time.

B - Good estimated viability/ecological integrity The EO has a good chance of persisting for an extended period of time.

A - Excellent estimated viability/ecological integrity The EO has an excellent chance of persisting for an extended period of time.

EO Rank: an assessment of viability (for species or animal assemblages) or ecological integrity (for natural communities). Possible values are:

EO Number: a number assigned to each occurrence of a specific element. For example, the fourth record for Carex lutea entered into our database would be assigned an EO number of 4.

Blank - An Estimated Representational Accuracy has not been assigned.

Unknown - The percentage of the polygon is occupied by the element is unknown.

Very Low - Less than 5% of the polygon is occupied by the element.

Low - Between 5% and 20% of the polygon is occupied by the element.

Medium - Between 20% and 80% of the polygon is occupied by the element.

High - Between 80% and 95% of the polygon is occupied by the element.

EO Accuracy: a rough measure of the accuracy the mapped EO. Possible values are: Very High Greater than 95% of the polygon is occupied by the element.

Element Occurrence (EO): a specific occurrence of an element of natural diversity. All Eos are mapped as polygons. An EO polygon includes the land and/or water occupied by the element and any
locational uncertainty associated with the record.

Element of Natural Diversity (or simply, “Element”): any natural feature. Natural features tracked by the NCNHP include: (1) rare plant and animal species, sub-species, varieties, and populations; (2)
rare and high-quality natural communities; and (3) notable animal assemblages, such as heronries and shorebird nesting areas.

Source: NCNHP 2011

Giant
Swallowtail

21

Papilio
cresphontes

Northern Oak
Hairstreak

Watersnake

EO
Nb

williamengelsi

Scientific
name

Table C.3.3. North Carolina Natural Heritage Program 2-Mile Radius Search Results
State
Federal
Common
Date Last
EO
EO
State Global
Protected Protection
Name
Observed Rank Accuracy
Rank
Rank
Status
Status

268

2001-08: During August 2001
1953: During 1953
1871-pre: Before 1871
1995-post: After 1995
1975-spr: In the spring of 1975
1992-sum: In the summer of 1992
1975-fall: In the fall of 1975
1960-1961-wi: In the winter of 1960-61
1955-circa: Sometime around 1955
1990s: Sometime during the 1990's
1960s-early: Sometime during the early 1960's
2002-2005: Between 2002 and 2005
1998?: Possibly 1998

Date: Typically, the date an occurrence was last observed is entered as “yyyy-mm-dd”, where “yyyy” is the four-digit year, “mm” is the month as a number, and “dd” is the day. Occasionally this date is
not precisely known and is entered in an alternate format. Some examples of alternate values are:

Note: For occurrences with a mixed rank (e.g., “AC”), the actual rank is uncertain and lies somewhere within the range specified.

_? - There is uncertainty about the rank (used as a qualifier of the above ranks).

NR - Not ranked The EO has not yet been assigned a rank.

U - Unrankable The EO cannot be assigned a rank because of insufficient information.

X - Extirpated The EO is known to be destroyed.

H - Historical There is no recent survey information to verify the continued existence of an EO previously reported.

APPENDIX D
AGENCY COORDINATION

This page intentionally left blank.

Appendix D

271

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

272

Appendix D

273

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

274

Appendix D

275

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

276

Appendix D

277

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

278

Appendix D

279

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

280

Appendix D

281

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

282

Appendix D

283

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

284

Appendix D

285

Fort Raleigh National Historic Site
Draft General Management Plan / Environmental Impact Statement

286

As the nation’s principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has the responsibility
for most of our nationally owned public lands and natural resources. This includes fostering sound
use of our land and water resources; protecting our fish, wildlife, and biological diversity; preserving
the environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places; and providing for
the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The department assesses our energy and mineral
resources and works to ensure that their development is in the best interests of all our people by
encouraging stewardship and citizen participation in their care. The department also has a major
responsibility for American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island
territories under U.S. administration.
NPS FORA 383/119762 April 2013
NPS January 2013

