USACE

Appendix A

Scoping Letters 2012-2015

STATE OF CALIFORNIA-BUSINESS TRANSPORTATION AND HOUSING AGENCY

EDMUND G. BROWN Jr. Governor

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
111 GRAND AVENUE
P. 0. BOX 23660
OAKLAND, CA 94623-0660
PHONE (510) 286-6053
FAX (510) 286-5559
TTY 711

Flex your power!
Be energy efficient!

October 18, 2012

Mr. David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118-3614

SCL101894
SCH#2012102032

Dear Mr. Dunlap:

The Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project/Notice of Preparation
Thank you for including the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) in the
environmental review process for the project referenced above. As the lead agency, the
Santa Clara Valley Water District is responsible for all project mitigation, including any
needed improvements to State highways. The project's fair share contribution, financing,
scheduling, implementation responsibilities and lead agency monitoring should be fully
discussed for all proposed mitigation measures. This information should also be presented
in the Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Plan of the environmental document.

Cultural Resources
Caltrans requires that a project environmental document include documentation of a
current archaeological record search from the Northwest Information Center of the
California Historical Resources Information System if construction activities are proposed
within State right-of-way. Current record searches must be no more than five years old.
Caltrans requires the records search, and if warranted, a cultural resource study by a
qualified, professional archaeologist, and evidence of Native American consultation to
ensure compliance with CEQA, Section 5024.5 and 5097 of the California Public
Resources Code, and Volume 2 of Caltrans' Standard Environmental Reference
(http://ser.dot.ca.gov). These requirements, including applicable mitigation, must be
fulfilled before an encroachment permit can be issued for project-related work in State
ROW; these requirements also apply to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
documents when there is a federal action on a project. Work subject to these requirements
includes, but is not limited to: lane widening, channelization, auxiliary lanes, and/or
modification of existing features such as slopes, drainage features, curbs, sidewalks and
driveways within or adjacent to State ROW.
Bridges, Trestles, Culverts and Other Structures in Riparian Environments
Some project level activities may affect riparian flow patterns upstream of bridges,
trestles, culverts or other structures for which Caltrans holds responsibility. Please ensure
your project level environmental documents include hydrological studies to determine
whether such impacts will occur, and to identify appropriate mitigation measures.
"Caltrans improves mobility across California"

Mr. David Dunlap I Santa Clara Valley Water District
October 18, 2012
Page 2

Dike and Levee Maintenance, Repair and Upgrade
Activities involving demolition, reinforcement or rehabilitation of dikes or levees on
which transportation facilities are built may potentially affect State transportation
facilities. Also, built features on top of dikes and levees may contribute additional
engineering considerations related to weight loading or compaction. These factors must
be addressed through geotechnical and hydrological studies conducted in coordination
with Caltrans at the project level.
Habitat Restoration and Management
Project level activities related to habitat restoration and management should be done in
coordination with local and regional Habitat Conservation Plans, and with Caltrans where
our programs share stewardship responsibilities for habitats, species and/or migration
routes.
Encroachment Permit
Please be advised that any work or traffic control that encroaches onto the State ROW
requires an encroachment permit that is issued by Caltrans. To apply, a completed
encroachment permit application, environmental documentation, and five (5) sets of plans
clearly indicating State ROW must be submitted to the address below. Michael Condie,
District Office Chief, Office of Permits, California Department of Transportation, District
4, P.O. Box 23660, Oakland, CA 94623-0660. Traffic-related mitigation measures should
be incorporated into the construction plans prior to the encroachment permit process. See
the website linked below for more information.
http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/traffops/developserv/permits/
Should you have any questions regarding this letter, please contact Keith Wayne of my
staff by telephone at (510) 286-5737, or by email at keith wayne@dot.ca.gov.
Sincerely,

ERIK ALM, AICP
District Branch Chief
Local Development - Intergovernmental Review
c: Scott Morgan, State Clearinghouse

"Caltrans improves mobility across California"

November 26, 2012
David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway San
Jose, CA 95118-3614 email:
ddunlap@valleywater.org

BY ELECTRONIC MAIL

CENTRAL COAST WATER BOARD COMMENTS ON THE OCTOBER 2012 NOTICE OF
PREPARATION FOR THE UPPER LLAGAS CREEK FLOOD PROTECTION PROJECT
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT, SANTA CLARA COUNTY, FILE NUMBER
431012CQ1
Dear Mr. Dunlap:
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the scope and content of the Draft
Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) for the Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project
(Project). Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board (Central Coast Water Board)
staff understands that the Santa Clara Valley Water District (District) proposes the Project to
achieve the following objectives:
x Provide 100-year flood protection for urban areas of the City of Morgan Hill;
x Provide 10-year flood protection for the semi-urban area around East Little Llagas Creek
downstream of Corralitos Creek; and
x Avoid induced flooding elsewhere on Llagas Creek.
The Central Coast Water Board is charged with the protection of the Waters of the State of
California in the Central Coast Region. The Central Coast Water Board is a responsible agency
under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and administers regulations established
by the Federal Clean Water Act and the California Water Code (Porter-Cologne Water Quality
Control Act). The Central Coast Water Board also administers regulations, plans, and policies
established by the Central Coast Region Water Quality Control Plan and the State Water
Resources Control Board to protect watersheds, their resources, and their beneficial uses. The
Central Coast Water Board administers these regulations, in part, through issuance of water
quality certifications under Clean Water Act (CWA) section 401. The Project proposes to
discharge dredged or fill materials within Waters of the United States and Waters of the State
and will require CWA section 401 water quality certification.
Central Coast Water Board staff understands that the Project, as proposed, involves the
following:
x Deepening the bed and widening at least one bank of approximately 10.9 miles of West
Little Llagas Creek, Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek (Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B,
and 14), with removal of all vegetation on the modified bed and bank(s);
x Altering hydraulic conditions in 1.1 miles of West Little Llagas Creek (Reach 8) by
diverting flows into bypass tunnels and culverts;

Santa Clara Valley Water District

x
x

-2-

November 26, 2012

Abandoning approximately 1.5 miles of West Little Llagas Creek by diverting flows into a
proposed bypass channel; and
Altering hydraulic conditions in approximately 4 miles of East Little Llagas Creek as a
result of diverting flows from West Little Llagas Creek.

As we stated in our August 23, 2012 comment letter on the Project 30% design, Central Coast
Water Board staff does not find that the Project, as proposed, is protective of water quality and
beneficial uses. Therefore Central Coast Water Board staff recommends that the Project DEIR
address the following issues. Our August 23, 2012 comments are incorporated into this letter
by reference.
Project Objectives
1. The Project includes significant environmental impact to a large portion of the Llagas Creek
watershed, with the potential for permanent degradation of water quality and beneficial uses
in the watershed, in order to achieve the flood protection levels identified in the Project
objectives. As a result, Central Coast Water Board staff finds the Project objectives identify
an unreasonably high level of flood protection for the urban areas of the City of Morgan Hill.
Flooding has become a frequent occurrence in Morgan Hill due to land development
practices which encroached on West Little Llagas Creek’s historic floodplain, constricted the
creek’s historic flow path, and significantly increased runoff to the creek due to increased
imperviousness. As such, controlling the flooding that has resulted from these large scale
historic land development practices at the level proposed by the Project will likely result in
unmitigable environmental impacts. However, it is possible to provide a level of flood
protection that is significantly better than Morgan Hill currently experiences without creating
these environmental impacts associated with 100-year flood protection. Central Coast
Water Board staff recommends that the District identify a more reasonable objective for the
Project, such as 50-year or 75-year flood protection for the urban areas of Morgan Hill.
2. The complex causes of flooding in the City of Morgan Hill and the extent of environmental
impact associated with the Project require a more comprehensive approach than simply
modifying stream channels to increase flow capacity. Such an approach fails to address the
real causes of flooding in Morgan Hill. This approach also fails to avoid environmental
impacts adequately because it places the “burden” of the solution entirely on the
waterbodies. Much has been learned about developing more comprehensive and balanced
solutions to flooding problems since the Project objectives were first formulated in 1968. As
they are currently stated, the Project objectives prevent the Project from benefitting from that
learning process and result in unnecessary environmental impacts. Central Coast Water
Board staff recommends that the District adopt a Project objective such as the following:
“Balance flood protection needs with environmental protection to provide a reasonable level
of flood protection for the urban areas of the City of Morgan Hill.”
3. A comprehensive and balanced solution to the flooding problems in Morgan Hill will require
a cooperative effort involving the District, the City of Morgan Hill, Santa Clara County,
property owners, and regulatory agencies. Therefore the DEIR should include a strategy for
developing an advisory committee consisting of representatives from these and other
relevant parties.
4. Where stream channels must be modified, the District should use channel designs that
provide the following characteristics of healthy, functioning streams:

Santa Clara Valley Water District

-3-

November 26, 2012

a. Preservation of existing stream alignments (e.g., West Little Llagas Creek instead of
Reach 7A);
b. Preservation of existing vegetation (mature and emergent);
c. Preservation/restoration of floodplain connectivity;
d. Preservation/restoration of geomorphic functions (e.g., sediment transport, channel
formation events, etc.);
e. Preservation/restoration of hydrologic functions that support habitat and beneficial uses
(e.g., time of concentration, base flow);
f. Sufficient channel width to allow for robust, multi-level canopy riparian vegetation;
g. Adequate benches to support optimal riparian vegetation, at an elevation convenient to
the water;
h. Minimizing or eliminating the use of rock slope protection (RSP);
i. Maximizing use of bridges instead of culverts, and of open-bottom culverts where
bridges are infeasible;
j. Sizing culverts to avoid creating backwater effects or localized raising of the hydraulic
grade line; and
k. Sinuosity and meander.
Alternatives Analysis
5. The District should thoroughly evaluate alternatives that provide a lesser degree of flood
protection where doing so would reduce the environmental impacts of the Project.
6. The list of alternatives included in the Notice of Preparation (NOP) does not include
alternatives which address the real causes of flooding. As a result, the list does not include
alternatives capable of reducing environmental impacts by combining channel modifications
with other approaches. The DEIR should include an alternatives analysis that examines the
following approaches:
x Providing a lower level of flood protection (e.g., 50-year): Central Coast Water Board
staff finds that the Project’s goal to provide 100-yr flood protection to development in a
historic floodplain fails to balance flood control with environmental protection.
x Floodplain restoration: Natural floodplains attenuate flood flows. Much of the area
draining to reaches 7B and 8 was historic floodplain (“wet meadows,” South Santa Clara
Valley Historical Ecological Study, p. 168). Restoring floodplain capacity in this area
through land acquisition and dedication would reduce the need for channel
modifications. The Project should maximize avoidance of environmental impacts by
restoring historic floodplains, floodplain connectivity, and natural flood attenuation
capacity.
Central Coast Water Board staff understands that this will involve hard
decisions about land acquisition, but is reasonable and warranted given the degree of
flood protection desired by the citizens of the City of Morgan Hill and the extent of
environmental impacts resulting from the Project.
x Runoff reduction: Development has increased imperviousness in areas historically
identified as well-drained soils (South Santa Clara Valley Historical Ecological Study, p.
176). Increased imperviousness has significantly increased runoff to West Little Llagas
Creek, exceeding its natural capacity and resulting in flooding. Measures to reduce
runoff, such as retrofitting existing development or constructing off-channel storage,
would reduce the need for channel modifications.
The Project should maximize
avoidance of environmental impacts by maximizing off-line (out of stream) modifications
designed to store runoff and urban retrofits designed to reduce runoff before it enters the
creek channel.

Santa Clara Valley Water District

x

-4-

November 26, 2012

Combination: Solutions which combine all of the above approaches could provide
significant flood protection improvements over existing conditions, while significantly
reducing the Project’s environmental impacts.

7. The alternatives analysis appears to have been influenced by available funding sources and
the type of flood protection improvements eligible for funding under each source. The DEIR
should consider alternatives regardless of funding considerations in order to identify the
least environmentally damaging alternative that is technically achievable.
Financial
feasibility should be considered only after identifying the least environmentally damaging
alternative that is technically achievable.
8. The channel modifications proposed by the Project are linked to flow rate objectives. As a
result, reducing the flow rate in a reach can reduce the channel modifications necessary to
convey the flow. Therefore the DEIR should include a sensitivity analysis that identifies the
extent to which proposed channel modifications could be reduced in each reach for given
reductions in flow rate (e.g., How much could channel deepening activities be reduced in
reach 7B if flow entering reach 7B is reduced 20%?). The sensitivity analysis should then
be used to answer the following questions:
x How much flow reduction is needed in reach 8 to avoid the need for bypass measures,
or for deepening and/or widening reach 8?
x How much flow reduction is needed in reaches 7B and 8 to avoid the need to deepen
and/or widen reach 7B?
x How much flow reduction is needed in reaches 7B and 8 to avoid the need for the
bypass channel (reach 7A)?
x How much flow reduction is needed in reaches 7B and 8 to avoid the need to deepen
and/or widen reaches 5 and 6?
x How much flow reduction is needed in reaches 7B and 8 to preserve areas of riparian
vegetation that will be lost under the proposed Project?
x How much flow reduction is needed in East Little Llagas Creek and Madrone Channel to
avoid the need to deepen and/or widen reach 14?
x How much flow reduction is needed to avoid the need to deepen and/or widen reach 4?
9. The DEIR should use the answers to the questions posed in Comment 8, above, to design
alternatives using the approaches described in Comment 6.
Models and Assumptions
10. To enable a complete review of the Project’s impacts and determination of whether the
Project is the least environmentally damaging alternative that is technically feasible, the
DEIR should explain and support the rationale and assumptions used to develop the
Project.
a. The DEIR should clearly explain and support the rationale for selecting 100-year flood
protection for reaches 7B and 8.
b. The DEIR should clearly explain and support the rationale for selecting 100-year flood
protection for reach 7A. In addition, the DEIR should clearly explain whether this means
there will be enough capacity in reach 7A to handle 100-yr flows from upstream (similar
to the design objective for reaches 4, 5, and 6), or that 100-yr flood protection will be
provided to the lands adjacent to reach 7A. If the latter, the DEIR should explain why
the Project provides a higher degree of flood protection for this area than it does for
similarly-developed lands adjacent to reach 14.

Santa Clara Valley Water District

-5-

November 26, 2012

c. The Project includes significant modifications to reach 14 to provide 10-yr flood
protection. The DEIR should clearly explain and support the rationale for selecting 10year flood protection for reach 14. In addition, the DEIR should explain why such
extensive modifications are needed, particularly considering that the Project diverts flow
from West Little Llagas Creek (a tributary of East Little Llagas Creek) into the main stem
of Llagas Creek.
d. The DEIR should clearly state whether flood protection objectives (i.e., 10-yr, 100-yr) are
based on current or "built out" conditions. The Project should be designed only for
current conditions, and local stakeholders should be expected to incorporate riparian
corridor protections and post-construction stormwater management control measures
that eliminate the need for subsequent channel modifications. The DEIR should also
include a comparison between the 100-year design flow rate currently proposed and the
design flow rate originally proposed in 1968. If the design flow rate has increased, the
DEIR should clearly identify how the increase affects the impacts of the Project.
e. The DEIR should clearly explain the hydrologic model used to determine the 100-year
and 10-year return period flows for each reach, including the assumptions made (e.g.,
rainfall, runoff coefficients, stage-discharge data, development conditions, etc.) and the
rationale for each assumption. The DEIR should also explain how the hydrologic model
was calibrated using empirical data, and when it was last calibrated.
f. The DEIR should clearly explain and support assumptions used in the hydraulic model to
determine proposed channel dimensions (e.g., active channel width and depth, flowline
elevation and slope, etc.). The DEIR should address at least the following:
x Channel vegetation and roughness assumptions;
x Features (such as existing culverts) that act as elevation controls; and
x Features affecting the hydraulic grade line (e.g., flow constrictions).
g. The DEIR should clearly explain the objectives of the hydraulic model (e.g., to stabilize
incision and sediment transport, to maximize revegetation in each reach, to facilitate fish
passage, etc.), and the rationale and appropriateness of each objective.
h. The DEIR should clearly state and support the assumptions, policies, calculations, etc.,
which guide where and how much rock slope protection or other channel armoring is
proposed. Use of RSP and other "hard" armoring methods must be limited to locations
where design flow conditions make all other forms of bank stabilization infeasible.
i. The DEIR should clearly state and support the assumptions, policies, calculations, etc.,
which guide all design decisions, including, but not limited to, the width and number of
maintenance/access roads, channel side slopes, channel alignments, and placement of
grade controls and drop structures.
11. The DEIR should clearly state District, United States Army Corps of Engineers, and/or
FEMA policies that influenced the objectives or design of the Project, including an
explanation of the authority of each agency to set policy for the Project.
Analysis of Environmental Impacts
12. Llagas Creek is geomorphically unstable as a result of development and channelization
activities over the last century. According to data collected by the District, the creek has
down-cut approximately ten feet in the last 100 years. This downcutting threatens remaining
historic riparian vegetation and hinders natural recruitment of riparian vegetation. In
addition, the creek bed and lower banks are now located in soil strata that do not readily
support healthy, robust, and multi-layered riparian vegetation. Data suggests that Llagas
Creek geomorphology remains unstable, so these problems are likely to continue without

Santa Clara Valley Water District

-6-

November 26, 2012

intervention. The dynamic nature of the Llagas Creek system makes it difficult to determine
the impact of the Project on the future of Llagas Creek. Therefore the DEIR should contain
an analysis that includes the following:
a. An assessment of geomorphic stability within the Llagas Creek watershed, and an
assessment of how the Project will affect this stability (positively or negatively). The
assessment should compare existing conditions, future conditions without the Project,
and future conditions with the Project;
b. An assessment of sediment transport characteristics within the Llagas Creek watershed
and the environmental functions and beneficial uses affected by these characteristics,
and an assessment of how the Project will affect sediment transport and these functions
and uses (positively or negatively).
The assessment should compare existing
conditions, future conditions without the Project, and future conditions with the Project;
c. An assessment of aquatic and riparian habitat within the Llagas Creek watershed and
the environmental functions and beneficial uses supported by the habitat, and an
assessment of how the Project will affect habitat functions and beneficial uses (positively
or negatively). The assessment should compare existing conditions, future conditions
without the Project, and future conditions with the Project;
d. An assessment of water quality and biotic conditions within the Llagas Creek watershed
and the environmental functions and beneficial uses supported by these factors, and an
assessment of how the Project will affect water quality and biotic conditions (positively or
negatively).
The assessment should compare existing conditions, future conditions
without the Project, and future conditions with the Project; and
e. An assessment of wildlife within the Llagas Creek watershed, and an assessment of how
the Project will affect wildlife (positively or negatively). The assessment should compare
existing conditions, future conditions without the Project, and future conditions with the
Project.
13. The long-term environmental impact of the Project is directly linked to the revegetation
potential of the modified channels.
However, the revegetation potential of the modified
channels is uncertain due to the soil quality and groundwater access available at the
proposed channel widths and depths. Therefore it is uncertain whether vegetation impacted
by the Project could be replaced, or that the modified channels could support robust riparian
vegetation. Central Coast Water Board staff will not be able to recommend water quality
certification of the Project objectives or design until the revegetation potential is clear. The
DEIR should fully analyze the revegetation potential of the modified channels, provide an
analysis of habitat functions and beneficial uses that would be impacted, and compare these
losses with the functions and beneficial uses that can be restored.
14. Central Coast Water Board staff understands that channel modification and alignment
decisions are influenced, in part, by the desire to use existing constructed features. These
features include existing culverts in reaches 7B and 8 and culverts constructed in the past
along the anticipated alignment of proposed reach 7A. The project should be designed to
achieve a minimum of environmental impact, rather than to match flowlines and cross
sections of previously constructed features. The DEIR should identify how the use of each
feature affects channel width, depth, and slope. In addition, the DEIR should compare the
impact of using previously constructed features, replacing the features, and avoiding them
altogether.
15. Lengthy tunnels and culverts can become habitat for roosting bats, which can be a
significant source of bacteria to the Llagas Creek watershed. In light of the fact that Llagas
Creek is already addressed by a bacteria Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL), the DEIR

Santa Clara Valley Water District

-7-

November 26, 2012

should identify and analyze the environmental impact of the bypass culverts and tunnel
proposed in reach 8, and identify and propose mitigation for bats or any other potential new
sources of bacteria. The Project must not contribute to Llagas Creek’s impairment for
bacteria.
16. The Project includes constructing, in the midst of active agricultural fields, a new channel
directly connected to Llagas Creek. Agricultural fields are significant sources of nutrients,
pesticides, and sediment, and Llagas Creek is already impaired for these pollutants, with
nutrient and sediment TMDLs in place.
The DEIR should identify and analyze the
environmental impact of constructing and operating reach 7A on the nutrient, pesticide, and
sediment conditions in Llagas Creek, and identify and propose mitigation for any new or
potential new sources of these pollutants. The Project (and subsequent operation by the
District) must not contribute to Llagas Creek’s impairment for nutrients, pesticides, and
sediment.
17. The Project includes intercepting West Little Llagas Creek at a point north of Watsonville
Road and diverting it to Llagas Creek. West Little Llagas Creek currently flows into East
Little Llagas Creek. The DEIR should identify and analyze the environmental impact of
decreased flows on lower West Little Llagas Creek, Madrone Channel, and East Little
Llagas Creek; the impact of increased flows in Llagas Creek; and the impact of constructing
and operating the diversion channel itself.
Restoration
18. Projects of this scope provide opportunities to restore lost hydrologic and environmental
functions and beneficial uses. Environmental impacts have accumulated in Llagas Creek
watershed streams for over the last century as a result of development, flood protection
improvement projects, and capacity maintenance efforts, resulting in degradation of water
quality and beneficial uses. The Project should include measures designed to restore these
lost functions and beneficial uses approaching historical conditions, rather than merely preproject conditions.
Therefore the DEIR should include a thorough evaluation of
opportunities to provide better protection of water quality and beneficial uses than is
provided by current conditions.
Cumulative Impacts
19. The analysis of cumulative impacts in the DEIR should include all channel modification work
conducted in the Llagas Creek system by the District and others for the purpose of flood
management, especially modifications made since 1973 associated with the Llagas Creek
Watershed Project Plan and its subsequent iterations.

Santa Clara Valley Water District

-8-

November 26, 2012

Thank you again for the opportunity to influence the scope and content of the DEIR. If we may
clarify any of our comments or be of further assistance, please contact Jon Rohrbough at (805)
549-3458 or via email at jrohrbough@waterboards.ca.gov or Phil Hammer at (805) 549-3882.
Sincerely,

Phil Hammer
2012.11.26 13:07:27 -08'00'
for
Kenneth A. Harris, Jr.
Interim Executive Officer
S:\CEQA\Comment Letters\Santa Clara County\Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection NOP_431012CQ1_final.doc

cc:
Luisa Valiela
US Environmental Protection Agency
Valiela.Luisa@epamail.epa.gov

Doug Weinrich
US Fish and Wildlife Service
Douglas_Weinrich@fws.gov

Christopher Eng
US Army Corps of Engineers
Christopher.K.Eng@usace.army.mil

Joseph Terry
US Fish and Wildlife Service
Joseph_Terry@fws.gov

Terry Marks
US Army Corps of Engineers
Terry.L.Marks@usace.army.mil

Tami Schane
California Department of Fish and Game
tschane@dfg.ca.gov

Jon Ambrose
National Marine Fisheries Service
Jonathan.ambrose@noaa.gov

Karl Bjarke
City of Morgan Hill
Karl.bjarke@morganhill.ca.gov
Jon Rohrbough
Central Coast Water Board
jrohrbough@waterboards.ca.gov

County of Santa Clara
Parks and Recreation Department
298 Garden Hill Drive
Los Gatos, California 95032-7669
(408) 355-2200 FAX 355-2290
Reservations (408) 355-2201

www.parkhere.org
November 1, 2012
David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118
Subject: Notice of Preparation for a Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report for the Upper
llagas Creek Flood Protection Project

Dear Mr. Dunlap:
The County of Santa Clara Parks and Recreation Department (County Parks) is in receipt of a Notice of
Preparation (NOP) for a Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) for the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection Project.
It is understood that the Llagas Creek Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP) was originally proposed by the
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) in 1968 and approved by three local sponsoring agencies,
that included the County of Santa Clara,the State of California and U.S. Congress. Construction began in
1973 but halted in 1974 in order to re-evaluate potential environmental impacts, and subsequently, an
EIR/EIS was completed in 1982 on a revised project. It is understood that the revised project subdivided
the project area into 14 reaches, with reaches from Buena Vista Avenue downstream to the confluence
of the Pajaro River completed between 1973 and 1994. The current project is designated as the Upper
Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project,and Draft Subsequent EIR pertains to the remaining reaches
(reach 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B,8, and 14) along sections of Little Llagas Creek and Llagas Creek.
County Parks' concerns and comments are primarily focused on potential impacts to County parklands,
park resources and recreational facilities, public access, and countywide trail routes relative to the
Santa Clara County Countywide Trails Master Plan Update (Countywide Trails Master Plan}, an element
ofthe County of Santa Clara General Plan (1995-2010) adopted by the County of Santa Clara Board of
Supervisors on November 14,1995.
Land Use & Policies - County
The DEIR should discuss and consider potential impacts to County parklands,including mitigation
strategies/measures,park resources and recreational facilities, and countywide trails,including public
access, relative to the Parks and Recreation Element of the County of Santa Clara General Plan (19902010) and the Countywide Trails Master Plan .
Board of Supervisors: Mike Wassennan, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss
SANTA ClAM
COUNTY PARKS

County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

The Countywide Trails Moster Plan identifies the following regional trail routes within and adjacent to
the project area which may be impacted by the proposed project.
• Regional Trail Route C25 Main Street Connecting Trail designated as on-street bicycle trail with
parallel trail route; route within road right-of-way (ROW) for hiking, off-road cycling.
• Regional Trail Route Rl-A Juan Bautista de Anza NHT (bicycle route) designated as on-street
bicycle trail within the road ROW for on-road cycling only.
• Regional Trail Route 55 Juan Bautista de Anza NHT (Coyote Creek- Llagas sub-regional trail}
designated as trail within other public lands for hiking, off-road cycling,equestrian.
• RegionalTrail Route 57 Morgan Hill Cross Valley Sub-regional trail designated as on-street
bicycle trail with parallel trail route; route within the road ROW for hiking, off-road cycling.
• RegionalTrail Route R3 Benito Clara Trail designated as trail within other public lands for hiking,
off-road cycling,equestrian.
• Regional Trail Route C31Buena Vista Day Connector designated as on"street bicycle trail with
parallel trail route;route within ROW for hiking, on-road cycling, equestrian.
The County of Santa Clara (Parks and Recreation Department) owns property within the project area
(Silveira property) that would be impacted by the project. As such, the DEIR should identify the County
as a responsible agency and coordinate with County Parks on the development of the proposed flood
protection designs and mitigation measures within this area. In addition, the DEIR should consider and
address potential impacts,including project mitigation strategies,to the Silveira property.
Land Use & Policies- other agencies
The DEIR should consider and address adopted land use goals and policies for the regional/citywide
trails system, and address proposed trail routes that have been approved by the City of Gilroy in their
Parks and Recreation System Master Plan (2001).
The DEIR should consider and address adopted land use goals and policies, for regional/citywide trail
routes that have been approved by the City of Morgan Hill in the City of Morgan Hill Bikeways Master
Plan (2001), Draft Trails and Natural Resource Study, and Bikeways Master Plan Update (2008).
Hydrology
The DEIR should discuss and consider the project's impacts to the hydrology,riparian corridor and
habitats,particularly in reaches where there are extensive segments of box culverts and to the riparian
habitats in segments where maintenance roads are proposed on both sides ofthe creek.
In reach 7a where West Little Llagas Creek is proposed to be disconnected from main stream flows as a
result of the proposed diversion channel, the DEIR should consider and address the short term and long
term impacts to the hydrology, riparian corridor and habitat of West Little Llagas Creek as well as
impacts downstream and upstream of the diversion, and to the hydrology and riparian habitat along the
Silveira property.
Recreation
The DEIR should consider and address the goals, policies and recreational opportunities,including trails,
within and adjacent to the project area,consistent with the Parks and Recreation chapter of the County
of Santa Clara General Plan (1990-2010) and Countywide Trails Master Plan.
Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss
County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

Non-motorized circulation within the project area should be analyzed in the context of potential
connectivity with all nearby trail routes. Per Policy PR-TS 6.3 of the Parks and Recreation chapter of the
County General Plan,public Improvement projects such as road widening,bridge construction and flood
control projects that may impact existing or proposed trails should be designed to facilitate provisions
of shared use. County Parks encourages SCVWD to incorporate planning of recreation facilities
particularly trails and amenities for public access into the project early in the design development
process.
County Parks is encouraged by SCVWD commitment to work with cities and the County to incorporate
recreation opportunities such as creekside trails into the project, and would welcome the opportunity
to work with SCVWD,cities and other agencies on the development of public trails within the project
area.
County Parks looks forward to continued collaboration with SCVWD on this project. We thank you for
the opportunity to respond to this NOP and request that our agency continues to receive timely
information on the project. We look forward to reviewing the DEIR and other environmental
documents when they become available. If you have any questions regarding these comments, please
feel free to contact me at (408) 355-2235 or via email at Antoinette.Romeo@prk.sccgov.org.
Sincerely,

Antoinette Romeo
Park Planner Ill

Cc:

®

SANTA ClARA
COUNTY PAliK$

Jane Mark,Senior Planner;
Tim Heffington, Senior Real Estate Agent;
lan Champeny,Real Estate Agent

Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss

County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

County of Santa Clara
Department of Planning and Development
Planning Office
county Government Center, East Wing, 7th Floor
70 west Hedding street
San Jose, California .951 10-1 705
(408) 299-5770 FAX (408) 288-9 l98

www.sccplanning.org

November 6, 2012
Mr. David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118

RE: Comments regarding Notice of Preparation (NOP) of a Draft
Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) for the Upper Llagas Creek Flood
Protection Project
Dear Mr. Dunlap:
Please find enclosed comments from the County regarding the Notice of Preparation
(NOP) of a Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) for the Upper Llagas Creek
Flood Protection Project. These include comments from Roads & Airports Dept., Parks
& Recreation Dept., and Dept. of Environmental Health.
The attached comments include concerns the County has regarding traffic during
construction, compliance with County Roads's Dept. future width line standards for
bridge and road construction, impacts to recreational trails, and riparian corridors and
associated habitat, and impacts to septic systems, groundwater, surface water, and
perchlorate plume, and wells.
If you have any questions regarding coordination of comments on the NOP from the
County, please contact Janice Spuller at (408) 573-2462, in Roads & Airports Dept. ,
Antoinette Romeo at (408) 355-2235 in Parks & Recreation Dept., or Scott Bourdon at
(408) 918-1955 in Dept. of Environmental Health.
Sincerely,

Ignacio Gonzalez
Director of Planning and Development
cc:
Janice Spuller -Roads & Airports Dept.
Antoinette Romeo -Parks & Recreation Dept.
Scott Bourdon- Dept. of Environmental Health
Roland Velasco, Mike Wasserman - Board of Supervisors District 1
Sylvia Gallegos- Deputy County Executive, County Executive Office
Board of Supctvisors: Mike wasserman. George Shirakawa. Dave Cortese. Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss
County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

County of Santa Clara
Roads and Airports Department

Io 1 Skyport Drive
san Jose. california 951 1 Q-1302
(408) 573-2400

October 31,2012
David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118

SUBJECT:Notice of Preparation- The Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Draft Subsequent
Environmental Impact Report
Deal' Mr. Dunlap:
The County of Santa Clara Roads and Airports Department is submitting the following comments regarding the
preparation of an envir01rn1ental impact rep01t for the project cited above.
The following items should be included in the Draft Subsequent Enviromnental hnpact Report.
I. Provide a discussion of constrnction-related impacts on local roads and bridges and identifY mitigation
measures for significant impacts. Potential impacts to consider include pavement degradation from
construction vehicles, traffic from road closures and detours, and accommodating bicyclists through
construction zones.
2.

IdentifY impacts of project on existing road and bridges considering factors such as alignment, design, and
height. IdentifY mitigation measures for significant impacts, including as applicable bridge replacements. Any
bridge replacements and road modifications identified as mitigation measures must be consistent with County
standards and the road's future width line.

Thank you for the oppmtunity to comment ou the NOP. If you have any questions about these comments, or require
more information on the County's local roads and bridges, please contact me at 408-573-2462 or
janice.spuller@rda.sccgov.org.
Sincer :s , OO!/,

.

;; ·cvl-

Transpmtation Plam1er
c: MA, DC, AP, TP, NC

Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman. George Shirakawa. Dave Cortese. Ken Yeager. Liz Kniss
county Executive: Jeffrey v. Smith

County of Santa Clara
Parks and Recreation Department
298 Garden Hill Drive
Los Gatos, California 95032-7669
(408) 355-2200 FAX 355-2290
Reservations (408) 355-2201

www.parkhere.org
November 1, 2012
David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118
Subject: Notice of Preparation for a Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report for the Upper
Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project

Dear Mr. Dunlap:
The County of Santa Clara Parks and Recreation Department {County Parks) is in receipt of a Notice of
Preparation {NOP) for a Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) for the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection Project.
It is understood that the Llagas Creek Watershed Project Plan {LCWPP) was originally proposed by the
Santa Clara Valley Water District {SCVWD) in 1968 and approved by three local sponsoring agencies,
that included the County of Santa Clara, the State of California and U.S. Congress. Construction began in
1973 but halted in 1974 in order to re-evaluate potential environmental impacts, and subsequently, an
EIR/EIS was completed in 1982 on a revised project. It is understood that the revised project subdivided
the project area into 14 reaches, with reaches from Buena Vista Avenue downstream to the confluence
of the Pajaro River completed between 1973 and 1994. The current project is designated as the Upper
Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, and Draft Subsequent EIR pertains to the remaining reaches (reach
4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) along sections of Little Llagas Creek and Llagas Creek.
County Parks' concerns and comments are primarily focused on potential impacts to County parklands,
park resources and recreational facilities, public access, and countywide trail routes relative to the
Santa Clara County Countywide Trails Master Plan Update {Countywide Trails Master Plan), an element
of the County of Santa Clara General Plan {1995-2010) adopted by the County of Santa Clara Board of
Supervisors on November 14, 1995.
Land Use & Policies- County
The DEIR should discuss and consider potential impacts to County parklands, including mitigation
strategies/measures, park resources and recreational facilities, and countywide trails, including public
access, relative to the Parks and Recreation Element of the County of Santa Clara General Plan {19902010) and the Countywide Trails Master Plan .

®

SANTACI.Alt'.
cotiNlY PARKS

Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss
County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

The Countywide Trails Master Plan identifies the following regional trail routes within and adjacent to
the project area which may be impacted by the proposed project.
• Regional Trail Route C25 Main Street Connecting Trail designated as on-street bicycle trail with
parallel trail route; route within road right-of-way (ROW) for hiking, off-road cycling.
• Regional Trail Route Rl-A Juan Bautista de Anza NHT {bicycle route) designated as on-street
bicycle trail within the road ROW for on-road cycling only.
•
•
•
•

Regional Trail Route 55 Juan Bautista de Anza NHT (Coyote Creek- Llagas sub-regional trail)

designated as trail within other public lands for hiking, off-road cycling, equestrian.
Regional Trail Route 57 Morgan Hill Cross Valley Sub-regional trail designated as on-street
bicycle trail with parallel trail route; route within the road ROW for hiking, off-road cycling.
Regional Trail Route R3 Benito Clara Trail designated as trail within other public lands for hiking,
off-road cycling, equestrian.
Regional Trail Route C31Buena Vista Day Connector designated as on-street bicycle trail with
parallel trail route; route within ROW for hiking, on-road cycling, equestrian.

The County of Santa Clara (Parks and Recreation Department) owns property within the project area
(Silveira property) that would be impacted by the project. As such, the DEIR should identify the County
as a responsible agency and coordinate with County Parks on the development of the proposed flood
protection designs and mitigation measures within this area. In addition, the DEIR should consider and
address potential impacts, including project mitigation strategies, to the Silveira property.

Land Use & Policies - other agencies
The DEIR should consider and address adopted land use goals and policies for the regional/citywide
trails system, and address proposed trail routes that have been approved by the City of Gilroy in their
Parks and Recreation System Master Plan {2001).
The DEIR should consider and address adopted land use goals and policies, for regional/citywide trail
routes that have been approved by the City of Morgan Hill in the City of Morgan Hill Bikeways Master
Plan {2001), Draft Trails and Natural Resource Study, and Bikeways Master Plan Update (2008).

Hydrology
The DEIR should discuss and consider the project's impacts to the hydrology, riparian corridor and
habitats, particularly in reaches where there are extensive segments of box culverts and to the riparian
habitats in segments where maintenance roads are proposed on both sides of the creek.
In reach 7a where West Little Llagas Creek is proposed to be disconnected from main stream flows as a
result of the proposed diversion channel, the DEIR should consider and address the short term and long
term impacts to the hydrology, riparian corridor and habitat of West Little Llagas Creek as well as impacts
downstream and upstream of the diversion, and to the hydrology and riparian habitat along the Silveira
property.

Recreation
The DEIR should consider and address the goals, policies and recreational opportunities, including trails,
within and adjacent to the project area, consistent with the Parks and Recreation chapter of the County
of Santa Clara General Plan {1990-2010) and Countywide Trails Master Plan.
Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss
County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

Non-motorized circulation within the project area should be analyzed in the context of potential
connectivity with all nearby trail routes. Per Policy PR-TS 6.3 of the Parks and Recreation chapter of the
County General Plan, public Improvement projects such a:s road widening, bridge construction and flood
control projects that may impact existing or proposed trails should be designed to facilitate provisions
of shared use. County Parks encourages SCVWD to incorporate planning of recreation facilities
particularly trails and amenities for public access into the project early in the design development
process.
County Parks is encouraged by SCVWD commitment to work with cities and the County to incorporate
recreation opportunities such as creekside trails into the project, and would welcome the opportunity
to work with SCVWD, cities and other agencies on the development of public trails within the project
area.
County Parks looks forward to continued collaboration with SCVWD on this project. We thank you for
the opportunity to respond to this NOP and request that our agency continues to receive timely
information on the project. We look forward to reviewing the DEIR and other environmental
documents when they become available. If you have any questions regarding these comments, please
feel free to contact me at (408) 355-2235 or via email at Antoinette.Romeo@prk.sccgov.org.
Sincerely,

Antoinette Romeo
Park Planner Ill

Cc:

Jane Mark, Senior Planner;
Tim Heffington,Senior Real Estate Agent;
lan Champeny, Real Estate Agent

Board of Supervisors: Mike Wasserman, George Shirakawa, Dave Cortese, Ken Yeager, Liz Kniss

County Executive: Jeffrey V. Smith

County of Santa Clara
Departmcnl of Environmental Health
1 sss Gerger Drive. suit{· : oo
Stlll Jose. California DG 1 1 :::!-2711)
(·1-0H) U 18-3400

www.EIIinfo.org

November 6, 2012

Mr. David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118
Re: CEQA Referrals- SCVWD The Upper Llagas Creek Flood Project
Dear Mr. Dunlap:
This letter is in reference to the above subject project requesting our department to respond to the CEQA
referrals.
For The Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, the Department of Enviromnental Health (DEH) would
like to see the impact on existing onsite wastewater treatment systems (septic systems) and any impact on
groundwater or surface water addressed in the EJR. Also, DEH would like more infom1ation on any effects on
the perchlorate plume (or the mitigation thereof). Please also address any impacts on existing or proposed
drinking water wells.
If you have any questions, please feel free to give me a call at (408) 918-1955 or email me at
scott.bourdon@deh.sccgov.org. Thank you.
Sincerely,
/>

.

I

•(

·;
-

.
', /

j

-)

1/ -'lI' .: )(.''1/_ I(Jo/'\
L 1.

[

Scott Bourd6, Director
Department of Enviromnental Health
cc:

Colleen A. Oda, Plam1er Ill
Santa Clara County Planning Office, 70 W. Hedding St., E. Wing, 7th Floor, San Jose, CA 95110

] Oi\H\ of Supervisors: ;..li!.;l' \\'<lSSl'fl llfll 1. ( ;ct
CottlliY EXl'Cllli\'c: Jl'!lrt·y V. Smilll

liW' Sllir<ll\ii\Vi\, Ili1\'t' ( :t )rJt ·sc. 1\Cil Yvagt T. [ .iz l\1 I iSS

State of California -The Natural Resources Agency

DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND GAME

EDMUND G. BROWN JR., Governor
CHARLTON H. BONHAM, Director

Bay Delta Region
7329 Silverado Trail
Napa, CA 94558
(707) 944-5500
www.dfg.ca.gov

November 9, 2012

Mr. David Dunlap
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118
Dear Mr. Dunlap:
Subject:

Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Notice of Preparation,
SCH #2012102032, Santa Clara County

The Department of Fish and Game (DFG) has r.eviewed the Santa Clara Valley Water
District's (District) Notice of Preparation (NOP) provided for the subject project, and we
have the following recommendations for issues to be addressed in development of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) document:
The CEQA document should describe how the flood design criteria were derived and why
those criteria are appropriate for Upper Llagas Creek.
The NOP describes installation of a bypass channel in Reach 7A to bypass a 1.9-mile
segment of West Little Llagas Creek, and installation of a weir and two bypass culverts in
Reach 8 to bypass high flows. The CEQA document should describe how processes such
as sediment transport, scouring of fines, minimization of channel vegetation encroachment,
and introduction and transport of woody material will be supported with the bypassing of
high flows typically associated with channel maintenance flows and channel forming flows.
The CEQA document should explain whether and how the proposed project will reduce
maintenance needs in the project area and the justification for the number and size of
maintenance roads included in the project.
The CEQA document should clearly define the impacts to vegetation, differentiating
between impacts to native and non-native species, disclosing number, size distribution, and
species identification of trees removed as a result of the project, and providing impacts to
riparian vegetation in linear feet and percent canopy cover. In addition, the document
should discuss what types of riparian vegetation the channel may have supported
historically, and describe limitations of revegetation (due to soils, hydrology, etc.) and
describe what type of riparian vegetation can reasonably be expected to be successful in
replanting and restoration.

Conserving Ca[ijornia's WiU[ije Since 1870

Mr. David Dunlap
November 9, 2012
Page 2

The CEQA document should clearly define potential project-related impacts to sensitive
species, including but not limited to least Bell's vireo (Vireo be/Iii pusillus), South-Central
California Coast steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss), California tiger salamander
(Ambystoma californiense), California red-legged frog (Rana aurora draytonil), western
pond turtle (Emys marmorata), burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia), yellow warbler
(Dendroica petechia), and San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes
annectens).
The CEQA document should clearly describe whether there will be an increase or decrease
in the length of stream that will be day-lighted as a result of this project. The document
should provide clear justification for any reduction in day-lighted stream length (resulting
from culverts, tunnel, etc.) and describe how this will be mitigated for in-kind.
The CEQA document should describe any net benefits of the project to native species, both
listed and non-listed. Mitigation site(s) should be disclosed and as much information as
possible should be provided that describes how specific mitigation will adequately
compensate for project-related impacts.
DFG appreciates the opportunity to comment on the District's NOP for the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection Project. Questions regarding this letter and further coordination on
this project should be directed to Ms. Tami Schane, Environmental Scientist, at
(415) 831-4640; or Mr. Liam Davis, Senior Environmental Scientist, at (707) 944-5529.
Sincerely,

Scott Wilson
Acting Regional Manager
Bay Delta Region
cc:

State Clearinghouse

10/22/2015

Print or export your map

10 km
5 mi

Historic Trail Corridor |
Revised/Unofficial Corridor |
Recreational Trail (Planned) |
Recreational Trail (Existing) |
Shapefile and KML
Uploads |
Recreational Trail (Under Review) |
Photos (Approved) |
Photos (Under Review) |
Trail Resource (Approved) |
Trail
Resource (Under Review) |
Map Notes

http://www.mapsportal.org/mapcollab_anza/legacy/print/print_map.php?0.18977399007417262

1/1

Operated by Other (open)
PALO
ALTO

LOS
ALTOS

MOUNTAIN
VIEW

Existing Routes

Off-Street Trail

On-Street Bike Route with Parallel Trail

SUNNYVALE

LOS ALTOS
HILLS

Palo Alto

Operated by SCCPRD (open)

MILPITAS

On-Steet Bike Route

SANTA
CLARA

Proposed Future Connections

MROSD
(Rancho San Antonio)

Off-Street Trail

CUPERTINO

CAMPBELL

County Parks
(Stevens Creek)

On-Street Bike Route with Parallel Trail

SAN JOSE

MONTE
SERENO

County Parks
(Sanborn)

LOS
GATOS

Morgan Hill

MROSD
(El Sereno)
County Parks
(Lexington Reservoir)
MROSD
(Sierra Azul)

On-Street Bike Route

County Parks
(Coyote Creek Trail)

SARATOG A

County Parks
(Almaden Quicksilver)

State Parks (Henry W Coe)

MORGAN
HILL

San Jose
County Parks
(Santa Teresa)

GILROY

Sources: Esri, USGS, NOAA

This map generated by the County of Santa Clara Department of Parks
and Recreation. The GIS files were compiled from various sources.
While deemed reliable, the Department assumes no liability.

Juan Bautista de Anza Trail Status

Lead Agencies for Complete Trail Segments

Draft Aug 5, 2015

Created By: WF

Scale:

0

1.25

2.5

5

Miles

USACE

Appendix B

Stream Maintenance Program Best Management
Practices

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

Table 2‐12. BMPs Listings
A.
SECTION A –Pre-Project Planning and General BMPs
General BMPs are applicable program-wide, for most routine SMP maintenance activities. These measures include standard construction
practices and impact avoidance measures that will minimize potential environmental impacts. These BMPs will be implemented by the stream
maintenance crew, as appropriate and as overseen by site managers, for all activities associated with the maintenance program. The majority of
these BMPs are implemented prior to and during maintenance operations, though the level of activity varies depending on the work type.
Other General BMPs are conducted prior to implementing maintenance activities on site. This group of measures includes procedures to identify
site or maintenance constraints, such as biological or cultural resource surveys which coincide with permit compliance requirements. Site design
constraints for sediment and bank stabilization activities in particular are also identified as part of the pre-project planning process.
BMP Number
GEN-1

BMP Title
In-Channel Work Window

BMP Description
All ground-disturbing maintenance activities (i.e., sediment removal, bank stabilization, tree removal, and
mechanized vegetation management) occurring in the channel (below bankfull) will take place between June 15
and October 15. Requests for work window extensions must be submitted to the regulatory agencies by October
st
1 , listing the creek names and reaches where a work extension will occur. Work extensions vary per work activity.
The agencies will provide a single response within one week. Significant rainfall applies after October 15. An
extension through December 31 may apply if the following requirements are met and regulatory agency approval is
received:
For ground-disturbing activities:
 Work may continue if no significant rainfall, defined as greater than 0.5 inches per 24 hours within a local
1
th
watershed, is either forecasted or observed. Following October 15 , maintenance work shall cease for
the season if such a rain event is forecasted or observed.
Sediment removal
 Extended Work Window:
1. Creeks supporting anadromous fish:
An extended work window may occur from October 15 through October 31, or until local rainfall of 0.5
inches or greater falls within the subject watershed within a 24-hour period, whichever occurs first.
2. Creeks not supporting anadromous fish:
An extended work window may occur from October 15 through November 30th, or until local rainfall of
0.5 inches or greater falls within the subject watershed within a 24-hour period, whichever occurs first.
 Extended Work Window in Lower Quality Areas:
1. Sediment removal work may occur until December 31.
2. Work will only occur on Berryessa Creek (0-88+80; 232+70-236+00; 284+30-288+00), Lower Silver
Creek (Reach 3 between Stations 37+40 and 381+19), Thompson Creek (0+00-10+00), Canoas
Creek (0+00-390+00), Ross Creek (0+00-86+30), Calabazas Creek (35+00-105+00), and San Tomas

1

Weather Forecasts. No phase of the project may be started if that phase and its associated erosion control measures cannot be completed prior to the onset of a
storm event if that construction phase may cause the introduction of sediments into the stream. Seventy-two-hour weather forecasts from the National Weather
Service or other localized and more detailed weather forecast service will be consulted prior to start up of any phase of the project that may result in sediment
runoff to a stream.
Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

1

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

GEN-2

BMP Title

Instream Herbicide
Application Work Window

BMP Description
Aquino Creek (80+00-100+00) can continue with the following conditions:
o site conditions are dry and access for all construction equipment and vehicles will not impact
waterways; and
o all work will stop if any rainfall is forecast for the next 72 hour period.
3. Work may occur after a significant rainfall event but no later than December 31.
2
4. Sites must be maintained in a rapidly winterizable state (implement control measures BMP GEN-20).
Bank stabilization projects may continue until the approved date stated below. Prior to a forecasted significant
rainfall event (0.5 in/24 hrs), all incomplete bank stabilization projects must be winterized.
1. In Creeks Supporting Anadromous Fish
o An extended work window may occur until October 31st for bank stabilization projects that will be
th
50% complete by October 15 .
2. In Creeks Not Supporting Anadromous Fish
th
o An extended work window may occur until November 30 for projects that will be 50% complete
th
by October 15 or until significant rainfall.
o An extended work window may occur until November 30th for new bank stabilization projects that
will be completed in five (5) days or less, or until significant rainfall.
 Instream hand pruning and hand removal of vegetation will occur year round, except when:
o Wheeled or tracked equipment needs to access the site by crossing a creek, ponded area, or
secondary channel; or
o Work occurs in streams that support steelhead. In these streams instream vegetation
maintenance will cease on December 31 or when local rainfall greater than 0.5 inches is
predicted within a 24-hour period of planned activities, whichever happens first.
Modification and removal of instream large woody debris will occur at any time of the year, and as further described
in the NMFS Biological Opinion.
Instream herbicide applications will take place between June 15 and October 31 for streams with steelhead, and
June 15 to December 31 for non-steelhead streams or until the first occurrence of any of the following conditions;
whichever happens first:
 local rainfall greater than 0.5 inches is forecasted within a 24-hour period from planned application events;
or
 when steelhead begin upmigrating and spawning in the 14 steelhead creeks, as determined by a qualified
biologist (typically in November/December),
o A qualified biologist will determine presence/absence of sensitive resources in designated
herbicide use areas and develop site-specific control methods (including the use of approved
herbicide and surfactants). Proposed herbicide use would be limited to the aquatic formulation of
glyphosate (Rodeo or equal). Surfactant use would be limited to non-ionic products, such as Agridex, Competitor, or another brand name using the same ingredients. Any modifications to these
materials would require review and approval by NMFS and CDFG.

2

Winterization is the process to maintain work sites with the appropriate BMP’s to prevent erosion, sediment transport, and protect water quality. Winterization
occurs upon completion of bank repairs or on incomplete projects after October 15 and prior to the forecast of significant rainfall, 0.5 inches or greater of local
watershed rainfall within 24 hours. Winterization shall be completed prior to the occurrence of such actual significant rainfall.
Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

2

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description
A qualified fisheries biologist will review proposed herbicide application methods and stream
reaches. The fisheries biologist would conduct a pre-construction survey (and any other
appropriate data research) to determine whether the proposed herbicide application is consistent
with SMP approvals concerning biological resources and determine which BMPs would be
instituted for work to proceed.
In addition, herbicide application requirements are as follows:
 no direct application into water;
 herbicide application shall not occur when wind conditions may result in drift;
 herbicide shall only be applied after the surfactant has a “wet” appearance on the target plants in order to
avoid run off; and
 where permitted, surfactants shall be added to the spray solution prior to application.
Sediment removal and bank stabilization projects in portions of the Guadalupe River watershed affected by historic
mercury mining may expose soils containing mercury.
1. In specified maintenance reaches in the Guadalupe River Basin, soils that are likely to be disturbed or excavated
shall be tested for mercury (Hg). Soils shall be remediated if:
a. disturbed or excavated soils exposed to streamflow below the elevation of the 2.33-year flow event exceed
1 ppm Hg; or
b. disturbed or excavated soils above the 2.33-year flow level exceed 20 ppm Hg.
2. Remediation may be accomplished either by:
a. treating the site so that contaminated soils excavated for the purpose of bank stabilization shall not be
susceptible to erosion; or
b. further excavating contaminated soils and replacing them with clean fill or other bank stabilization
materials that are free from contaminants.
c. Soils with mercury concentrations exceeding 20 mg/kg shall be removed and disposed of in a Class I
landfill following established work practices and hazard control measures. Soils with mercury
concentrations less than 20 mg/kg will remain at the project site.
3. To ensure worker safety during sediment removal and bank stabilization projects with elevated mercury
concentrations in the exposed surfaces, personal protective equipment will be required during project
construction to maintain exposure below levels established by the Occupational Safety and Health Agency
(OSHA).
o

GEN-3

Avoid Exposing Soils with
High Mercury Levels

Biological Resources
GEN-4
GEN-5
GEN-6

Minimize the Area of
Disturbance
Mitten Crab Control
Measure
Minimize Impacts to
Nesting Birds via Site
Assessments and
Avoidance Measures

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

To minimize impacts to natural resources, soil disturbance will be kept to the minimum footprint necessary to
complete the maintenance operation.
Sediment from the San Francisco Bay Watershed, including that for reuse, cannot be moved to areas any farther
south than Coyote Creek Golf Drive in south San Jose, and the intersection of McKean and Casa Loma Roads.
1. For activities occurring between January 15 and August 31, project areas will be checked by a qualified
biologist or Designated Individuals (DI – for limited ground nesting species surveys) for nesting birds within 2
weeks prior to starting work. If a lapse in project-related work of 2 weeks or longer occurs, another focused
survey will be conducted before project work can be reinitiated.
2. If nesting birds are found, a buffer will be established around the nest and maintained until the young have
3

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

GEN-6.5

Protection of Nesting Least
1.
Bell’s Vireos

2.

3.

4.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
fledged. Appropriate buffer widths are 0.5 mile for bald and golden eagles; 250 feet for other raptors and the
least Bell’s vireo, herons, and egrets; 25 feet for ground-nesting non-raptors; and 50 feet for non-raptors
nesting on trees, shrubs and structures. A qualified biologist may identify an alternative buffer based on a site
specific-evaluation. No work within the buffer will occur without written approval from a qualified biologist, for
as long as the nest is active.
All vegetation management, sediment reuse, road grading, or other SMP activities in or immediately adjacent
to suitable California clapper rail or Alameda song sparrow nesting habitat, as determined by a qualified
biologist, shall not be conducted prior to September 1 (the non-nesting season).
If a pre-activity survey in high-quality San Francisco common yellowthroat breeding habitat (as determined by
a qualified biologist) identifies more singing male San Francisco common yellowthroats than active nests, then
the inconspicuous nests of this species might have been missed. In that case, maintenance activities in that
area shall be delayed until the San Francisco common yellowthroat non-breeding season (i.e., August 16–
March 14).
The boundary of each buffer zone will be marked with fencing, flagging, or other easily identifiable marking if
work will occur immediately outside the buffer zone.
All protective buffer zones will be maintained until the nest becomes inactive, as determined by a qualified
biologist.
If monitoring shows that disturbance to actively nesting birds is occurring, buffer widths will be increased until
monitoring shows that disturbance is no longer occurring. If this is not possible, work will cease in the area
until young have fledged and the nest is no longer active.
To the extent feasible, SMP activities within woody riparian habitat along portions of lower Llagas Creek
downstream from Highway 152, the Pajaro River from Llagas Creek downstream, and lower Uvas/Carnadeo
Creek downstream from Hecker Pass Road shall be scheduled to occur outside of the least Bell’s vireo nesting
season (March 15 – July 31).
For activities within woody riparian habitat along the aforementioned creek reaches that will occur between
March 15 and July 31, any work will be preceded by a focused survey for least Bell’s vireos. Pre-activity
surveys will consist of two site visits, conducted on separate days within 14 days before the initiation of
maintenance activities in the given area, with at least one of these surveys occurring within 7 days before the
initiation of such activities. Surveys will be conducted between dawn and 11:00 a.m., during mild weather
conditions (i.e., not during excessive cold, heat, wind, or rain), within all riparian habitat in and within 250 feet
of any proposed maintenance location along these reaches. The surveys will be conducted by a qualified
biologist who is familiar with the visual and auditory identification of this species.
To minimize impacts to nesting least Bell’s vireos and other birds, the biologist will not initially be looking for
Bell’s vireo nests during these surveys. Rather, the biologist will look and listen for individual vireos. If a least
Bell’s vireo is detected, it will be observed to determine whether it is actively nesting. The biologist will note the
nest location, or if finding the actual nest could result in excessive disturbance or risk damaging the nest, the
biologist will determine the approximate location, based on observation of birds carrying nesting material,
carrying food, or repeatedly visiting a certain area.
If an active nest is found, a minimum 250-foot no-activity buffer will be established around the nest. If a
territorial male is found but no nest can be detected, then the approximate centroid of the bird’s area of activity
will be the point from which the buffer will be applied. The required buffer may be reduced in areas where
4

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

GEN-7

Protection of Burrowing
Owls

GEN-8

Protection of Sensitive
Fauna Species from
Herbicide Use

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
dense riparian forest occurs between the construction activities and the active nest or where sufficient barriers
or topographic relief exists to protect the nest from excessive noise or other disturbance. The biologist will
coordinate with the USFWS and CDFG to evaluate exceptions to the minimum no-activity buffer distance on a
case-by-case basis.
5. No work will occur within the buffer without verification by a biologist that the nest is inactive and until any
fledged young are no longer dependent on adults for food.
1. Work within 250 feet of an occupied burrow will be delayed until after the nesting season.
2. If suitable burrowing owl habitat is identified where mowing is proposed, or active burrows are found, they will
be marked in such a way that the mower can identify the locations of such burrows. Mowing can then occur
anywhere beyond the 250 foot buffer zone. Within the 250 foot buffer zone mowing may be done to within 10
feet of an active burrow provided there areis no burrowing owls active on the surface. An on-site monitor will
observe the area in front of the mower from a safe vantage point while it is in operation. In areas within 10 ft of
active burrows the vegetation may be removed by hand (e.g., weed-whackers). All mowing and hand-removal
of vegetation within 250 ft of a burrow will be done as quickly as possible to minimize disturbance of burrowing
owls.
3. All markers will be removed once mowing is complete.
4. For burrow destruction work, all burrows within the 250-foot buffer zone around known, occupied burrows will
be inspected with a burrow camera prior to destruction to ensure no entrapment of burrowing owls. Burrows
that are difficult to inspect due to intricate subterranean configuration or depth will be inspected in stages
where the uninspected section of the burrow will be protected while the previously inspected section is
excavated.
If maintenance activities will directly impact occupied burrows the District will consult with the DFG and FWS on
establishing alternative burrows (including artificial burrows) and a process for removing owls from the active
burrow. No burrowing owls will be evicted from burrows during the nesting season.
Approved herbicides and adjuvants may be applied in habitat areas for sensitive wildlife species (including
steelhead, California red-legged frog, California tiger salamander, salt marsh harvest mouse, and Bay checkerspot
butterfly); all applications will occur in accordance with federal and state regulations.
For sprayable or dust formulations: when the air is calm or moving away from sensitive wildlife habitat, applications
will commence on the side nearest the habitat and proceed away from the habitat. When air currents are moving
toward habitat, applications will not be made within 200 yards by air or 40 yards by ground upwind from occupied
habitat. However, these distances may be modified for the control of invasive species on salmonid streams if the
following measures are implemented:
 A qualified biologist will determine presence/absence of sensitive resources in designated herbicide use
areas and develop site-specific control methods (including the use of approved herbicide and surfactants).
Proposed herbicide use would be limited to the aquatic formulation of glyphosate (Rodeo or equal).
Surfactant use would be limited to non-ionic products, such as Agri-dex, Competitor, or another brand
name using the same ingredients. Any modifications to these materials would require review and approval
by NMFS and CDFG.
 A qualified fisheries biologist will review proposed herbicide application methods and stream reaches. The
fisheries biologist would conduct a pre-construction survey (and any other appropriate data research) to
determine whether the proposed herbicide application is consistent with SMP approvals concerning
5

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number
GEN-9

GEN-10

GEN-11

BMP Title

BMP Description
biological resources and determine which BMPs would be instituted for work to proceed.
Avoid Impacts to SpecialA qualified botanist will identify special status plant species and sensitive natural vegetation communities and
Status Plant Species and
clearly map or delineate them as needed in order to avoid and/or minimize disturbance, using the DFG protocols
Sensitive Natural
and the CNPS Botanical Survey Guidelines to formulate the following protocols:
Vegetation Communities
1. A qualified botanist will use the GIS database, CNDDB, and/or other suitable tools to identify special status
plants and sensitive natural vegetation communities located within or near work areas.
2. Surveys of areas identified as sensitive natural communities or suitable habitat for special status plant species
will be conducted by a qualified botanist prior to commencement of work.
3. Surveys will be conducted during the appropriate time of the year to adequately identify special-status plants
that could occur on the site of proposed maintenance activities.
4. The qualified botanist will ensure avoidance and/or minimize impacts by implementing one or more of the
following, as appropriate, per the botanist’s recommendation:
a) Flag or otherwise delineate in the field the special status plant populations and/or sensitive natural
community to be protected;
b) Allow adequate buffers around plants or habitat; the location of the buffer zone will be shown on the
maintenance design drawings and marked in the field with stakes and/or flagging in such a way that
exclusion zones are visible to maintenance personnel without excessive disturbance of the sensitive
habitat or population itself (e.g., from installation of fencing).
c) Time construction or other activities during dormant and/or non-critical life cycle period;
d) Store removed sediment off site; and
e) Limit the operation of maintenance equipment to established roads whenever possible.
5. No herbicides, terrestrial or aquatic, will be used in areas identified as potential habitat for special status
plants species or containing sensitive natural communities, until a qualified botanist has surveyed the area
and determined the locations of special status plant species present.
6. If special status plant species or sensitive communities are present, then a qualified botanist will determine if a
given type of vegetation management method is ecologically appropriate for a given area. Alternative
strategies based on the botanist’s recommendations will be coordinated with appropriate staff.
7. All impacts to sensitive natural communities and special status plants identified by the qualified botanist will be
avoided and/or minimized
Avoid Impacts to Bay
1. Areas supporting Bay checkerspot larval host plants will be identified by a qualified botanist and protected
Checkerspot Butterfly and
from disturbance to the extent feasible, by establishing buffer zones around individual plants or populations.
The size of the buffer will be determined by a qualified botanist; the actual distance will depend on the plant
Associated Critical Habitat
species potentially affected and the type of disturbance. No herbicide will be applied to the buffer area, and
to the extent feasible, maintenance personnel and equipment will not operate within such areas.
2. Herbicides may be used in serpentine areas that do not contain Bay checkerspot butterfly larval host plants
or sensitive plant species and habitat when approved by a qualified botanist and for the following
maintenance purposes:
a) To protect sensitive species and habitat;
b) To manage for control of invasive and non-native plants; and/or
c) To maintain access to a facility.
Protection of Salt Marsh
1. A District qualified biologist will conduct a desk audit to determine whether suitable Salt Marsh Harvest Mouse

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

6

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title
Harvest Mouse and
California Clapper Rail

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

BMP Description
(SMHM) or California Clapper Rail (CCR) habitat is present in or adjacent to a maintenance activity.
Within 7 days prior to work within the range of the Salt Marsh Harvest Mouse (SMHM) or California Clapper
Rail (CCR), as depicted on the District’s GIS layers, the proposed project area will be surveyed by a qualified
biologist to identify specific habitat areas. Surveyed areas will include work locations and access routes.
To minimize or avoid the loss of individuals, activities within or adjacent to California clapper rail and salt marsh
harvest mouse habitat will not occur within two hours before or after extreme high tides (6.5 feet or above)
when the marsh plain is inundated, because protective cover for those species is limited and activities could
prevent them from reaching available cover.
Specific habitat areas are vegetated areas of cordgass (Spartina spp), marsh gumplant (Grindelia spp.),
pickleweed (Sarcocornia pacifica), alkali heath, (Frankenia sp.), and other high marsh vegetation, brackish
marsh reaches of creek with heavy accumulations of bulrush thatch (old stands), and high water refugia habitat
that may include annual grasses, and shrubs immediately adjacent to channels.
Within the identified specific habitat areas, vegetation will be removed by hand from areas to be directly
impacted by the work activities if possible (hand removal of vegetation in some channels may not be possible).
Prior to the initiation of work each day for all vegetation management work, ground or vegetation disturbance,
operation of large equipment, grading, sediment removal, and bank stabilization work and prior to expanding
the work area, if suitable habitat occurs within the immediate work area, a qualified biologist will conduct a preconstruction survey of all suitable habitat that may be directly or indirectly impacted by the day’s activities
(work area, access routes, staging areas).
a.
b.

7.

GEN-12

8.
Protection of Special-Status 1.
Amphibian and Reptile
Species
2.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

If during the initial daily survey or during work activities a CCR is observed within or immediately
adjacent to the work area (50 feet), initiation of work will be delayed until the CCR leaves the work area.
If during the initial daily survey or during work activities a SMHM or similar rodent is observed within or
immediately adjacent to the work area (50 feet), initiation of work will be delayed until a Site Specific
Species Protection Form can be developed and implemented by a qualified biologist to protect the
SMHM or similar rodent is developed and implemented by the qualified biologist. Acceptable plan
activities may include one or more of the following activities: 1) establishment of a buffer zone at least 50
feet in radius from the rodent; 2) ongoing active monitoring, 3) construction of silt fence barrier between
maintenance work and location of the rodent, 4) delay of work activity until the qualified biologist can
contact DFG and USFWS for additional direction.

Mowing using heavy equipment (tractors, boom mowers, rider mowers) will not be conducted in habitat areas
or within 50 feet of habitat areas. If mowing with hand equipment is necessary within 50 feet of habitat areas,
an on-site monitor will observe the area in front of the mower from a safe vantage point while it is in operation.
If SMHM are detected within the area to be mown, no mowing will occur in that area. If CCR are detected
within the area to be mown, the mowing will stop until the individual(s) have left the work area.
See ANI-2 for additional restrictions.
A District qualified biologist will conduct a desk audit to determine whether suitable special-status amphibian or
reptile habitat is present in or adjacent to a maintenance activity.
If the District Wildlife or Fisheries Biologist determines that a special-status amphibian or reptile could occur in
the activity area, a qualified biologist will conduct one daytime survey within a 7 day period preceding the onset

7

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
of maintenance activities.
a. If a special-status amphibian or reptile, or the eggs or larvae of a special status amphibian or reptile, are
found within the activity area during a pre-activity survey or during project activities, the qualified biologist
shall notify the project proponent about the special-status species and conduct the following work specific
activities:
i. For minor maintenance activities and for vegetation removal activities that will take less than 1 day,
the qualified biologist shall conduct a special status species survey on the morning of and prior to the
scheduled work.
A. If no special status species is found, the work may proceed.
B. If eggs or larvae of a special status species are found, a buffer will be established around the
location of the eggs/larvae and work may proceed outside of the buffer zone. No work will
occur within the buffer zone. Work within the buffer zone will be rescheduled until the time that
eggs have hatched and/or larvae have metamorphosed.
C. If an active western pond turtle nest is detected within the activity area, a 50-foot buffer zone
around the nest will be established and maintained during the breeding and nesting season
(April 1 – August 31). The buffer zone will remain in place until the young have left the nest, as
determined by a qualified biologist.
D. If adults or non-larval juveniles of a special status species are found, one of the following two
procedures will be implemented:
i. If, in the opinion of the qualified biologist, capture and removal of the individual to a safe
place outside of the work area is less likely to result in adverse effects than leaving the
individual in place and rescheduling the work (e.g., if the species could potentially hide
and be missed during a follow-up survey), the individual will be captured and relocated
by a qualified biologist (with USFWS and/or CDFG approval, depending on the listing
status of the species in question), and work may proceed.
ii. If, in the opinion of the qualified biologist, the individual is likely to leave the work area
on its own, and work can be feasibly rescheduled, a buffer will be established around
the location of the individual(s) and work may proceed outside of the buffer zone. No
work will occur within the buffer zone. Work within the buffer zone will be rescheduled.
ii. For minor maintenance and vegetation removal activities that will take more than 1 day, the qualified
biologist shall conduct a special-status species survey on each morning of and prior to the scheduled
work commencing.
E. If eggs or larvae of a special status species are found, a buffer will be established around the
location of the eggs/larvae and work may proceed outside of the buffer zone. No work will
occur within the buffer zone. Work within the buffer zone will be rescheduled until the time that
eggs have hatched and/or larvae have metamorphosed.
F. If an active western pond turtle nest is detected within the activity area, a 2550 ft-buffer zone
around the nest will be established and maintained during the breeding and nesting season
(April 1 – August 31). The buffer zone will remain in place until the young have left the nest, as
determined by a qualified biologist.
G. If adults or non-larval juveniles of a special status species are found, the individual will be
captured and relocated by a qualified biologist (with USFWS and/or CDFG approval,
8

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

GEN-13

BMP Title

Protection of Bat Colonies

1.

2.

3.

4.

GEN-14

Protection of San Francisco 1.
Dusky-footed Woodrat

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
depending on the listing status of the species in question), and work may proceed.
iii. For Sediment Removal and Bank Stabilization Projects the wildlife or fisheries biologist in cooperation
with the project proponent shall complete a Site Specific Species Protection Form for the project.
Elements of the form include: work rescheduling, training work crews, daily surveys, establishment of
buffers and buffer fencing, on-site monitoring, habitat modification in advance of work activities, capture
and relocation of individual special-status species, methods of documentation, and reporting of results.
b. If no special status amphibian or reptile is found within the activity area during a pre-activity survey, the
work may proceed.
c. During animal conflict management activities, if special status species are found within a burrow proposed
for destruction, a qualified biologist will determine an appropriate buffer distance around that burrow to
ensure adequate protection of the habitat. The buffer area may include not destroying adjacent burrows as
that may damage subterranean networks of the occupied burrow or produce substrate vibrations which
could interfere with prey detection mechanisms. If two consecutive follow up surveys are conducted (spaced
30 days apart) in which the burrow is found to be unoccupied, work can proceed as planned. A naturally
found back filled burrow known to have been inhabited by a special-status species will be presumed to still
be occupied by that species and a clearly delineated buffer demarcation of the burrow area will be in place
for the duration of nearby work activities. In rare instances in which destruction of the burrow is not
avoidable during animal conflict management, the animal will be relocated to a safe burrow outside the
impact area, with USFWS and/or CDFG approval, depending on the listing status of the species in question.
A biologist will observe the relocated animal until it is certain that the animal is not in immediate danger of
desiccation or predation.
A District Wildlife Biologist will conduct a desk audit to determine whether suitable habitat (appropriate roost
trees or anthropogenic structures) is present for bat colonies within 100 feet of the work site, staging areas, or
access routes.
If potential bat colony habitat is determined to be present, within two weeks prior to the onset of work activities
a qualified biologist will conduct a survey to look for evidence of a bat use. If evidence is observed, or if
potential roost sites are present in areas where evidence of bat use might not be detectable (such as a tree
cavity), an evening survey and/or nocturnal acoustic survey may be necessary to determine if the bat colony is
active and to identify the specific location of the bat colony.
If an active bat maternity colony is present then the qualified biologist will make the following determinations:
a. The work can proceed without unduly disturbing the bat colony
b. There is a need for a buffer zone to prevent disturbance to the bat colony, and implementation of
the buffer zone (determined on a case-by-case basis by a qualified biologist) will reduce or
eliminate the disturbance to an acceptable level.
c. Work cannot proceed without unduly disturbing the bat colony; thus, the work will be postponed
until after July 31.
If a non-breeding bat hibernaculum is found in a tree or structure that must be removed or physically disturbed,
the qualified biologist will consult with DFG prior to initiating any removal or exclusion activities.
Prior to work within riparian, oak woodland, or coyote brush scrub habitat, or the removal of any oak trees
outside these habitats, a District Wildlife Biologist will conduct a desk audit to determine whether woodrats
9

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

2.
3.

GEN-15

GEN-15.5

BMP Description
could be present within suitable habitat for San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat or is known to be present in or
adjacent to a maintenance activity site.
If the District Wildlife Biologist determines that no San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat habitat is present, or
there is habitat present but will not be affected by the maintenance activity, then no further action is required.
If the District Wildlife Biologist determines that suitable San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat habitat is present
and may be affected by the maintenance activity, a qualified biologist shall conduct a pre-activity survey within
2 weeks prior to the start of work to determine if woodrat nests are in, or within 5 feet of, the immediate activity
area.
a. If woodrat nests are present at the site and will be affected by the work activity area, the District Wildlife
Biologist in cooperation with the project proponent will evaluate the site specific situation. The Wildlife
Biologist will then develop a site specific woodrat management plan to first avoid and second minimize
take or injury of the woodrat(s). The woodrat management plan may include: establishment of buffers
zones, installation of buffer zone fences, relocation of the woodrat nest, removal of the woodrat nest,
and/or construction of artificial nests. Consideration will be given to the number of woodrat nests that may
be affected by the work activity and the number in the project vicinity that may not be affected.

Salvage Native Aquatic
If fisheries or native aquatic vertebrates are present when cofferdams, water bypass structures, and silt barriers are
Vertebrates from Dewatered to be installed, a fish and native aquatic vertebrate relocation plan shall be implemented to ensure that fish and
native aquatic vertebrates are not stranded. Relocation efforts will be based on the District’s Fish Relocation
Channels
Guidelines. Streams that support a sensitive species (i.e. steelhead) will require a relocation effort and/ or initial
onsite monitoring by a qualified biologist depending on seasonal conditions:
1. In non-tidal channels, where water is to be diverted, prior to the start of work or during the installation of water
diversion structures, native aquatic vertebrates shall be captured in the work area and transferred to another
reach as determined by a qualified biologist. Timing of work in streams that supports a significant number of
amphibians will be delayed until metamorphosis occurs to minimize impacts to the resource. Capture and
relocation of aquatic native vertebrates is not required at individual work sites when site conditions preclude
reasonably effective operation of capture gear and equipment.
2. Aquatic invertebrates will not be transferred (other than incidental catches) because of their anticipated
abundance and colonization after completion of the repair work.
Avoidance of Impacts on
1. A qualified District biologist will conduct a desk audit to determine whether an SMP activity will occur in an area
the San Joaquin Kit Fox
where the San Joaquin kit fox could potentially occur (i.e., roughly east of Frazier Lake Road and south of
Bloomfield Avenue), and in potential habitat for the species.
2. If the District biologist determines that an SMP activity could occur in an area that could potentially support a kit
fox, the SCVWD will implement applicable pre-activity surveys and other measures in accordance with the
USFWS’s San Joaquin Kit Fox Survey Protocol for the Northern Range, as follows:
a) Conduct a preconstruction/pre-activity survey no less than 14 days and no more than 30 days prior to
the beginning of project implementation. Surveys shall identify kit fox habitat features on the project site
and evaluate use by kit fox and, if possible, and assess the potential impacts to the kit fox by the
proposed activity. The status of all dens shall be determined and mapped in accordance with the survey
protocol.
b) If a natal/pupping den is discovered within the project area or within 200 feet of the project boundary,

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

10

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

3.
General Maintenance Practices
GEN-16
In-Channel Minor Activities
GEN-17

Employee/Contractor
Training

GEN-18

Paperwork Required Onsite

GEN-19

Work Site Housekeeping

GEN-20

Erosion and Sediment
Control Measures

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
the USFWS shall be immediately notified. Disturbance to all San Joaquin kit fox dens should be avoided
to the maximum extent possible. Destruction of any known or natal/pupping kit fox den would require
take authorization from the USFWS.
c) The project proponent will establish exclusion zones around the kit fox dens, if determined to be
present. The configuration of the exclusion should have a radius measured outward from the entrance
or cluster of entrances. The following radii are minima to be applied:

Potential den: 50 feet

Known den: 100 feet

Natal/pupping den: Service must be contacted (occupied and unoccupied)

Atypical den: 50 feet.
If take of the San Joaquin kit fox will occur, take authorization from the USFWS and CDFG will be necessary.

For in-channel minor work activities, work will be conducted from the top of the bank if access is available and there
are flows in the channel.
All appropriate District staff and contractors will receive annual training on Stream Maintenance Program BMPs.
The training will also include an overview of special-status species identification and habitat requirements. District
staff and contractors will receive fact sheets to assist with in-the-field identification of special-status species and
their habitats.
1. Copies of regulatory permits related to the Stream Maintenance Program will be kept on-site and available
for review, if requested by regulatory personnel.
2. Copies of the Stream Maintenance Program Manual and this BMP Manual will be kept on-site.
1. District employees and contractors will maintain the work site in neat and orderly conditions on a daily basis,
and will leave the site in a neat, clean, and orderly condition when work is complete.
2. Slash, sawdust, cuttings, etc. will be removed to clear the site of vegetation debris. As needed, paved access
roads and trails will be swept and cleared of any residual vegetation or dirt resulting from the maintenance
activity.
3. For activities that last more than one day, materials or equipment left on the site overnight will be stored as
inconspicuously as possible, and will be neatly arranged. Any materials and equipment left on the site
overnight will be stored to avoid erosion, leaks, or other potential impacts to water quality (see BMPs GEN24).
4. The District’s maintenance crews are responsible for properly removing and disposing of all debris incurred
as a result of construction within 72 hours of project completion.
5. All trash that is brought to a project site during maintenance activities (e.g., plastic water bottles, plastic lunch
bags, cigarettes) will be collected at the site daily.
1. Soils exposed due to maintenance activities will be seeded and stabilized using hydroseeding, straw
placement, mulching, and/or erosion control fabric. These measures will be implemented such that the site is
stabilized and water quality protected prior to significant rainfall. The channel bed and areas below the
Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM) are exempt from this BMP.
2. The preference for erosion control fabrics will be to consist of natural fibers; however, steeper slopes and
areas that are highly erodible may require more structured erosion control methods. No non-porous fabric will
11

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

3.
4.

5.
6.

GEN-21

Staging and Stockpiling of
Materials

1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
be used as part of a permanent erosion control approach. Plastic sheeting may be used to temporarily
protect a slope from runoff, but only if there are no indications that special-status species would be impacted
by the application.
Erosion control measures will be installed according to manufacturer’s specifications.
Appropriate measures include, but are not limited to, the following:
o Silt Fences
o Straw Bale Barriers
o Brush or Rock Filters
o Storm Drain Inlet Protection
o Sediment Traps
o Sediment Basins
o Erosion Control Blankets and Mats
o Soil Stabilization (i.e. tackified straw with seed, jute or geotextile blankets, etc.)
o Wood chips
o Straw mulch
All temporary construction-related erosion control methods shall be removed at the completion of the project
(e.g. silt fences).
Surface barrier applications installed as a method of animal conflict management, such as chain link fencing,
woven geotextiles, and other similar materials, will be installed no longer than 300 feet, with at least an equal
amount of open area prior to another linear installation; and only on one side of levee slopes. Inboard and
outboard areas will only have installations set in an alternating pattern, such that no inboard and outboard
levee faces would have erosion control blankets along the same levee stationing.
To protect on-site vegetation and water quality, staging areas should occur on access roads, surface streets,
or other disturbed areas that are already compacted and only support ruderal vegetation. Similarly, all
maintenance equipment and materials (e.g., road rock and project spoil) will be contained within the existing
service roads, paved roads, or other pre-determined staging areas.
Building materials and other maintenance-related materials, including chemicals and sediment, will not be
stockpiled or stored where they could spill into water bodies or storm drains. Materials will not be stockpiled
longer than seven (7) calendar days.
No runoff from the staging areas may be allowed to enter water ways, including the creek channel or storm
drains, without being subjected to adequate filtration (e.g., vegetated buffer, swale, hay wattles or bales, silt
screens).
The discharge of decant water to water ways from any on-site temporary sediment stockpile or storage areas
is prohibited.
Wet material removed from an isolated creek reach may be pulled to the side of the channel (within the
channel and below top of bank) and allowed to naturally drain prior to removal from the channel. Pulled
material will be removed from the channel prior to deactivation of the site or forecast of rain.
During the wet season, no stockpiled soils will remain exposed, unless surrounded by properly installed and
maintained (i.e., per manufacturer specifications) silt fencing or other means of erosion control. During the
dry season; exposed, dry stockpiles will be watered, enclosed, covered, or sprayed with non-toxic soil

12

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

GEN-22

Sediment Transport

GEN-23

Stream Access

GEN-24

On-Site Hazardous
Materials Management

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
stabilizers (GEN-24).
7. All pipes, culverts, or similar structures stored at a site within sensitive species areas, for one or more
overnight periods shall be securely capped prior to storage or inspected before the pipe is subsequently
moved. If any potential special-status species are observed within a pipe, a District biologist shall be
consulted on what steps should be taken to protect the species. If a District biologist is on-site, they may
remove the special status species from the pipes and relocate to the nearest appropriate and unaffected
habitat.
To prevent sediment-laden water from being released back into waterways during transport of spoils to disposal
locations, truck beds will be lined with an impervious material (e.g., plastic), or the tailgate blocked with wattles, hay
bales, or other appropriate filtration material. Trucks may then drain excess water by slightly tilting the loads and
allowing the water to drain out through the applied filter, but only within the active project area of the creek where
the sediment is being loaded into the trucks or within an identified vegetated area (swale) that is separated from the
creek.
District personnel will use existing access ramps and roads to the extent feasible. If necessary to avoid large
mature trees, native vegetation, or other significant habitat features, temporary access points will be constructed in
a manner that minimizes impacts according to the following guidelines:
1. Temporary access points will be constructed as close to the work area as possible to minimize equipment
transport
2. In considering channel access routes, slopes of greater than 20 percent will be avoided, if possible.
3. Any temporary fill used for access will be removed upon completion of the project and pre-project topography
will be restored to the extent possible.
4. When temporary access is removed, disturbed areas will be revegetated or filled with compacted soil, seeded,
and/or stabilized with erosion control fabric immediately after construction to prevent future erosion.
5. Personnel will use the appropriate equipment for the job that minimizes impacts and disturbance to the stream
bottom. Appropriately-tired vehicles, either tracked or wheeled, will be used depending on the site and
maintenance activity.
1. An inventory of all hazardous materials used (and/or expected to be used) at the worksite and the end
products that are produced (and/or expected to be produced) after their use will be maintained by the worksite
manager.
2. As appropriate, containers will be properly labeled with a “Hazardous Waste” label and hazardous waste will
be properly recycled or disposed of off-site.
3. Contact of chemicals with precipitation will be minimized by storing chemicals in watertight containers with
appropriate secondary containment to prevent any spillage or leakage.
4. Quantities of toxic materials, such as equipment fuels and lubricants, will be stored with secondary
containment that is capable of containing 110% of the primary container(s).
5. Petroleum products, chemicals, cement, fuels, lubricants, and non-storm drainage water or water
contaminated with the aforementioned materials will not contact soil and not be allowed to enter surface
waters or the storm drainage system.
6. All toxic materials, including waste disposal containers, will be covered when they are not in use, and located
as far away as possible from a direct connection to the storm drainage system or surface water.
7. Sanitation facilities (e.g., portable toilets) will be placed outside of the creek channel and floodplain. Direct
13

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

GEN-25

Existing Hazardous
Materials

GEN-26

Spill Prevention and
Response

BMP Description
connections with soil, the storm drainage system, and surface waters will be avoided.
8. Sanitation facilities will be regularly cleaned and/or replaced, and inspected daily for leaks and spills..
If hazardous materials, such as oil, batteries or paint cans, are encountered at the maintenance sites, the District
will carefully remove and dispose of them according to applicable regulatory requirements. District staff will wear
proper protective gear and store the waste in appropriate hazardous waste containers until it can be disposed at a
hazardous waste facility.
The District will prevent the accidental release of chemicals, fuels, lubricants, and non-storm drainage water into
channels following these measures:
1. District field personnel will be appropriately trained in spill prevention, hazardous material control, and
clean up of accidental spills.
2. Equipment and materials for cleanup of spills will be available on site and spills and leaks will be cleaned
up immediately and disposed of according to applicable regulatory requirements.
3. Field personnel will ensure that hazardous materials are properly handled and natural resources are
protected by all reasonable means.
4. Spill prevention kits will always be in close proximity when using hazardous materials (e.g., at crew trucks
and other logical locations). All field personnel will be advised of these locations.
5. District staff will routinely inspect the work site to verify that spill prevention and response measures are
properly implemented and maintained.
Spill Response Measures:
For small spills on impervious surfaces, absorbent materials will be used to remove the spill, rather than hosing it
down with water. For small spills on pervious surfaces such as soil, the spill will be excavated and properly
disposed rather than burying it. Absorbent materials will be collected and disposed of properly and promptly.
If a hazardous materials spill occurs that cannot be contained or cleaned up with the onsite materials, the onsite
District field personnel will be responsible for immediately initiating an emergency response sequence by notifying
the proper authorities (i.e., District Emergency Response (ER) Team and public fire and hazmat agencies) of the
release; taking appropriate defensive steps from a safe distance to secure the site to minimize damage to people,
environment, and property (PEP); and deferring all other response activities to public emergency response
agencies and/or the District Emergency Response (ER) Team or District ER Contractor. Depending on the nature
of the release, the District ER Team’s actions will include: urgent (responding within 2 hours of notification) field
response site reconnaissance, emergency sequence initiation, defensive containment, release control, incident
command; or priority (non 2-hour) field response site reconnaissance and clean-up operations.
If a “reportable” spill of petroleum products occurs, the District’s Stream Maintenance Implementation Program
Manager will be notified and action taken to contact the appropriate safety and cleanup crews. A reportable spill is
defined as when:
 a film or sheen on, or discoloration of, the water surface or adjoining bank/shoreline is observed; or
 a sludge or emulsion is deposited beneath the surface of the water or adjoining banks/shorelines (40
Code of Federal Regulations 110); or when
 another violation of water quality standards is observed.
A written description of the reportable release must be submitted to the appropriate Regional Water Quality Control

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

14

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

GEN-27

Existing Hazardous Sites

GEN-28

Fire Prevention

GEN-29

Dust Management

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
Board and the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). This submittal must contain a
description of the release, including the type of material and an estimate of the amount spilled, the date of the
release, an explanation of why the spill occurred, and a description of the steps taken to prevent and control future
releases.
If an appreciable spill has occurred, and results determine that project activities have adversely affected surface
water or groundwater quality, a detailed analysis will be performed to the specifications of DTSC to identify the
likely cause of contamination. This analysis will include recommendations for reducing or eliminating the source or
mechanisms of contamination. Based on this analysis, the District or contractors will select and implement
measures to control contamination, with a performance standard that surface and groundwater quality will be
returned to baseline conditions. These measures will be subject to approval by the District, DTSC, and the Regional
Water Quality Control Board.
Upon selection of maintenance project locations, the District will conduct a search for existing known contaminated
sites, as part of its annual preparation of the Notice of Proposed Work (NPW), on the State Water Resource Control
Board’s GeoTracker Web site (http://www.geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov). The Geotracker search will only be
performed for the District’s ground disturbing activities. For any proposed ground disturbing maintenance sites
located within 1,500 feet of any “open” sites where contamination has not been remediated, the District will contact
the RWQCB case manager listed in the database. The District will work with the case manager to ensure
maintenance activities would not affect cleanup or monitoring activities or threaten the public or environment.
1. All earthmoving and portable equipment with internal combustion engines will be equipped with spark
arrestors.
2. During the high fire danger period (April 1–December 1), work crews will : a) Hhave appropriate fire
suppression equipment available at the work site.
The District will implement the Bay Area Air Quality Management District’s (BAAQMD) required Dust Control
Measures
(http://www.baaqmd.gov/~/media/Files/Planning%20and%20Research/CEQA/BAAQMD%20CEQA%20Guidelines
%20May%202011.ashx?la=en). Current measures stipulated by the BAAQMD Guidelines include the following:
1. All exposed surfaces (e.g., parking areas, staging areas, soil piles, graded areas, and unpaved access roads)
shall be watered two times per day.
2. All haul trucks transporting soil, sand, or other loose material off-site shall be covered.
3. All visible mud or dirt track-out onto adjacent public roads shall be removed using wet power vacuum street
sweepers at least once per day. The use of dry power sweeping is prohibited.
4. Water used to wash the various exposed surfaces (i.e., parking areas, staging areas, soil piles, graded areas,
etc.) will not be allowed to enter the water way.
5. All vehicle speeds on unpaved roads shall be limited to 15 mph.
6. All roadways, driveways, and sidewalks to be paved shall be completed as soon as possible. Building pads
shall be laid as soon as possible after grading unless seeding or soil binders are used.
7. Idling times shall be minimized either by shutting equipment off when not in use or reducing the maximum
idling time to 5 minutes (as required by the California airborne toxics control measure Title 13, Section 2485 of
California Code of Regulations [CCR]). Clear signage shall be provided for construction workers at all access
points.
8. All construction equipment shall be maintained and properly tuned in accordance with manufacturer‘s
15

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title
9.

GEN-30

Vehicle and Equipment
Maintenance

1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

GEN-31

Vehicle Cleaning

1.
2.

GEN-32

Vehicle and Equipment
Fueling

1.
2.
3.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
specifications. All equipment shall be checked by a certified visible emissions evaluator.
Post a publicly visible sign with the telephone number and person to contact at the lead agency regarding dust
complaints. This person shall respond and take corrective action within 48 hours. The Air District‘s phone
number shall also be visible to ensure compliance with applicable regulations.
All vehicles and equipment will be kept clean. Excessive build-up of oil and grease will be prevented.
All equipment used in the creek channel will be inspected for leaks each day prior to initiation of work.
Maintenance, repairs, or other necessary actions will be taken to prevent or repair leaks, prior to use.
Incoming vehicles and equipment (including delivery trucks, and employee and subcontractor vehicles) will be
checked for leaking oil and fluids. Vehicles or equipment visibly leaking operational fluids will not be allowed
on-site.
No heavy equipment will operate in a live stream. This will not apply to activities for which no other option
exists, such as sediment removal which cannot be conducted from top of bank, etc. In these cases,
dewatering will be conducted as necessary, following the protocols in BMPs GEN-33 or GEN-34.
No equipment servicing will be done in the creek channel or immediate floodplain, unless equipment stationed
in these locations cannot be readily relocated (i.e., pumps and generators).
If emergency repairs are required in the field, only those repairs necessary to move equipment to a more
secure location, and that can be performed without releasing any material into the floodway or water, will be
conducted in the channel or floodplain.
If necessary, all servicing of equipment done at the job site will be conducted in a designated, protected area
to reduce threats to water quality from vehicle fluid spills. Designated areas will not directly connect to the
ground, surface water, or the storm drain system. The service area will be clearly designated with berms,
sandbags, or other barriers. Secondary containment, such as a drain pan, to catch spills or leaks will be used
when removing or changing fluids. Fluids will be stored in appropriate containers with covers, and properly
recycled or disposed of offsite.
Equipment will be cleaned of any visible sediment or vegetation clumps before transferring and using in a
different watershed to avoid spreading pathogens or exotic/invasive species.
Vehicle and equipment washing can occur on-site only as needed to prevent the spread of sediment,
pathogens or exotic/invasive species. No runoff from vehicle or equipment washing is allowed to enter water
bodies, including creek channels and storm drains, without being subjected to adequate filtration (e.g.,
vegetated buffers, straw wattles or bales, fiber rolls, and silt screens). The discharge of decant water from any
on-site wash area to water bodies or to areas outside of the active project site is prohibited. Additional
vehicle/equipment washing will occur at the approved wash area in the District’s corporation yard.
No fueling will be done in the channel (top-of-bank to top-of-bank) or immediate floodplain unless equipment
stationed in these locations cannot be readily relocated (e.g., pumps and generators).
All off-site fueling sites (i.e., on access roads above the top-of-bank) will be equipped with secondary
containment and avoid a direct connection to soil, surface water, or the storm drainage system.
For stationary equipment that must be fueled on-site, secondary containment, such as a drain pan or drop
cloth, will be used to prevent accidental spills of fuels from reaching the soil, surface water, or the storm drain
system.

16

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number
Dewatering
GEN-33

BMP Title
Dewatering for Non-Tidal
Sites

BMP Description
When sediment removal and bank stabilization work area includes a flowing stream, the entire streamflow will be
diverted around the work area by construction of a temporary dam and/or bypass. Where appropriate, stream flow
diversions will occur via gravity driven systems.
A. Planning to avoid and minimize impacts to water quality and aquatic wildlife:
1. For construction and monitoring of a stream flow bypass, the Sediment Removal and Bank Stabilization
Projects checklist will be completed.
2. Recommendations by a qualified Fisheries Biologist to protect native fisheries and aquatic vertebrates will
be incorporated into the bypass design. The recommendations may include but are not limited to:
i. Screening the stream flow diversion source or pump to prevent entrainment of native fish or
amphibian species. The screening dimensions will be appropriate to the species present.
ii. Relocation of native aquatic vertebrates. This will include the methods to be used to capture and
hold and move the aquatic vertebrates and a description of where the aquatic vertebrates will be
relocated.
3. Depending on the channel configurations, sediment removal activities may occur where the flows are not
bypassed around the work site as long as a berm is left between the work area and stream flows to
minimize water quality impacts during excavation activities. The berm between the work and the live
channel will be wide enough to prevent introduction of turbid water from the cell into the live channel.
B. Construction:
1. The construction of facilities will be based on the water bypass plan.
2. Coffer dams will be installed both upstream and downstream of the work area to minimize impacts or the
distance necessary to accomplish effective passive systems.
3. In streams where water may enter the construction site from downstream (reverse flow) additional coffer
dams (downstream) may be necessary. When multiple coffer dams are constructed, the upstream dam will
be constructed first.
4. Instream cofferdams will only be built from materials such as sandbags, earth fill, clean gravel, or rubber
bladders which will cause little or no siltation or turbidity.
5. Plastic sheeting will be placed over k-rails, timbers, and earth fill to minimize water seepage into and out of
the maintenance areas. The plastic sheets will be firmly anchored, using sandbags, to the streambed to
minimize water seepage.
6. When pumping is necessary to dewater a work site, a temporary siltation basin and/or use of silt bags may
be required to prevent sediment from re-entering the wetted channel. Pump intakes will be screened to
prevent harm to aquatic wildlife.
7. If necessary to prevent erosion an energy dissipater will be constructed at the discharge point.
8. Timing of flow diversions will be coordinated with the completion of the dam structure to facilitate not drying
up the downstream creek area and to minimize dry back conditions.
C. Implementation:
1. Water flows downstream of the project site will be maintained to prevent stranding aquatic vertebrates.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

17

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description
2. Water diverted around work sites and water detained by coffer dams will be protected from maintenance
activity-related pollutants, such as soils, equipment lubricants or fuels.
3. The Fish Relocation Guidelines will be implemented to ensure that fish and other aquatic vertebrates are
not stranded during construction and implementation of channel dewatering.
a) Native aquatic vertebrates shall be captured in the work area and transferred to another reach as
determined by a qualified biologist. Timing of work in streams that supports a significant number of
amphibians will be delayed until metamorphosis occurs to minimize impacts to the resource. Capture
and relocation of aquatic native vertebrates is not required at individual work sites when site
conditions preclude reasonably effective operation of capture gear and equipment.
b) Aquatic invertebrates will not be transferred (other than incidental catches) because of their
anticipated abundance and colonization after completion of the repair work.
4. Filtration devices (silt bags attached to the end of discharge hoses and pipes to remove sediment from
discharged water) or settling basins will be provided as necessary at discharge sites to ensure that the
turbidity of discharged water is not visibly more turbid than the water in the channel upstream of the
maintenance site. If increases in turbidity are observed, additional measures will be implemented such as
a larger settling basin or additional filtration. If increases in turbidity persist, the District’s Stream
Maintenance Program Implementation Project Manager will be alerted since turbidity measurements may
be required.
5. Water remaining in the work area will be removed by evaporation, seepage, or pumping. When pumping is
required to dewater a site, the decanted water will be discharged with water bypassed around the site or in
a separate erosion control – energy dissipation area/vegetated swale. The turbidity of discharged water will
not be visibly more turbid than the receiving water.
Deconstruction:
1. When maintenance is completed, the flow diversion structure will be removed as soon as possible.
Impounded water will be released at a reduced velocity to minimize erosion, turbidity, or harm to downstream
habitat.
2. Removal will normally proceed from downstream in an upstream direction.
3. When diversion structures are removed, the ponded water will be directed back into the low-flow channel in a
phased manner to minimize erosion and downstream water quality impacts. Normal flows will be restored.
4. The area disturbed by flow bypass mechanisms will be restored to the pre-project condition at the completion
of the project (to the extent practical). This may include, but is not limited to, recontouring the area and
planting of riparian vegetation.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

18

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number
GEN-34

GEN-35

BMP Title
Dewatering in Tidal Work
Areas

BMP Description
For tidal areas, a downstream cofferdam will be constructed to prevent the work area from being inundated by tidal
flows.
1. Installation of cofferdams and fish exclusion measures will be installed at low tide when the channel and project
site are at their driest.
2. It is preferable to not use any bypass pipes when work is being conducted on one side of the channel, ifs
isolated by the cofferdam, and flows can continue on the other side of the creek channel without entering the
project area.
3. If downstream flows cannot be diverted around the project site, the creek waters will be transmitted around the
site through cofferdam bypass pipes. Waters discharged through tidal cofferdam bypass pipes will not exceed
50 NTUs over the background levels of the tidal waters into which they are discharged.
4. Cofferdams in tidal areas may be made from earthen or gravel material. If earth is used, the downstream and
upstream faces will be covered by a protected covering (e.g., plastic or fabric) if needed to minimize erosion. A
protected covering or sheeting will be placed on the water side of an earthen coffer dam to protect water
quality.
5. When maintenance is completed, the cofferdams and bypass pipes will be removed as soon as possible but no
more than 72 hours after work is completed. Flows will be restored at a reduced velocity to minimize erosion,
turbidity, or harm to downstream habitat.
Pump/Generator Operations When needed to assist in channel dewatering, pumps and generators will be maintained and operated in a manner
and Maintenance
that minimizes impacts to water quality and aquatic species.
1. Pumps and generators will be maintained according to manufacturers’ specifications to regulate flows to
prevent dryback or washout conditions.
2. Pumps will be operated and monitored to prevent low water conditions, which could pump muddy bottom
water, or high water conditions, which creates ponding.
3. All pump intakes will be screened. Pumps in steelhead creeks will be screened according to NMFS criteria
(http://www.swr.noaa.gov/sr/fishscrn.pdf) to prevent entrainment of steelhead.

Public Safety
GEN-36

Public Outreach

GEN-37

Implement Public Safety

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

The public will be informed of stream maintenance work prior to the start of work as part of the preparation of the
NPW for all projects in the NPW:
1. Each spring, a newspaper notice will be published with information on the NPW work sites, approximate work
dates, and contact information.
2. Neighborhood Work Notices will be distributed as part of the NPW preparation prior to the start of work.
3. Local governments (cities and County) will be notified of scheduled maintenance work. The NPW will be
submitted to the public works departments, local fire districts, and the District’s Flood Protection and
Watershed Advisory Committees.
4. The District will post specific information on individual maintenance projects on the Stream Maintenance Web
site: (http://valleywater.org/EkContent.aspx?id=379&terms=stream+maintenance)
5. For high profile projects, at the District’s discretion, signs will be posted in the neighborhood to notify the
public at least one week in advance of maintenance schedules, trail closures, and road/lane closures as
necessary and as possible. Signage used at work sites will include contact information for lodging comments
and/or complaints regarding the maintenance activities.
The District will implement public safety measures during maintenance as follows:
19

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

GEN-38

GEN-39

BMP Title
Measures

BMP Description
Construction signs will be posted at job sites warning the public of construction work and to exercise caution,
as appropriate to public accessed areas.
2. Where work is proposed adjacent to a recreational trail, warning signs will be posted several feet beyond the
limits of work. Signs will also be posted if trails will be temporarily closed.
3. If needed, a lane will be temporarily closed to allow for trucks to pull into and out of access points to the work
site.
4. Temporary fencing, either the orange safety type or chain link, will be installed above repair sites on bank
stabilization projects.
5. When necessary, District or contracted staff will provide traffic control and site security.
Minimize Noise
The District will implement maintenance practices that minimize disturbances to residential areas surrounding work
Disturbances to Residential sites.
Areas
1. With the exception of emergencies, work will be conducted during normal working hours. Maintenance
activities in residential areas will not occur on Saturdays, Sundays, or District observed holidays except during
emergencies, or with approval by the local jurisdiction and advance notification of surrounding residents.
2. Vehicles, generators and heavy equipment will be equipped with adequate mufflers.
3. Idling of vehicles will be prohibited beyond 5 minutes unless operation of the engine is required to operate a
necessary system such as a power take-off (PTO).
Planning for Pedestrians,
1. Work will be staged and conducted in a manner that maintains two-way traffic flow on public roadways in the
Traffic Flow, and Safety
vicinity of the work site. If temporary lane closures are necessary, they will be coordinated with the appropriate
Measures
jurisdictional agency and scheduled to occur outside of peak traffic hours (7:00 – 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 – 6:00
p.m.) to the maximum extent practicable. Any lane closures will include advance warning signage, a detour
route and flaggers in both directions. When work is conducted on public roads and may have the potential to
affect traffic flow, work will be coordinated with local emergency service providers as necessary to ensure that
emergency vehicle access and response is not impeded.
2. Bicycle and pedestrian facility closures will be scheduled outside of peak traffic hours (7:00 – 10:00 a.m. and
3:00 – 6:00 p.m.) to the maximum extent practicable.
3. Public transit access and routes will be maintained in the vicinity of the work site. If public transit will be
affected by temporary road closures and require detours, affected transit authorities will be consulted and kept
informed of project activities.
4. Adequate parking will be provided or designated public parking areas will be used for maintenance-related
vehicles not in use through the maintenance period.
5. Access to driveways and private roads will be maintained. If brief periods of maintenance would temporarily
block access, property owners will be notified prior to maintenance activities.

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

1.

20

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number
BMP Title
Cultural Resources
GEN-40
Discovery of Cultural
Remains or Historic or
Paleontological Artifacts

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
Work in areas where remains or artifacts are found will be restricted or stopped until proper protocols are met.
1. Work at the location of the find will halt immediately within 50 feet of the find. A “no work” zone shall be
established utilizing appropriate flagging to delineate the boundary of this zone, which shall measure at least
50 feet in all directions from the find.
2. The District shall retain the services of a Consulting Archaeologist or Paleontologist, who shall visit the discovery
site as soon as practicable, and perform minor hand-excavation to describe the archaeological or
paleontological resources present and assess the amount of disturbance.
3. The Consulting Archaeologist shall provide to the District and the Corps, at a minimum, written and digitalphotographic documentation of all observed materials, utilizing the guidelines for evaluating archaeological
resources for the California Register of Historic Places (CRHP) and National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). Based on the assessment, the District and Corps shall identify the CEQA and Section 106 culturalresources compliance procedure to be implemented.
4. If the find appears to not meet the CRHP or NRHP criteria of significance, and the Corps archaeologist concurs
with the Consulting Archaeologist’s conclusions, construction shall continue while monitored by the Consulting
Archaeologist. The authorized maintenance work shall resume at the discovery site only after the District has
retained a Consulting Archaeologist to monitor and the Watershed Manager has received notification from the
Corps to continue work.
5. If the find appears significant, avoidance of additional impacts is the preferred alternative. The Consulting
Archaeologist shall determine if adverse impacts to the resources can be avoided.
6. When avoidance is not practical (e.g., maintenance activities cannot be deferred or they must be completed to
satisfy the SMP objective), the District shall develop an Action Plan and submit it to the Corps within 48 hours
of Consulting Archaeologist’s evaluation of the discovery. The action Plan may be submitted via e-mail to
(rstradford@spd.usace.army.mil). The Action Plan is synonymous with a data-recovery plan. It shall be
prepared in accordance with the current professional standards and State guidelines for reporting the results of
the work, and shall describe the services of a Native American Consultant and a proposal for curation of
cultural materials recovered from a non-grave context.
7. The recovery effort will be detailed in a report prepared by the archaeologist in accordance with current
archaeological standards. Any non-grave artifacts will be placed with an appropriate repository.
8. The Consulting Paleontologist will meet the Society for Vertebrate Paleontology’s criteria for a “qualified
professional paleontologist” (Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Conformable Impact Mitigation Guidelines
Committee 1995).
9. The paleontologist will follow the Society for Vertebrate Paleontology’s guidelines for treatment of the artifact.
Treatment may include preparation and recovery of fossil materials for an appropriate museum or university
collection, and may include preparation of a report describing the finds. The District will be responsible for
ensuring that paleontologist’s recommendations are implemented.
10. In the event of discovery of human remains (or the find consists of bones suspected to be human), the field
crew supervisor shall take immediate steps to secure and protect such remains from vandalism during periods
when work crews are absent.)
11. Immediately notify the Santa Clara County Coroner and provide any information that identify the remains as
Native American. If the remains are determined to be from a prehistoric Native American, or determined to be a

21

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

GEN-41

BMP Title

Review of Projects with
Native Soil

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
Native American from the ethnographic period, the Coroner shall contact the Native American Heritage
Commission (NAHC) within 24 hours of being notified of the remains. The NAHC then designates and notifies
within 24 hours a Most Likely Descendant (MLD). The MLD has 24 hours to consult and provide
recommendations for the treatment or disposition, with proper dignity, of the human remains and grave goods.
12. Preservation in situ is the preferred option. Human remains shall be preserved in situ if continuation of the
maintenance work, as determined by the Consulting Archaeologist and MLD, will not cause further damage to
the remains. The remains and artifacts shall be documented and the find location carefully backfilled (with
protective geo-fabric if desirable) and recorded in District project files.
13. Human remains or cultural items exposed during maintenance that cannot be protected from further damage
shall be exhumed by the Consulting Archaeologist at the discretion of the MLD and reburied with the
concurrence of the MLD in a place mutually agreed upon by all parties.
A cultural resources specialist will conduct a review and evaluation of those sites that would involve disturbance /
excavation of native soil previously undisturbed by contemporary human activities to determine their potential for
affecting significant cultural resources. The evaluation of the potential to disturb cultural resources will be based on
an initial review of archival information provided by the California Historical Resources System/Northwest
Information Center (CHRIS/NWIC) in regard to the project area based on a 0.25 mile search radius. It is
recommended that this initial archival review be completed by a professional archaeologist who will be able to view
confidential site location data and literature to arrive at a preliminary sensitivity determination. If necessary, a
further archival record search and literature review (including a review of the Sacred Lands Inventory of the Native
American Heritage Commission); and a field inventory of the project area will be conducted to determine the
presence/absence of surface cultural materials associated with either prehistoric or historic occupation. The results
along with any mitigation and/or management recommendations would be presented in an appropriate report
format and include any necessary maps, figures, and correspondence with interested parties. A summary table
indicating appropriate management actions (e.g., monitoring during construction, presence/absence testing for
subsurface resources; data recovery, etc.) will be developed for each project site reviewed. The management
actions will be implemented on site to avoid significant effects to cultural resources.

22

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number
Utilities
GEN-42

BMP Title
Investigation of Utility Line
Locations

BMP Description
An evaluation of the locations of utility lines that could be affected by maintenance activities will be conducted
annually as part of the preparation of the Notice of Proposed Work (NPW). Utilities will be avoided as much as
possible. For maintenance areas with the potential for adverse effects on utility services, the following measures
shall be implemented:
1. Utility excavation or encroachment permits shall be required from the appropriate agencies. These permits
include measures to minimize utility disruption. The District and its contractors shall comply with permit
conditions. Such conditions shall be included in construction contract specifications.
2. Utility locations shall be verified through a field survey (potholing) and use of the Underground Service Alert
services.
3. Detailed specifications shall be prepared as part of the design plans to include procedures for the excavation,
support, and/or fill of areas around utility cables and pipelines. All affected utility services shall be notified of the
District’s maintenance plans and schedule. Arrangements shall be made with these entities regarding
protection, relocation, or temporary disconnection of services.
4. Residents and businesses in the project area shall be notified of planned utility service disruption 2 to 4 days in
advance, in conformance with state standards.
5. Disconnected cables and lines shall be reconnected promptly.

B.
SECTION B – Sediment Removal BMPs
This group of BMPs is intended to be implemented specifically during sediment removal activities to avoid potential impacts on biological
resources.
BMP Number

BMP Title

SED-1

Groundwater Management

SED-2

SED-3
SED-4

BMP Description

If high levels of groundwater (i.e., visible water) are encountered during excavations in a work area, the water will
be pumped out of the work site or left within the work area if the work activity is not causing water quality
degradation in a live stream. Water Quality monitoring would need to occur. If necessary to protect water quality,
the extracted water will be discharged into specifically constructed infiltration basins, holding ponds, or areas with
vegetation to remove sediment prior to the water re-entering a creek. Water discharged into vegetated areas or
swales will be pumped in a manner that will not create erosion around vegetation.
Prevent Scour Downstream Sediment removal sites in the transport zone on alluvial fans may cause increased scour downstream if they
of Sediment Removal
experience scouring flows or rapid sediment accumulation after maintenance.
After sediment removal, the channel will be graded so that the transition between the existing channel both
upstream and downstream of the maintenance area is smooth and continuous between the maintained and nonmaintained areas and does not present a sudden vertical transition (wall of sediment) or other blockage that could
erode once flows are restored to the channel.
Restore Channel Features
Low-flow channels within non-tidal streams will be contoured to facilitate fish passage and will emulate the preconstruction conditions as closely as possible, within the finished channel topography.
Berm Bypass
Where sediment removal is accomplished without a bypass by removing alternating cells, the berm between the

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

23

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description
work and the live channel will be wide enough to prevent introduction of turbid water from the cell into the live
channel.

C.
SECTION C – Vegetation Management BMPs
These BMPs provide specific and detailed guidance on the variety of vegetation management procedures implemented by the District. BMPs for
the following maintenance techniques are included: tree pruning, tree removal, plant removal, woody debris management, herbicide application,
mowing, discing, flaming, and grazing. Practices will be implemented by fully trained and qualified field crews.
BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description

VEG-1

Minimize Local Erosion
Increase from In-channel
Vegetation Removal
Non-native Invasive Plant
Removal

To minimize the potential effect of localized erosion, the toe of the bank will be protected by leaving vegetation to
the maximum extent possible and consistent with the maintenance guidelines or original design requirements.

VEG-2

VEG-3
VEG-4

VEG-5

VEG-6

Invasive species (e.g. cape ivy [Delairea odorata/Senecio mikanoides], arundo [Arundo donax]) will be disposed of
in a manner that will not contribute to the further spread of the species. Cape ivy removed during a project shall be
bagged and disposed of in a landfill. Arundo canes will be prevented from floating downstream or otherwise
entering the creek or waterway.
Use Appropriate Equipment When using heavy equipment to cut or remove instream vegetation, low ground pressure equipment, such as
for Instream Removal
tracked wheels will be utilized to reduce impacts to the streambed.
Use Flamers with Caution
1. A fire extinguisher, water supply and other appropriate fire suppression equipment will always be kept close to
the work site in case of an emergency.
2. Propane tanks will be checked for leaks and proper functioning prior to and proceeding use of flaming
equipment. The propane tank will be treated as a hazardous material.
Conduct Flaming During
Flamers will not be used during periods of high fire danger or in areas where fuel or climate conditions could
Appropriate Weather and
accidentally ignite a fire.
Seasonal Conditions
Standard Grazing
1. Vegetation and areas to be preserved will be fenced off to exclude grazing animals.
Procedures
2. Grazing animals will be excluded from stream channels, using fencing or other barriers.

D.
SECTION D – Bank Stabilization BMPs
These BMPs provide additional guidance during implementation of bank stabilization projects to avoid impacts on biological and cultural
resources. Review of the Post-Project Restoration BMPs in Section F is recommended because those measures will be implemented after bank
stabilization projects are complete. The BMPs included in this section are implemented by the field crew and site manager.
Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

24

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

BANK-1

Bank Stabilization Design to To further prevent potential downstream erosion impacts due to bank stabilization, the site design will be adjusted
Prevent Erosion
to provide proactive protection of vulnerable areas within the reach of the worksite. Such measures include, but
Downstream
are not limited to, appropriately keyed-in coir logs, riparian planting, strategic placement of rock, and flow
deflectors.
Bank stabilization will include appropriate transition designs upstream and downstream of the work site to prevent
potential erosion impacts.
Concrete Use Near
Concrete that has not been cured is alkaline and can increase the pH of the water.; fFresh concrete will be isolated
Waterways
until it no longer poses a threat to water quality using the following appropriate measures:
1. Wet sacked concrete will be excluded from the wetted channel for a period of two weeks after installation.
During that time, the wet sacked concrete will be kept moist (such as covering with wet carpet) and runoff from the
wet sacked concrete will not be allowed to enter a live stream.
2. Poured concrete will be excluded from the wetted channel for a period of two weeks after it is poured. During
that time, the poured concrete will be kept moist, and runoff from the wet concrete will not be allowed to enter a
live stream. Commercial sealants (e.g., Deep Seal, Elasto-Deck Reservoir Grade) may be applied to the poured
concrete surface where difficulty in excluding water flow for a long period may occur. If a sealant is used, water will
be excluded from the site until the sealant is dry.
3. Dry sacked concrete will not be used in any channel.
4. An area outside of the channel and floodplain will be designated to clean out concrete transit vehicles.
Bank Stabilization PostThe District may maintain or repair bank stabilization projects that are less than 2 years old that are damaged by
Construction Maintenance winter flows.
The District will notify the regulatory agencies 24 hours prior to beginning the work and the work will be reported as
part of the Post-Construction Report submitted by January 15 of each year or if necessary, the subsequent year.
Appropriate BMPs will be applied during maintenance repairs.

BANK-2

BANK-3

BMP Description

E.
SECTION E – Post-Project Restoration BMPs
These BMPs will be implemented, as appropriate, on all sites that involve ground disturbance.
BMP Number
REVEG-1

BMP Title
Seeding

REVEG-2

Planting Material

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

BMP Description
Sites where maintenance activities result in exposed soil will be stabilized to prevent erosion. Disturbed areas shall
be seeded with native seed as soon as is appropriate after maintenance activities are complete. An erosion control
seed mix may be applied to exposed soils, and down to the ordinary high water mark (OHWM).
1. The seed mix should consist of California native grasses (e.g., Hordeum brachyantherum, Elymus glaucus, and
Vulpia microstachyes) or annual, sterile seed mix.
2. Temporary earthen access roads may be seeded when site and horticultural conditions are suitable, or have
other appropriate erosion control measures in place (GEN-20).
Revegetation and replacement plantings will consist of locally collected native species. Species selection will be
based on surveys of natural areas on the same creek that have a similar ecological setting and/or as appropriate
25

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description
for the site location.

F.
SECTION F – Management of Animal Damage Conflict BMPs
Methods of animal management included in the SMP are avoidance, biological controls, physical alterations, habitat alterations, and lethal
controls. Of all these methods, implementation of lethal controls has the highest potential for environmental and biological impacts. Therefore, the
animal management BMPs provided in this section focus on lethal controls. The application area for lethal controls will be identified during the
annual planning process (see the Biological Resource Planning BMPs) and guided as directed by wildlife biologists. Species habitat areas are
defined by the District’s GIS species mapping, updated CNDDB and known local biological information and are included in the SMP Update
Subsequent EIR.
BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description

ANI-1

Avoid Redistribution of
Rodenticides

Carcass surveys will be conducted periodically when acute poisons and first generation anticoagulants are used.
The frequency of the carcass surveys will be specific to the type of rodenticide used, to minimize secondary
poisoning impacts:
•
Acute toxins – Daily carcass surveys, beginning the first day after application until the end of the baiting
period for acute toxins used above-ground.
•
Anticoagulants - Within 7 days of installation of first generation anticoagulant bait, and weekly thereafter.
Anytime a carcass is found, daily carcass surveys will begin for as long as carcasses are found until no
carcasses are found during a daily survey. Once no carcasses are found, carcass surveys will return to
the weekly carcass survey timeline maximum from the date of initial installation of an anticoagulant bait
station.
To verify that the frequency of carcass surveys is adequate, a biologist will conduct daily carcass surveys 2 times
per year over one baiting cycle. Based on the results of these surveys, the timing of carcass surveys will be
adjusted if necessary.

ANI-2

Prevent Harm to the Salt
Marsh Harvest Mouse and
California Clapper Rail

ANI-3

Burrowing Owl, Bald Eagle
and Golden Eagle Buffer
Zone

ANI-4

Animal Control in Sensitive
Amphibian Habitat

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

Any spilled bait will be cleaned up immediately.
1. No rodenticides or fumigants will be used within the range of the SMHM or CCR as identified on District range
maps.
2. Methods of rodent control within SMHM or CCR habitat will be limited to live trapping. All live traps shall have
openings measuring no smaller than 2 inches by 1 inch to allow any SMHM that inadvertently enter the trap to
easily escape. All traps will be placed outside of pickleweed areas and above the high tide line.
Per the California Department of Fish and Game’s 2008 Guidance for Burrowing Owl Conservation, a 656-yard
buffer will be established around known burrowing owl locations where no rodenticides or fumigants (including
smoke bombs) will be used. A 0.5-mile buffer will be established around known bald eagle and golden eagle
nesting locations where no rodenticides will be used.
1. Fumigants will not be used within the habitat areas of special status amphibians.
2. The use of bait stations within the potential habitat areas of California red-legged frog, California tiger

26

January 2012
Project 10.005

2012-2022 Program Manual – Attachment F

BMP Number

ANI-5

BMP Title

Slurry Mixture near
Waterways

BMP Description
salamander, or foothill yellow-legged frog will be limited to bait stations specifically designed to prevent entry by
these species.
3. Any live traps will allow California red-legged frogs, California tiger salamanders, or foothill yellow-legged frogs
to safely exit (e.g., by having openings measuring no smaller than 2 inches by 1 inch).
All slurry type mixes used to fill rodent burrows will be prevented from entering any waterway by using appropriate
erosion control methods and according to the manufacturer’s specifications. If the creek bed is dry or has been
dewatered, any material that has entered the channel will be removed.

G.
SECTION G – Use of Pesticides
Pesticides may be used for vegetation management or control of animal damage.
BMP Number

BMP Title

BMP Description

HM-4

Posting and Notification for
Pesticide Use

Posting of areas where pesticides are used will be performed in compliance with District Policy Ad-8.2 Pesticide
Use as follows:
1. Posting will be performed in compliance with the label requirements of the product being applied.
2. In addition, posting will be provided for any products applied in areas used by the public for recreational
purposes, or those areas readily accessible to the public, regardless of whether the label requires such notification.
In doing this, the District ensures that exposure risk is minimized further by adopting practices that go beyond the
product label requirements. (The posting method may be modified to avoid destruction of bait stations or scattering
of rodenticide.)
3. These postings will notify staff and the general public of the date and time of application, the product’s active
ingredients, and common name, and the time of allowable re-entry into the treated area.
4. Signs will not be removed until after the end of the specified re-entry interval.
5. Right-to-know literature on the product will be made available to anyone in the area during the re-entry period.
6. A District staff contact phone number will be posted on the sign, including a cellular phone number.
7. Notification of pesticide activities will be made as required by law. Also, the District will maintain records of
neighbors with specific needs relative to notification before treatment of an adjacent area so that such needs are
met.

Source: Data compiled by Horizon Water and Environment in 2011

Santa Clara Valley Water District
Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022
Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report

27

January 2012
Project 10.005

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

USACE

Appendix C

Comprehensive Best Management Practices
Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

C.1

Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive Best Management Practices
(BMP) List

Air Quality
AQ-1
Use Dust Control Measures
for Soil Disturbing Activities

AQ-4
Avoid Stockpiling Potentially
Odorous Materials

The following Bay Area Air Quality Management District’s (BAAQMD) Dust Control
Measures will be implemented:
1. All exposed surfaces (e.g., parking areas, staging areas, soil piles, graded
areas, and unpaved access roads) shall be watered two times per day.
2. All haul trucks transporting soil, sand, or other loose material off-site shall be
covered.
3. All visible mud or dirt track-out onto adjacent public roads shall be removed
using wet power vacuum street sweepers at least once per day. The use of dry
power sweeping is prohibited.
4. Water used to wash the various exposed surfaces (i.e., parking areas, staging
areas, soil piles, graded areas, etc.) will not be allowed to enter waterways.
5. All vehicle speeds on unpaved roads shall be limited to 15 mph.
6. All roadways, driveways, and sidewalks to be paved shall be completed as
soon as possible. Building pads shall be laid as soon as possible after grading
unless seeding or soil binders are used.
7. Idling times shall be minimized either by shutting equipment off when not in
use or reducing the maximum idling time to 5 minutes (as required by the
California airborne toxics control measure Title 13, Section 2485 of California
Code of Regulations [CCR]). Clear signage shall be provided for construction
workers at all access points.
8. All construction equipment shall be maintained and properly tuned in
accordance with manufacturer‘s specifications. All equipment shall be checked
by a certified visible emissions evaluator.
9. Post a publicly visible sign with the telephone number and person to contact at
the lead agency regarding dust complaints. This person shall respond and
take corrective action within 48 hours. The Air District‘s phone number shall
also be visible to ensure compliance with applicable regulations.
Materials with decaying organic material will be handled in a manner that avoids
impacting sensitive receptors.
1. Avoid stockpiling potentially odorous materials within 1,000 feet of residential
areas or other odor sensitive land uses.
Where appropriate, odorous stockpiles will be disposed of at an appropriate landfill.

Biological Resources
BI-3
Minimize Impacts to
Steelhead

Steelhead migrate upstream during the winter months to lay eggs. Eggs remain in
the gravels for several weeks. Fry emerge from the gravel and may spend up to a
year in local streams before migrating to the ocean.
To avoid and minimize impacts to salmonids, routine use of vehicles and
equipment in live salmonid streams will be avoided between January 1 and June
15.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-1

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Biological Resources
BI-4
Minimize Access Impacts

Existing access ramps and roads will be utilized to the extent feasible. If necessary
to avoid large mature trees, native vegetation, or other significant habitat features,
temporary access points will be constructed in a manner that minimizes impacts
according to the following guidelines:
1. Temporary access points will be constructed as close to the work area as
possible
2. In considering channel access routes, slopes of greater than 20 percent will be
avoided, if possible.
3. Any temporary fill used for access will be removed upon completion of the
project and pre-project topography will be restored to the extent possible.
4. When temporary access is removed, disturbed areas will be revegetated or
filled with compacted soil, seeded, and/or stabilized with erosion control fabric
immediately after construction to minimize future erosion.

BI-5
Remove Temporary Fills as
Appropriate

Temporary fills, such as for diversion structures or cofferdams, will be removed
upon finishing the work. The creek channels and banks will be re-contoured to
match pre-construction conditions to the extent possible. Low-flow channels within
non-tidal streams will be contoured to facilitate fish passage and will emulate the
preconstruction conditions as closely as possible, within the finished channel
topography.

BI-6
Minimize Adverse Effects of
Pesticides on Non-target
Species

Pesticides will be handled, stored, transported, and used in a manner that
minimizes negative environmental effects on non-target species and sensitive
habitats. This includes all rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides, algaecides, and
fungicides.
The proposed project plan for handling, storing, transporting and using pesticides
must be reviewed and approved by both of the following subject matter experts:
1. District’s Pest Control Advisor (a State-certified Qualified Applicator) – the plan
will be reviewed, and modified as deemed appropriate, for compliance with:
District policy, label restrictions and any advisories published by the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation, the Santa Clara County Division of
Agriculture, and the U.S. EPA bulletin Protecting Endangered Species, Interim
Measures for Use of Pesticides in Santa Clara County (USEPA 2000).
2. Qualified District Biologist (as defined in EMAP-30264) – the plan will be
reviewed, and modified as deemed appropriate, for compliance with: District
policy, approved environmental review documents, project permits, and
avoidance of all known listed (Threatened or Endangered) and sensitive
species. Information sources for determination of all known locations of
species that may be harmed by pesticides include the District’s GIS system
and California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB).
Either the District’s Pest Control Advisor or the Qualified District Biologist may
modify the proposed pesticide plan, such as establishing buffer areas or prohibiting
the use of pesticides outright, based on site-specific data, current regulatory
requirements, and District policy.
The purchase of all pesticides must be approved by the District’s Pest Control
Advisor to ensure compliance with the District’s Control and Oversight of Pesticide
Use policy and appropriate regulatory agency reporting requirements.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-2

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Biological Resources
BI-8
Avoid Impacts to Nesting
Migratory Birds

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

For activities occurring between January 15 and August 31, project areas will
be checked by a qualified biologist for nesting birds within two weeks of
starting work. If a lapse in project-related work of two weeks or longer occurs,
another focused survey will be conducted before project work can be
reinitiated.
If nesting birds are found, a buffer will be established around the nest and
maintained until the young have fledged. Appropriate buffer widths are 0.5 mile
for bald and golden eagles; 250 feet for other raptors and the least Bell’s vireo,
herons, and egrets; 25 feet for ground-nesting non-raptors; and 50 feet for
non-raptors nesting on trees, shrubs and structures. A qualified biologist may
identify an alternative buffer based on a site-specific evaluation. No work
within the buffer will occur without written approval from a qualified biologist,
for as long as the nest is active.
The boundary of each buffer zone will be marked with fencing, flagging, or
other easily identifiable marking if work will occur immediately outside the
buffer zone.
All protective buffer zones will be inspected daily if work is adjacent to the
buffer to ensure the buffer is not violated. Each buffer zone will be maintained
until the nest becomes inactive, as determined by a qualified biologist.
If monitoring shows that disturbance to actively nesting birds is occurring, the
biologist will require increased buffer widths until monitoring shows that
disturbance is no longer occurring. If this is not possible, work will cease in the
area until young have fledged and the nest is no longer active as determined
by a qualified biologist.

BI-9
Avoid Impacts to Nesting
Migratory Birds from
Pending Construction

Nesting exclusion devices may be installed to prevent potential establishment or
occurrence of nests in areas where construction activities would occur. All nesting
exclusion devices will be maintained throughout the nesting season or until
completion of work in an area makes the devices unnecessary. All exclusion
devices will be removed and disposed of when work in the area is complete.

BI-10
Minimize Impacts to
Vegetation from Clearing
and Trimming

Vegetation to be trimmed or cleared will be evaluated by a qualified vegetation
specialist or qualified biologist prior to impacts; and, the qualified vegetation
specialist or qualified biologist recommendations will be followed.
Cutting vegetation will be limited to the minimum length, width, and height
necessary while conforming to International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) pruning
standards. No trees with a 6-inch or greater diameter at breast height will be
removed; and, no branches greater than 4” diameter will be removed.
Woody vegetation (i.e. native trees and shrubs) which require pruning for
equipment access, construction operations, etc, shall be pruned correctly such that
health status is maintained and no post-construction impacts accrue. Woody
vegetation will be pruned consistent with all three of the following complementary
guidance or their updates:
1. ‘BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES, TREE PRUNING’ 2008,
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF ARBORICULTURE; and
2. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 (Part 1) – 2008 PRUNING;
and
3. ANSI Z133.1, 2008, SAFTEY REQUIREMENTS.
Woody material (including live leaning trees, dead trees, tree trunks, large limbs,
and stumps) will be retained on site, unless it is threatening a structure or impedes
access, in which case it must moved to a less threatening position.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-3

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Biological Resources
BI-11
Minimize Root Impacts to
Woody Vegetation

Construction activities, including cut and fill, will be minimized to the extent
practicable within the root zones of existing woody vegetation to remain post
project. In general, root extent can be estimated as 2-3 times canopy radius, but
vary depending on slope and soil conditions. To the extent practicable, construction
setbacks will be calculated using all of the following:
1. Tree DBH (diameter at breast height); and
2. a multiplier of 1.25. The product is reported in feet as the radial distance in feet
around the trunk inside which no construction activities are to occur. Example:
a 12 inch dbh tree X 1.25 = 15 foot radial construction setback.
If soil encroachment must occur in 33% or more of this area, the tree should be
evaluated for removal. Additionally, mulching the root zone will be employed to
provide root protection from unavoidable equipment traffic during construction,
specifically:
1. Use 6 inches minimum depth of wood chips; or,
2. 4 inches minimum depth of ¾-inch (or greater) gravel.
Both may remain in place after work if approved by a qualified biologist or
vegetation specialist.

BI-13
Choose Local Ecotypes Of
Native Plants and
Appropriate Erosion-Control
Seed Mixes

Whenever native species are prescribed for installation the following steps will be
taken by a qualified biologist or vegetation specialist:
1. Evaluate whether the plant species currently grows wild in Santa Clara
County; and,
2. If so, the qualified biologist or vegetation specialist will determine if any need
to be local natives, i.e. grown from propagules collected in the same or
adjacent watershed, and as close to the project site as feasible.
Also, consult a qualified biologist or vegetation specialist to determine which
seeding option is ecologically appropriate and effective, specifically:
1. For areas that are disturbed, an erosion control seed mix may be used
consistent with the SCVWD Guidelines and Standards for Land Use Near
Streams, Design Guide 5, ‘Temporary Erosion Control Options.’
2. In areas with remnant native plants, the qualified biologist or vegetation
specialist may choose an abiotic application instead, such as an erosion
control blanket or seedless hydro-mulch and tackifier to facilitate passive
revegetation of local native species.
3. Temporary earthen access roads may be seeded when site and horticultural
conditions are suitable.
4. If a gravel or wood mulch has been used to prevent soil compaction per BI-11,
this material may be left in place [if ecologically appropriate] instead of
seeding.
Seed selection shall be ecologically appropriate as determined by a qualified
biologist, per Guidelines and Standards for Land Use Near Streams, Design Guide
2: Use of Local Native Species.

BI-15
Restore Riffle/Pool
Configuration of Channel
Bottom

The channel bottom shall be re-graded the at the end of the work project to as
close to original conditions as possible.
In salmonid streams, restore pool and riffle configurations to emulate pre-project
instream conditions, taking into account channel morphological features (i.e.
slope), which affects riffle/pool sequence.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-4

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Biological Resources
BI-16
Avoid Animal Entry and
Entrapment

All pipes, hoses, or similar structures less than 12 inches diameter will be closed or
covered to prevent animal entry. All construction pipes, culverts, or similar
structures, greater than 2-inches diameter, stored at a construction site overnight,
will be inspected thoroughly for wildlife by a qualified biologist or properly trained
construction personnel before the pipe is buried, capped, used, or moved. If
inspection indicates presence of sensitive or state- or federally-listed species inside
stored materials or equipment, work on those materials will cease until a qualified
biologist determines the appropriate course of action.
To prevent entrapment of animals, all excavations, steep-walled holes or trenches
more than 6-inches deep will be secured against animal entry at the close of each
day. Any of the following measures may be employed, depending on the size of the
hole and method feasibility:
1. Hole to be securely covered (no gaps) with plywood, or similar materials, at
the close of each working day, or any time the opening will be left unattended
for more than one hour; or
2.
In the absence of covers, the excavation will be provided with escape ramps
constructed of earth or untreated wood, sloped no steeper than 2:1, and
located no farther than 15 feet apart; or
3. In situations where escape ramps are infeasible, the hole or trench will be
surrounded by filter fabric fencing or a similar barrier with the bottom edge
buried to prevent entry.

BI-17
Minimize Predator-Attraction
Effects on Wildlife

Remove trash daily from the worksite to avoid attracting potential predators to the
site.

Cultural Resources
CU-2
Stop Work and Report if
Archaeological Artifacts are
Found

Work in areas where archaeological artifacts are found will be restricted or stopped
until proper protocols are met. Work at the location of the find will halt immediately
within 50 feet of the find. A “no work” zone shall be established utilizing appropriate
flagging to delineate the boundary of this zone. A Consulting Archaeologist will visit
the discovery site as soon as practicable for identification and evaluation pursuant
to Section 21083.2 of the Public Resources Code and Section 15126.4 of the
California Code of Regulations. If the archaeologist determines that the artifact is
not significant, construction may resume. If the archaeologist determines that the
artifact is significant, the archaeologist will determine if the artifact can be avoided
and, if so, will detail avoidance procedures. If the artifact cannot be avoided, the
archaeologist will develop within 48 hours an Action Plan which will include
provisions to minimize impacts and, if required, a Data Recovery Plan for recovery
of artifacts in accordance with Public Resources Code Section 21083.2 and
Section 15126.4 of the CEQA Guidelines.

CU-3
Stop Work and Report if
Burial Remains are Found

Work in areas where any burial site is found will be restricted or stopped until
proper protocols are met. Upon discovering any burial site as evidenced by human
skeletal remains, the County Coroner will be immediately notified and the field crew
supervisor shall take immediate steps to secure and protect such remains from
vandalism during periods when work crews are absent. No further excavation or
disturbance within 30 feet of the site or any nearby area reasonably suspected to
overlie adjacent remains may be made except as authorized by the County
Coroner, California Native American Heritage Commission, and/or the County
Coordinator of Indian Affairs.

Hazards & Hazardous Materials
HM-1
Comply with All Pesticide
Application Restrictions and
Policies

Pesticide products are to be used only after an assessment has been made
regarding environmental, economic, and public health aspects of each of the
alternatives by the District’s Pest Control Advisor (PCA). All pesticide use will be
consistent with approved product specifications. Applications will be made by, or
under the direct supervision of, State Certified applicators under the direction of, or
in a manner approved by the PCA. Refer to Q751D02, Control and Oversight of
Pesticide Use.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-5

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Hazards & Hazardous Materials
HM-3
Minimize Use of Pesticides

In all cases, where some form of pest control is deemed necessary by the PCA;
evaluate alternative pest control methods and pesticides. Refer to Q751D02:
Control and Oversight of Pesticide Use.

HM-4
Post Areas Where Pesticides
Will Be Used

Posting of areas where pesticides are to be used shall be performed in compliance
with Q751D02: Control and Oversight of Pesticide Use. Posting shall be performed
in compliance with the label requirements of the product being applied.
In addition, the District shall provide posting for any products applied in areas used
by the public for recreational purposes, and areas readily accessible to the public,
regardless of whether the label requires such notification (the posting method may
be modified to avoid destruction of bait stations or scattering of rodenticide),
including:
1. Sign postings shall notify staff and the general public of the date and time of
application; the product’s active ingredients, and common name; and, the time
of allowable re-entry into the treated area.
2. A District staff contact phone number shall be posted on the sign.
3. Signs shall not be removed until after the end of the specified re-entry interval.
4. Right-to-know literature on the product shall be made available upon request to
anyone in the area.
Notification will take into account neighbors with specific needs prior to treatment of
an adjacent area to ensure such needs are met. Such requests are maintained by
the District under Q751D02.

HM-5
Comply with All Pesticide
Usage Requirements

All projects that propose ongoing use of pesticides will comply with all provisions of
Q751D02: Control and Oversight of Pesticide Use, including, but not necessarily
limited to the following:
1. All pest control methods will be performed only after a written Pest Control
Recommendation for use has been prepared by the District’s PCA in
accordance with requirements of the California Food and Agricultural Code.
F751D01 – Pest Control Recommendation & Spray Operators Report will be
completed for each pesticide application.

HM-7
Comply with Restrictions on
Herbicide Use in Upland
Areas

Consistent with provisions of Q751D02: Control and Oversight of Pesticide Use,
application of pre emergence (residual) herbicides to upland areas will not be made
within 72 hours of predicted significant rainfall. Predicted significant rainfall for the
purposes of this BMP will be described as local rainfall greater than 0.5 inch in a 24hour period with greater than a 50% probability of precipitation according to the
National Weather Service.

HM-8
Comply with Restrictions on
Herbicide Use in Aquatic
Areas

Consistent with provisions of Q751D02: Control and Oversight of Pesticide Use,
only herbicides and surfactants registered for aquatic use will be applied within the
banks of channels within 20 feet of any water present.
Furthermore, aquatic herbicide use will be limited to June 15th through
October 31st with an extension through December 31 or until the first occurrence of
any of the following conditions; whichever happens first:
1. local rainfall greater than 0.5 inches is forecasted within a 24-hour period from
planned application events according to the National Weather Service; or
2. when steelhead begin upmigrating and spawning in the 14 steelhead creeks,
as determined by a qualified biologist (typically in November/December)
If rain is forecast then application of aquatic herbicide will be rescheduled.

HM-9
Limit Vehicle and Equipment
Cleaning to Appropriate
Locations

Vehicles may be washed only at approved areas. No washing of vehicles will occur
at job sites.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-6

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Hazards & Hazardous Materials
HM-10
Ensure Proper Vehicle and
Equipment Fueling and
Maintenance

No fueling or servicing will be done in a waterway or immediate flood plain, unless
equipment stationed in these locations is not readily relocated (i.e., pumps,
generators).
1. For stationary equipment that must be fueled or serviced on-site, containment
will be provided in such a manner that any accidental spill will not be able to
come in direct contact with soil, surface water, or the storm drainage system.
2. All fueling or servicing done at the job site will provide containment to the
degree that any spill will be unable to enter any waterway or damage riparian
vegetation.
3. All vehicles and equipment will be kept clean. Excessive build-up of oil and
grease will be prevented.
4. All equipment used in the creek channel will be inspected for leaks each day
prior to initiation of work. Maintenance, repairs, or other necessary actions will
be taken to prevent or repair leaks, prior to use.
If emergency repairs are required in the field, only those repairs necessary to move
equipment to a more secure location will be done in a channel or flood plain.

HM-12
Ensure Proper Hazardous
Materials Management

Measures will be implemented to ensure that hazardous materials are properly
handled and the quality of water resources is protected by all reasonable means.
1. Prior to entering the work site, all field personnel will know how to respond
when toxic materials are discovered.
2. Contact of chemicals with precipitation will be minimized by storing chemicals
in watertight containers with appropriate secondary containment to prevent any
spillage or leakage.
3. Petroleum products, chemicals, cement, fuels, lubricants, and non-storm
drainage water or water contaminated with the aforementioned materials will
not contact soil and not be allowed to enter surface waters or the storm
drainage system.
4.
All toxic materials, including waste disposal containers, will be covered when
they are not in use, and located as far away as possible from a direct
connection to the storm drainage system or surface water.
5. Quantities of toxic materials, such as equipment fuels and lubricants, will be
stored with secondary containment that is capable of containing 110% of the
primary container(s).
6. The discharge of any hazardous or non-hazardous waste as defined in Division
2, Subdivision 1, Chapter 2 of the California Code of Regulations will be
conducted in accordance with applicable State and federal regulations.
In the event of any hazardous material emergencies or spills, personnel will call the
Chemical Emergencies/Spills Hotline at 1-800-510-5151.

HM-13
Utilize Spill Prevention
Measures

Prevent the accidental release of chemicals, fuels, lubricants, and non-storm
drainage water following these measures:
1. Field personnel will be appropriately trained in spill prevention, hazardous
material control, and clean up of accidental spills;
2. Equipment and materials for cleanup of spills will be available on site, and spills
and leaks will be cleaned up immediately and disposed of according to
applicable regulatory requirements;
3. Field personnel will ensure that hazardous materials are properly handled and
natural resources are protected by all reasonable means;
4. Spill prevention kits will always be in close proximity when using hazardous
materials (e.g., at crew trucks and other logical locations), and all field
personnel will be advised of these locations; and,
5. The work site will be routinely inspected to verify that spill prevention and
response measures are properly implemented and maintained.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-7

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Hazards & Hazardous Materials
All earthmoving and portable equipment with internal combustion engines will
be equipped with spark arrestors.
2. During the high fire danger period (April 1–December 1), work crews will have
appropriate fire suppression equipment available at the work site.
3. An extinguisher shall be available at the project site at all times when welding
or other repair activities that can generate sparks (such as metal grinding) is
occurring.
Smoking shall be prohibited except in designated staging areas and at least 20 feet
from any combustible chemicals or vegetation.

HM-14
Incorporate Fire Prevention
Measures

1.

HM-17
Comply with BAAQMD
Regulations for Naturally
Occurring Asbestos

The District will implement BAAQMD dust control measures and notification
requirements when working in serpentine soils.
The District will implement BAAQMD dust control measures and notification
requirements when working in serpentine soils.

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-1
Conduct Work from Top of
Bank

For work activities that will occur in the channel, work will be conducted from the
top of the bank if access is available and there are flows in the channel.

WQ-2
Evaluate Use of Wheel and
Track Mounted Vehicles in
Stream Bottoms

Field personnel will use the appropriate equipment for the job that minimizes
disturbance to the stream bottom. Appropriately tired vehicles, either tracked or
wheeled, will be used depending on the situation. Tracked vehicles (bulldozers,
loaders) may cause scarification. Wheeled vehicles may cause compaction. Heavy
equipment will not operate in the live stream.

WQ-3
Limit Impact of Pump and
Generator Operation and
Maintenance

Pumps and generators will be maintained and operated in a manner that minimizes
impacts to water quality and aquatic species.
1. Pumps and generators will be maintained according to manufacturers’
specifications to regulate flows to prevent dry-back or washout conditions.
2. Pumps will be operated and monitored to prevent low water conditions, which
could pump muddy bottom water, or high water conditions, which creates
ponding.
3. Pump intakes will be screened to prevent uptake of fish and other vertebrates.
Pumps in steelhead creeks will be screened according to NMFS criteria.
Sufficient back-up pumps and generators will be onsite to replace defective or
damaged pumps and generators.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-8

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-4
Limit Impacts of Sediments
on Water Quality

WQ-5

Sediments will be stored and transported in a manner that minimizes water quality
impacts.
1. Wet sediments may be stockpiled outside of a live stream or may be
stockpiled within a dewatered stream so water can drain or evaporate before
removal.
2. This measure applies to saturated, not damp, sediments and depends upon
the availability of a stockpile site.
3. For those stockpiles located outside the channel, water draining from them will
not be allowed to flow back into the creek or into local storm drains that enter
the creek, unless water quality protection measures recommended by the
RWQCB are implemented.
4. Trucks may be lined with an impervious material (e.g. plastic), or the tail gate
blocked with dry dirt or hay bales, for example, or trucks may drain excess
water by slightly tilting their loads and allowing the water to drain out through a
filter, but only within the active project area of the creek where the sediment is
being loaded into the trucks or within an identified vegetated area (swale) that
is separated from the creek.
Water will not drain directly into channels (outside of the work area) or onto public
streets without providing water quality control measures.
Streets will be cleared of mud and/or dirt by street sweeping (with a vacuumpowered street sweeper), as necessary, and not by hosing down the street.
1.

Limit Impacts From Staging
and Stockpiling Materials
2.

3.

4.
5.

To protect on-site vegetation and water quality, staging areas should occur on
access roads, surface streets, or other disturbed areas that are already
compacted and only support ruderal vegetation. Similarly, all equipment and
materials (e.g., road rock and project spoil) will be contained within the existing
service roads, paved roads, or other pre-determined staging areas.
Building materials and other project-related materials, including chemicals and
sediment, will not be stockpiled or stored where they could spill into water
bodies or storm drains.
No runoff from the staging areas may be allowed to enter water ways,
including the creek channel or storm drains, without being subjected to
adequate filtration (e.g., vegetated buffer, swale, hay wattles or bales, silt
screens).
The discharge of decant water to water ways from any on-site temporary
sediment stockpile or storage areas is prohibited.
During the wet season, no stockpiled soils will remain exposed, unless
surrounded by properly installed and maintained silt fencing or other means of
erosion control. During the dry season; exposed, dry stockpiles will be
watered, enclosed, covered, or sprayed with non-toxic soil stabilizers.

WQ-6
Stabilize Construction
Entrances and Exits

Measures will be implemented to minimize soil from being tracked onto streets
near work sites:
1. Methods used to prevent mud from being tracked out of work sites onto
roadways include installing a layer of geotextile mat, followed by a 4-inch thick
layer of 1 to 3-inch diameter gravel on unsurfaced access roads.
Access will be provided as close to the work area as possible, using existing ramps
where available and planning work site access so as to minimize disturbance to the
water body bed and banks, and the surrounding land uses.

WQ-9
Minimize Erosion from
Removal of In-channel
Vegetation

In-channel vegetation removal may result in increased local erosion due to
increased flow velocity. To minimize the effect, the toe of the bank will be protected
by leaving vegetation to the maximum extent practicable consistent with design
requirements.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-9

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-10
Limit Impact of Concrete
Near Waterways

Concrete that has not been cured is alkaline and can increase the pH of the water;
fresh concrete will be isolated until it no longer poses a threat to water quality using
the following appropriate measures:
1. Wet sacked concrete will be excluded from the wetted channel for a period of
two weeks after installation. During that time, the wet sacked concrete will be
kept moist (such as covering with wet carpet) and runoff from the wet sacked
concrete will not be allowed to enter a live stream.
2. Poured concrete will be excluded from the wetted channel for a period of two
weeks after it is poured. During that time, the poured concrete will be kept
moist, and runoff from the wet concrete will not be allowed to enter a live
stream. Commercial sealants (e.g., Deep Seal, Elasto-Deck Reservoir Grade)
may be applied to the poured concrete surface where difficulty in excluding
water flow for a long period may occur. If a sealant is used, water will be
excluded from the site until the sealant is dry.
3. Dry sacked concrete will not be used in any channel.
An area outside of the channel and floodplain will be designated to clean out
concrete transit vehicles.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-10

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-12
Isolate Work in Non-tidal
Sites With Use of Diversion
of Bypass

When work in a flowing stream is unavoidable, the entire streamflow will be
diverted around the work area by a barrier. Construction of the barrier will normally
begin in the upstream area and continue in a downstream direction, and the flow
will be diverted only when construction of the diversion is completed. Where
appropriate, the diversion will occur via gravity flow around or through the work site
using temporary culverts. If necessary, stream flow may be pumped around the
work site using pumps and screened intake hoses. When pumping is necessary to
dewater a work site, a temporary siltation basin and/or use of silt bags may be
required to prevent sediment from re-entering the wetted channel discharge sites to
ensure that the turbidity of discharged water is not visibly more turbid than the
water in the channel upstream of the site. If increases in turbidity are observed,
additional measures will be implemented. Sumps or basins also may be used to
collect water, where appropriate (e.g., in channels with low flows).
Recommendations by a qualified Fisheries Biologist to protect native fisheries and
aquatic vertebrates will be incorporated into the bypass design. The
recommendations may include but are not limited to:
1. Screening the stream flow diversion source or pump to prevent entrainment of
native fish or amphibian species. The screening dimensions will be appropriate
to the species present;
2. Relocation of native aquatic vertebrates will include a plan specifying the
methods to be used to capture, hold and move the aquatic vertebrates, as well
as a description of where the aquatic vertebrates will be relocated; and,
3. Timing work in streams that support a significant number of amphibians until
after metamorphosis occurs.
Instream cofferdams will be built only from materials such as sandbags, clean
gravel, or rubber bladders, which will cause little or no siltation or turbidity. Plastic
sheeting will be placed over k-rails, timbers, and earthen fill to minimize water
seepage into, and out of, the work areas. The plastic sheets will be firmly
anchored, using sandbags, to the streambed to minimize water seepage.
If necessary to prevent erosion, an energy dissipater will be constructed at the
discharge point. Timing of flow diversions will be coordinated with the completion of
the dam structure to avoid drying up the downstream creek area.
Water remaining in the work area will be removed by evaporation, seepage, or
pumping. When pumping is required to dewater a site, the decanted water will be
discharged with water bypassed around the site or in a separate erosion control –
energy dissipation area/vegetated swale. The turbidity of discharged water will not
be visibly more turbid than the receiving water.
Diversions will maintain ambient stream flows below the diversion, and waters
discharged below the project site will not be diminished or degraded by the
diversion.
Coffer dams will be installed both upstream and downstream to minimize the
distance necessary to accomplish effective passive systems, not more than
100 feet from the extent of the work areas.
In-channel berms that only deflect water to one side of the channel during sediment
removal may be constructed of channel material.
When work is completed, the flow diversion structure will be removed as soon as
possible. Impounded water will be released at a reduced velocity to minimize
erosion, turbidity, or harm to downstream habitat, as follows:
> All water will be discharged in a non-erosive manner (e.g., gravel or vegetated
bars, on hay bales, on plastic, on concrete, or in storm drains when equipped
with filtering devices, etc.);
> Normally, removal will proceed from downstream in an upstream direction;
> When diversion structures are removed, the ponded water will be directed
back into the low-flow channel in a phased manner to minimize erosion and
downstream water quality impacts. Normal flows will be restored; and,
> The area disturbed by flow bypass mechanisms will be restored to the preproject condition at the completion of the project (to the extent practical). This
may include, but is not limited to, re-contouring the area and planting of site
appropriate vegetation.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-11

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-14
Use Seeding for Erosion
Contro, Weed Suppression,
and Site Improvement

Disturbed areas shall be seeded with native seed as soon as is appropriate after
activities are complete. An erosion control seed mix will be applied to exposed soils
down to the ordinary high water mark in streams.
1. The seed mix should consist of California native grasses, (for example
Hordeum brachyantherum; Elymus glaucus; and annual Vulpia microstachyes)
or annual, sterile hybrid seed mix (e.g., Regreen™, a wheat x wheatgrass
hybrid).
2. Temporary earthen access roads may be seeded when site and horticultural
conditions are suitable, or have other appropriate erosion control measures in
place.

WQ-15
Manage Exposed
Groundwater at Work Sites

If high levels of groundwater in a work area are encountered, the water will be
pumped out of the work site. If necessary to protect water quality, the water will be
directed into specifically constructed infiltration basins, into holding ponds, or onto
areas with vegetation to remove sediment prior to the water re-entering a receiving
water body. Water pumped into vegetated areas will be pumped in a manner that
will not create erosion around vegetation.

WQ-18
Maintain Clean Conditions at
Work Sites

The work site, areas adjacent to the work site, and access roads will be maintained
in an orderly condition, free and clear from debris and discarded materials on a
daily basis. Personnel will not sweep, grade, or flush surplus materials, rubbish,
debris, or dust into storm drains or waterways.
For activities that last more than one day, materials or equipment left on the site
overnight will be stored as inconspicuously as possible, and will be neatly
arranged. Any materials and equipment left on the site overnight will be stored to
avoid erosion, leaks, or other potential impacts to water quality
Upon completion of work, all building materials, debris, unused materials, concrete
forms, and other construction-related materials will be removed from the work site.

WQ-40
Prevent Water Pollution

Oily, greasy, or sediment laden substances or other material that originate from the
project operations and may degrade the quality of surface water or adversely affect
aquatic life, fish, or wildlife will not be allowed to enter, or be placed where they
may later enter, any waterway.
The project will not increase the turbidity of any watercourse flowing past the
construction site by taking all necessary precautions to limit the increase in
turbidity as follows:
2. where natural turbidity is between 0 and 50 Nephelometric Turbidity Units
(NTU), increases will not exceed 5 percent;
3. where natural turbidity is greater than 50 NTU, increases will not exceed
10 percent;
4. where the receiving water body is a dry creek bed or storm drain, waters in
excess of 50 NTU will not be discharged from the project.
Water turbidity changes will be monitored. The discharge water measurements will
be made at the point where the discharge water exits the water control system for
tidal sites and 100 feet downstream of the discharge point for non-tidal sites.
Natural watercourse turbidity measurements will be made in the receiving water
100 feet upstream of the discharge site. Natural watercourse turbidity
measurements will be made prior to initiation of project discharges, preferably at
least 2 days prior to commencement of operations.
1.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-12

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

USACE

Hydrology/Water Quality
WQ-41
Prevent Stormwater
Pollution

1.

2.

3.
4.

Soils exposed due to project activities will be seeded and stabilized using
hydroseeding, straw placement, mulching, and/or erosion control fabric. These
measures will be implemented such that the site is stabilized and water quality
protected prior to significant rainfall. In creeks, the channel bed and areas
below the Ordinary High Water Mark are exempt from this BMP.
The preference for erosion control fabrics will be to consist of natural fibers;
however, steeper slopes and areas that are highly erodible may require more
structured erosion control methods. No non-porous fabric will be used as part
of a permanent erosion control approach. Plastic sheeting may be used to
temporarily protect a slope from runoff, but only if there are no indications that
special-status species would be impacted by the application.
Erosion control measures will be installed according to manufacturer’s
specifications.
Appropriate measures include, but are not limited to, the following:
−

Silt Fences

−

Straw Bale Barriers

−

Brush or Rock Filters

−

Storm Drain Inlet Protection

−

Sediment Traps

−

Sediment Basins

−

Erosion Control Blankets and Mats

−

Soil Stabilization (i.e. tackified straw with seed, jute or geotextile blankets,
etc.)

−

Straw mulch

All temporary construction-related erosion control methods shall be removed
at the completion of the project (e.g. silt fences).
Surface barrier applications installed as a method of animal conflict management,
such as chain link fencing, woven geotextiles, and other similar materials, will be
installed no longer than 300 feet, with at least an equal amount of open area prior
to another linear installation.
5.

WQ-42
Manage Sanitary/
Septic Waste

Temporary sanitary facilities will be located on jobs that last multiple days in
compliance with California Division of Occupational Safety and Health (Cal/OSHA)
regulation 8 CCR 1526. All temporary sanitary facilities will be located where
overflow or spillage will not enter a watercourse directly (overbank) or indirectly
(through a storm drain).

Noise
NO-1
Minimize Noise Pollution

Noise produced by construction activities will not exceed the applicable local noise
ordinance standards.

NO-2

The District will implement practices that minimize disturbances to residential
neighborhoods surrounding work sites.
In general, work will be conducted during normal working hours. Extending
weekday hours and working weekends may be necessary to complete some
projects.
1. Internal combustion engines will be equipped with adequate mufflers.
2. Excessive idling of vehicles will be prohibited.
3. All construction equipment will be equipped with manufacture’s standard noise
control devices.
4. The arrival and departure of trucks hauling material will be limited to the hours
of construction.
The use of jake brakes is prohibited in residential areas.

Minimize Noise Disturbances
to Residential
Neighborhoods

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-13

Appendix C
Upper Llagas Creek Project Comprehensive BMPs

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Transportation/Traffic
TR-1
Incorporate Public Safety
Measures

Fences, barriers, lights, flagging, guards, and signs will be installed as determined
appropriate by the public agency having jurisdiction, to give adequate warning to
the public of the construction and of any dangerous condition to be encountered as
a result thereof.

TR-2
Minimize Impacts on Traffic,
Bicycles and Pedestrians

1.

Work will be staged and conducted in a manner that maintains two-way traffic
flow on public roadways in the vicinity of the work site. If temporary lane
closures are necessary, they will be coordinated with the appropriate
jurisdictional agency and scheduled to occur outside of peak traffic hours (7:00
– 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 – 6:00 p.m.) to the maximum extent practicable. Any
lane closures will include advance warning signage, a detour route and
flaggers in both directions. When work is conducted on public roads and may
have the potential to affect traffic flow, work will be coordinated with local
emergency service providers as necessary to ensure that emergency vehicle
access and response is not impeded.
2.
Bicycle and pedestrian facility closures will be scheduled outside of peak
traffic hours (7:00 – 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 – 6:00 p.m.) to the maximum extent
practicable.
3. Public transit access and routes will be maintained in the vicinity of the work
site. If public transit will be affected by temporary road closures and require
detours, affected transit authorities will be consulted and kept informed of
project activities.
4. Adequate parking will be provided in designated staging areas.
Access to driveways and private roads will be maintained. If brief periods of project
activity would temporarily block access, property owners will be notified prior to
work activities.

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) 2013
C-14

USACE

Appendix D

Resource Agency Coordination

CDFW Comments for 65% Design
1

Tami Schane

Specs - pg 12-8

12.05.03 Hydraulic Design Criteria - please reference
and utilize the California Salmonid Stream Habitat
Restoration Manual for fish passage criteria.

District staff has been using the California Salmonid
Stream Habitat Restoration Manual for design particularly
Part XII.

2

Tami Schane

GC-1

The Type 1 and Type 2 grade control structures do not
appear to contain a low flow notch. This could be
problematic for fish passage.

The grade control structures comply with the hydraulic
design criteria specified in the California Salmonid
Stream Habitat Restoration Manual and the hydraulic
drop height also complies with published guidelines
(CDFG-2002) and NOAA 2001 for passage of steelhead.
This information will be submitted to the agencies upon
completion of the 90% design.

3

Tami Schane

GC-1

The boulders located at the top of the grade control
structures measure 12"-18" in diameter. Are these big
enough and how was that size determined to be
appropriate?

Yes, the boulders are big enough and were sized based
on channel velocity and channel configuration.

4

Tami Schane

GC-1

In the section details for the grade control structures, it
is stated that interstices will be filled with streambed fill.
Please ensure that those interstices are packed in well
with water or they may not stay in place.

Stability depends on the size of the rock, the interlocking
of the rock, as well as shape of the structure. District staff
will ensure that the rock is appropriately sized given the
configuration of the grade control structure.

5

Tami Schane

GC-12

6

Tami Schane

ISC-29

Fish passage details refer to Pg GC-15, which could
not be found in the design plans.
What is the existing structure at station 426?

Yes, you are correct the design sheet GC 12 incorrectly
labels details so GC 15 will be revised.
This is the temporary grade control structure which
provides channel stability between Phase 1 and Phase 2
of construction.

7

Tami Schane

ISC-71

District staff will pass this information along to the design
consultant for consideration into the 90% design.

8

Tami Schane

GISC-2

Would it make sense to add LWD structures just
upstream of the existing RSP at the bend in the creek
to slow the water down? Or just downstream of the
RSP on the opposite bank to ensure that opposite
bank isn't scouring out as a result of the water hitting
the RSP?
Cables should be anchored within the boulders to a
depth of 10"-12" (shown as 6" in the details).

9

Tami Schane

General Comment

Although the use of single root wad structures may be
appropriate in certain locations, CDFW recommends
the use of spider log structures and rootwad, log and
boulder combinations rather than single root wad
structures spread through the creek (see California
Salmonid Stream Habitat Restoration Manual Pgs VII27 and VII-28).

Thank you. District staff has passed this information
along to the design consultant and it will be considered
into the 90% design.

The anchoring techniques cited in the CDFG restoration
manual for Polyester Resin Adhesive provide guidelines
on depth into the rock "and should be approximately 10
inches deep". District Project team will change the depth
within the plans to reflect a depth recommendations of 810 inches on the larger rock.

CDFW Comments for 65% Design
10

Tami Schane

General Comment

Please describe the intended function of the LWD
structures for this project, which is located in a creek
that tends to go dry very early in the season.

The major objective for the LWD in the perennial reach
(Reach 6) is to provide cover by enhancing rearing
habitat for steelhead by increasing the diversity of cover
in the form of scoured pools and turbulence. Other native
fish and possibly western pond turtles (basking) will also
benefit from the increased complexity. The major
objective for the LWD in Reaches 4 and 5 (ephemeral
reaches) is to provide velocity refuge for up-out migrating
steelhead. There may be ancillary benefits for native fish
when the stream is wet by the increase in complexity.

8

Tami Schane

General Comment

Please ensure that placement of the LWD structures at
the V weirs is closer to where the pool would develop
to ensure adequate cover is provided.

Yes, District Project team will ensure placement provides
cover.

9

Tami Schane

General Comment

Please explain the intended purpose of the divider
logs.

Divide logs are installed typically mid-channel to provide
a visual barrier adjacent to spawning areas. District staff
has directed the consultant to replace divide logs with
velocity refuge structures in Reaches 4 and 5 and leave
them only in the perennial reach above San Martin Ave.
in Reach 6.

11

Tami Schane

General Comment

Please ensure that when removing trees and reusing
for LWD structures, that they should be adequate
length (minimum 5'-6' in length).

District staff typically fells the tree for use in LWD
structures in lengths of approximately 20 foot incrementsdepending on the design of the structure the wood will be
cut to fit.

12

Tami Schane

General Comment

Hardwoods and conifers are best for LWD structures.
Porous species such as sycamore do not hold up well
for these purposes and are likely to fail.

Thank you. District staff has installed LWD in the County
and understands that hardwood is most appropriate.

13

Tami Schane

General Comment

It does not appear from the plans that the culverts are
natural-bottomed? How will fish passage be addressed
at culverts?

Can you please provide clarity on which culvert you are
referring to for fish passage?

14

Tami Schane

General Comment

CDFW recommends considering the use of boulder
wing deflectors rather than log wing deflectors, as they
will last longer.

District staff will pass this information along to the design
consultant for consideration into the 90% design.

15

Tami Schane

General Comment

16

Tami Schane

General Comment

Please describe how the project will affect fish
passage at a wide variety of flows.
Please refer to the Project Specific Information for
Streamlining Fisheries Engineering Review (attached
in email) for information that should be considered
when designing projects in salmonid habitat.

Are you referring to steelhead passage or localized
movements of native fish within the watershed?
District staff is aware of the checklist and this information
is available. Would CDFW like to provide a timeline for
CDFW engineers to review the design plans? District
staff will provide this information in the format of the
checklist for ease of review.

CDFW Comments for 65% Design
17

Tami Schane

General Comment

Looking at the tree removal sheets and revegetation
sheets, it appears that quite a few sycamores are
being removed throughout the project, but are only
being replanted in Reach 6. How will this adequately
mitigate the impacts of the loss of sycamore woodland,
which is considered to be a sensitive habitat by
CDFW?

The hydrology and soils have dictated where Sycamores
can successfully grow within the project limits. Reach 6,
7a and Lake Silveira (mitigation parcel) are currently the
only locations where Sycamores are believed to be able
to survive given the limitations of the site. Planting for
Sycamore is planned for the Lake Silveira site and
possibly 7a which was not part of the 65% plans. District
staff is currently writing a proposal which will be sent to
all agency staff on propagation of Sycamores for the
Upper Llagas Project which should offset the losses to
this sensitive habitat type. District staff did request that
CDFW provide some information regarding an acceptable
distance for collection of propagules during the August 2
Resource Agency Update and would greatly appreciate if
CDFW would provide that direction.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS

1

USFWS

18-12

Section 18.07.01 A. Suggest the following changes:
The Contractor shall carry out all activities in a manner
consistent with the Migratory Bird Permit
Memorandums (Appendix B, issued by the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service dated April 15, 2003 and June 5,
2009. Except as may be noted elsewhere...regardless
of the presence of eggs or young; whereas inactive
nests or partially-built nests.... The red text is
additional. A copy of the June 5, 2009 memorandum
is attached.

Concur. Project team will make that change.

2

USFWS

18-12

Section 18.07.02 A Scope of Work. Suggest the
following: The Contractor shall be aware of migratory
bird nesting seasons and variability; monitor the project
site; perform preventative and deterrence measures to
prevent birds from nesting in compliance with the
provisions of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and
applicable State laws; preserve and protect...;establish
new protective buffer zones around established
nests....

That is our standard and will make the suggested
changes.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS

3

USFWS

18-13

Section 18.07.01 B. Suggest the following changes:
Prior to the District releasing the site to the Contractor,
the Engineer, Contractor, and Contractor Biologist
shall assess….

Concur. Project team will make that change.

4

USFWS

18-14

Concur. Project team will make that change.

5

USFWS

18-14

Section 18.07.04 A General Nesting Season. Suggest
the following: The nesting season in the project area is
generally to be from February 1st through August 31st.
However, annual variation in climate conditions can
alter these periods by several weeks. The Contractor
Biologist should notify the Engineers of any nesting
season variations observed on-site. [Maybe this
should be the Contractor instead of Contractor
Biologist?]
Section 18.07.05 A. Migratory Bird Surveys. The
Contractor and Contractor Biologist shall perform
migratory bird and nest surveys prior to any projectrelated activity that could pose the potential to affect
migratory birds or active nests.

6

USFWS

18-14

Section 18.07.06 C Protective Buffer Zones. Suggest
the following: The Contractor shall monitor protective
buffer zone operations periodically throughout each
work day during construction.

Concur. Project team will make that change.

7

USFWS

18-15

Section 18.07.06 C Protective Buffer Zones, bullet 5.
Change the 20- and 50-foot buffers to 80-foot in the
first sentence. Insert the following sentence after the
second full sentence (ending with egrets). If eagles
are present within 1/4 mile of the work area, the
Contractor and Engineers should contact the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish
and Wildlife for further consultation.

Regarding "if eagles are present or nesting", can you
please provide clarity? Eagles have been noted as
nesting in the nearby Anderson Reservoir and eagles
have been cited within the Llagas Watershed.

8

USFWS

18-15

Section 18.07.07 A & B Installation and Maintenance
of Exclusion Devices. Insert the word generally prior to
the reference of nesting and non-nesting seasons.
(i.e..,(generally February 1 through August 31)

Concur. Project team will make that change.

9

USFWS

18-17

Section 18.08. Other Wildlife and Fish Species. We
just want to note that there is no mention of federallylisted species in Section 18. California red-legged
frog, least Bell's vireo, and California tiger salamander.

This section is not typically written until permits are
acquired for project activities. This is just a placeholder.
Comment noted and all biological requirements will be
put into the final contract specifications. District staff will
insert all biologic requirements into the final
specifications.

Concur. Project team will make that change.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS

10

The comments above apply to both Phase 1 and
Phase 2 Specifications Documents

Thank you, Project team appreciates the feedback.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR DESIGN DOCUMENTS FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
Page Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project 65% Design Habitat Impact
Analysis Technical Memorandum

SCVWD Response

USFWS COMMENTS FOR DESIGN DOCUMENTS FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
5

Quantifications of Impacts Section, Second Paragraph, it States:
"Native PSS (shrub-scrub) vegetation under trees to be saved was mapped in
the field if grading is proposed under those trees' canopies. If the understory
was herbaceous vegetation or non-native PSS, no impacts were assigned.
However, if native PSS would be removed by grading, the area of native PSS
was considered impacted."
The Service believes that understory non-native PSS provides habitat for
different species of wildlife and therefore its loss should be considered an
impact. In addition, the Service would like the total acreage of impacted PSS
understory that will be removed identifies.

6 & Table 2 and Table 3.
7 The totals for Native Riparian Forest and Native Riparian Scrub-shrub (17.49
ac) do not match the total shown in Table 3 (17.48 ac). There is a similar
discrepancy with Non-native Riparian Forest and Non-native Riparian Scrubshrub. Both are likely rounding errors.
7

Table 3, 2nd footnote.
It is not clear why “In most cases” sycamore woodland is a subset of PFO.

Project team agrees that non-native PSS does provide habitat for some
wildlife species, but some non-native plants are more innocuous than others.
The dominant non-native PSS species on this project, particularly Himalayan
blackberry and giant reed (which make up the vast majority of the non-native
PSS) have a negative impact on the overall wildlife functions and values and
that removal of these species followed by revegetation with native
herbaceous species will result in a net ecological benefit to the Llagas Creek
riparian corridor. Removal will help to minimize the continued spread of
these non-native species and reduce competition with native species. The
total acreage of giant reed and Himalayan blackberry, which constitutes
approximately 90% of all non-native PSS understory, totals approximately 0.18
ac. Data on the surface area of the other non-native PSS understory species
was not collected, but we would estimate it at 10% or approximately 0.018
acres of the surface area. If this value were doubled to 0.036 acres to ensure
that all non-native understory is more than accounted for, the total area of
non-native PSS understory would be 0.216 ac.
Yes, these are rounding errors. To ensure all potential impacts are accounted
for, District staff will use the larger impact values in its assessment of impacts
and development of associated mitigation.

PFO is defined in the CAR as woody plant growth averaging over 20 feet in
height along the stream corridor. In all cases where sycamore woodland is
growing along the stream corridor it is considered a subset of PFO. However,
there are instances where sycamore woodland is growing well outside of the
bed and banks of the Llagas Creek riparian corridor and as a result it is not
considered PFO and would therefore not be a subset of PFO.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR DESIGN DOCUMENTS FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
8 & Pages 8-9, Mitigation Ratios section, first paragraph, it states:
9 “Mitigation ratios for impacts to riparian habitat proposed in the CAR will be
used per consultation between SCVWD and regulatory agencies. Per the CAR,
mitigation ratios for PFO and PSS habitat impacts range from 1.5:1 to 1.7:1
depending on the reach (USFWS 2003b). These ratios will be reduced 40% for
impacts to non-native PFO and P55 and 33% for impacts to native PSS under
PFO canopy that has been saved.”
Please clarify why these mitigation ratios are reduced by 40% for impacts to
non-native PFO and PSS, and by 33% for impacts to native PSS under PFO
canopy that has been saved.

Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection - Project Update
The service has no comments specific to this document.
Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: Inclusion of Bat Evaluations into
Environmental Documents
The service has no comments specific to this document.
Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Habitat Restoration Planting
Palette, Species Composition, and Spacing Technical Memorandum
The Service has no specific comments to this document.

Per previous guidance provided by the resource agencies, District staff is
utilizing the habitat mitigation approach that is described in the CAR to the
extent feasible. The HEP analysis that the CAR is based on reduces the Habitat
Suitability Index of impacted vegetation by 40% when the majority of the
plant canopy closure (cover) is made up of non-native species. Therefore, we
utilized that 40% reduction in our adjustment of mitigation ratios for nonnative PFO and PSS.
Independent of the CAR directive as just described, the Project design team
considered habitat values for native PSS under PFO canopy, and proposes that
a 33% reduction in mitigation ratios would reflect that fact that only
understory was removed, compared with areas where both overstory and
understory were removed.
SCVWD Response
Ok, thank you for your review.
SCVWD Response
Ok, thank you for your review.
SCVWD Response
Ok, thank you for your review.

USFWS COMMENTS FOR DESIGN DOCUMENTS FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project- Revegetation Acreage and
Planting Polygon Refinement Technical Memorandum
The Service has no specific comments to this document.
Upper Llagas Creek FFP- Reach 7A Detention Basin Analysis
The Service has no specific comments to this document.

SCVWD Response

Ok, thank you for your review.
SCVWD Response
Ok, thank you for your review.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

1

2

3

4

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

General Comment

Central Coast Water Board staff provided comments on the 30% design
to the District on August 23, 2012. Central Coast Water Board staff met
with District staff on March 14, 2013, to reiterate and discuss our
comments on the 30% design that had not been adequately addressed
in the District’s January 24, 2013 response to our comments on the 30%
design. To date Central Coast Water Board staff has not received the
District’s response to the issues we raised in the April 18, 2013 meeting,
nor have the issues been incorporated into the 65% design plans.

General Comment

Since the District has not yet responded to all of our earlier comments,
all of our earlier comments are incorporated by reference.

General Comment

Since many of Central Coast Water Board’s earlier comments on the
Project relate to the hydrologic model and assumptions on which the
design is based, and since the District has not yet responded to all of our
earlier comments or incorporated them into the Project design, it is
possible that the final Project design may vary significantly from the 65%
design plans. This uncertainty makes review of the 65% design difficult
and potentially irrelevant. The District should resolve the hydrologic
model and incorporate resulting changes into the design before
continuing with design development. The District should provide
additional review opportunities after the design has been modified to
incorporate the District's responses to all CCRWQCB comments.

General Comment

The Project hydrologic model still has not been modified to
appropriately. The model must be adjusted to include only runoff from
existing development, rather than from development associated with
2050 build-out conditions. The model must also be adjusted to account
for onsite runoff detention and retention. The City of Morgan Hill has
been requiring post-construction stormwater controls for all new
development for many years. As a result, the 1% runoff rate from many
developed areas in Morgan Hill is substantially less than the 1% runoff
rate without such post-construction runoff controls.

Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 and August 1, 2013 letters for
responses to the Central Coast Water Board's earlier
Project comments.

Agreed. It is the Project team's desire to review all
comments, provide responses, and incorporate the
applicable comments/responses into the design.
Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (response to question 1a, 1b, 1c)
and August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the Central
Coast Water Board's earlier Project comments.

Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (responses to question 1a and
1b) and August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the
Central Coast Water Board's earlier Project comments.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

5

6

7

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

General Comment

The Project has still not incorporated alternative approaches to flood
protection which would reduce the Project's impacts on stream channels.
In particular, the Project has still not incorporated off-channel or nearchannel detention and/or retention storage. Such storage could
significantly reduce the design flow rate, and therefore significantly
reduce the channel modifications needed to convey the design flow rate.
Review of aerial photographs of Morgan Hill indicate undeveloped land
within the City that could be used in this way to reduce the design flow
rate within the stream channels. In addition, numerous plan sheets
(e.g., D-13, D-34 through D-37, D-40, D-45 through D-48, D-53, D-54, D75 through D-77, D-79 through D-89, et. al.) indicate undeveloped land
adjacent to the proposed channel modifications that could be acquired
by the District and modified for use as floodplain storage, further
reducing the downstream flow rate and thus the need for downstream
channel modifications. The District must as demonstrate that all less
environmentally damaging alternatives have been fully explored. The
District's alternatives analysis should include explanation of why rejected
alternatives were rejected.

General Comment

The District has still not conducted updated environmental review for the
proposed project. Given the project design changes since 1982, the
issues raised in earlier CCRWQCB comments which have not yet been
addressed or incorporated into the design, and the uncertainty about
revegetation potential, 65% plan review seems extremely premature.
We need to have the environmental analysis before evaluating the
design.

D-11, D-12, D-17,
D-18, D-20, D-24,
D-29, D-30, et. al.

The 65% plans indicate that the Project will use existing bridges and
crossings without modifying them. However, it is unclear whether the
existing bridges and crossings are able to convey the design flow rate
without significant hydraulic effects, such as head loss, increased
erosion potential, and increased need for hardscape. What are the
hydraulic consequences of using each existing bridge and crossing, and
to what extent does retaining each existing bridge and crossing increase
other environmental impacts, such as creating the need for more
modified channels to compensate for head losses? What are the
backwater effects of each existing bridge and crossing? To what extent
would replacing the bridges reduce these impacts?

Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (response to question 1c) and
August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the Central Coast
Water Board's earlier Project comments.

The Project team is to issue the Draft EIR/EA in
December 2013 which will include all the environmental
analysis you are seeking. The Project team has tried to
provide these supporting
documents/reports/memorandums, etc. to the Resources
Agencies as they have become final.
Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (response to question 1d) and
August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the Central Coast
Water Board's earlier Project comments.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

8

9

10

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

D-55, D-57,
D-65 through D-67,
D-69, D-72, et. al.

General Comment

L-21

The plans indicate several locations where existing trees on the bank
are proposed for removal in favor of a bench nearer the bankfull
channel. Since the revegetation potential of the benches is not fully
known, it is not known whether the bench in these locations will provide
higher-quality habitat than the existing trees. Benches must be
considered on a case-by-case basis. Where the revegetation potential
of the bench equals or exceeds the habitat value of existing vegetation
to be removed—or the revegetation potential of upper bank areas—and
the District is willing to vegetate the bench in order to achieve this
potential, benches are preferred. Otherwise, the bench should be
removed so that the stream channel is nearer to the existing vegetation
and/or planting area on the upper banks.

Modifying the Project’s hydrologic model and providing off-channel and
near-channel storage as described above may result in lower design
flow rates, reducing the extent of channel modification needed to convey
the design flow rate. Any reduction in the need for channel modification
should be used to optimize revegetation of the channel in one or more of
the following ways:
a) Retaining the design width of channels and increasing vegetation
type or thickness within the channels (e.g., bench and bank areas)
where the habitat restoration potential within the channel equals or
exceeds the habitat value of existing vegetation and the habitat
restoration potential of upper bank areas; or
b) Reducing the design width of channels where the habitat restoration
potential within the channels (e.g., bench and bank areas) is less than
the habitat value of existing vegetation and the habitat restoration
potential of upper bank areas.

The 65% design includes planting plans consisting of “blanket”
vegetation layers overlaid on the Project footprint. These blanket layers
do not appear to account for uncertainty with respect to the revegetation
potential of these areas. In addition, planting decisions require
explanation: What criteria guided selection of each vegetation type to
plant in each area? Which of the other vegetation types would also be
viable? Which vegetation type would add the most environmental
value? If another vegetation type would add more environmental value
than the selected type in any location, why was it rejected? What is the
roughness objective for each channel reach, and how does the selected
vegetation type meet that objective?

Agreed. The Project team agrees with this philosophy
and analysis for considering benches. This analysis is
and has been performed, while maintaining the
geomorphology bankfull channel design.

Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (response to question 1c) and
August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the Central Coast
Water Board's earlier Project comments.

The vegetation polygons (i.e. vegetation layers) are a
GIS tool to graphically represent what vegetation types
were proposed for planting within the project footprint.
The layers were not just laid on the plans but a significant
amount of work went into developing locations and types
of planting material. What criteria guided selection of
each vegetation type to plant in each area? The criteria
that guided selection was a copulation of data collection
efforts for project development 1) Evaluate existing
vegetation-existing species composition informs which
species have the best potential given current conditions
2) hydrology 3) Soil conditions 4) channel roughness and
flood protection constraints 5) plant growth potential 6)
plant growth requirements 7) propagule source and

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

11

12

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

L-21

General Comment

There does not appear to be a planting plan for reach 7B

It is not clear how channel meander will be achieved. The 65% plan
seems to include only requirements for the radius of curvature for
meander in each reach. Will actual meander design be incorporated into
the Project plans or left to the contractor in the field? What is the plan
for agency review of the channel meander plans?

commercial availability. Which of the other vegetation
types would also be viable? I am unclear how to answer
this question-what is the “other vegetation types”? Which
vegetation type would add the most environmental value?
Plants provide the basic physical structure for most
wildlife habitats so the most environmental value question
is open to some degree of interpretation. For the
purposes of planning for this project, the vegetation types
with the greatest wildlife value in the Llagas watershed
are plant communities which are locally endemic to the
area for which the native wildlife have evolved.
Additionally, for greater “value” a mosaic of habitat types
are preferential and they should be self-sustaining which
require very little human intervention to manage. If
another vegetation type would add more environmental
value than the selected type in any location, why was it
rejected? I am unclear as to what other vegetation types
the author refers but the District has favored rarer habitat
types in the planning process. Wetland habitats are rare
in this watershed owing to the changed hydrology on the
valley floor where once wet meadows were interspersed
with drier grasslands. Reach 7 is now under
consideration for favoring this habitat type over upland
plantings which is a more prolific in the watershed.
Additionally, the creation of the mosaic of wetlands (Lake
Silveira) adjacent to riparian would add much needed
biodiversity to this watershed. What is the roughness
objective for each channel reach, and how does the
selected vegetation type meet that objective? This
information is outlined in the Upper Llagas Creek Flood
Protection Project Habitat Restoration Planting Palette,
Species Composition and Spacing Technical
Memorandum previously provided to all resource agency
staff. This information will also be provided in the EIR.
The Reach 7b Planting Plan will be developed as the
Project design advances. However, due to the limited
available Project r/w due to urban development along
both banks, a geomorphology bankfull design, the Reach
7b revegetation will be limited in scope in order to provide
1% protection.
Meander geometry is most often expressed as a function
of bankful width. The meanders were evaluated as part of
the project planning (Recommended Bankfull Geometries
for Flood Protection Channel Design Upper Llagas Creek
Santa Clara County) and appear to remain from the preagricultural valley floor, before Llagas Creek was
locally straightened, and incident flows were modified by

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

construction of Chesbro Dam. Diameters of
350 feet (radius of 175 feet) have been calculated to
show that numerous self-formed curves have radii in the
range of
120 to 200 feet, implying that the pre-agricultural bankfull
width through much of Reach 4 ranged between 50 and
65
feet. Stable bankfull widths under current flows may be
slightly less, due primarily to peak attenuation at
Chesbro.
While other factors also influence stable bank widths, the
District does not plan to deviate from the radius of
curvature and subsequent meander length which
currently exists since this is the natural condition. Since
the plan is to match existing conditions (i.e. keep
meanders) there is no specific meander design and
subsequent no plan for agency review.

13

14

15

The Bankfull report was previously provided to all agency
staff.
Please refer to the Project design team's responses to
both your July 15, 2013 (response to question 1d) and
August 1, 2013 letters for responses to the Central Coast
Water Board's earlier Project comments.

CCRWQCB

D-26

A new crossings proposed to be constructed in proposed reach 7A.
According to plan sheet C-35, the crossing will consist of a triple box
culvert. This design will potentially result in significantly higher head
losses and other hydraulic effects than would result from constructing a
bridge in this location. In addition, a bridge would allow greater habitat
continuity and wildlife passage. Why was a culvert chosen for this
location rather than a bridge? What are the hydraulic consequences (in
terms of head loss, increased erosion potential, and increased need for
hardscape) of the proposed culvert? Please reevaluate this crossing,
modify if possible, and provide analysis demonstrating the thought
process which led to the ultimate design.

CCRWQCB

Plan sheets D-22,
D-66, D-67, D-69,
D-89, et. al

The plans indicate several locations where modifying the channel
alignment in these locations could result in preservation of more of the
native trees. Please reevaluate these locations, modify if possible, and
provide analysis demonstrating the thought process which led to the
ultimate design at each location.

Agreed. The Project team has reviewed the Project
design to avoid and preserve as many native trees as is
possible for the entire length of the approximate 13 mile
long Project. These locations will be re-evaluated again.

D-27, D-59,
D-71, et. al.

While channel meander is a vital habitat function, increasing the radius
of the proposed bends between STA 443+00 and STA 446+00 and
between STA 202+00 and 209+00 and may result in less erosion and
less need for hardscape. Please reevaluate these bends, modify if
possible, and provide analysis demonstrating the thought process which
led to the ultimate design for each location.

See response to question 12.

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

16

17

18

19

20

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

D-28

There appears to be a hydraulic “bottle-neck” between STA 435+00 and
STA 444+00 as a result of avoiding the commercial development north
of the channel. This bottle-neck has the potential to increase head loss,
erosion, and the need for hardscape at this location. What are the
hydraulic consequences of avoiding the commercial development?
What options were explored to avoid this bottle-neck? Please
reevaluate this bottle-neck, modify if possible, and provide analysis
demonstrating the thought process which led to the ultimate design.

Actually, this location is the Reach 7a confluence with the
main stem of Upper Llagas Creek. This location is
actually where the additional "bowtie" parcel and the
triangular parcel (sycamore plantings) are being
purchase to enhance the higher value habitat, take
advantage of better soils and higher groundwater, and
continuity with the Lake Silveira Mitigation plantings.
Please refer to future design drawings and the upcoming
Draft EIR/EA to be released for public review in
December 2013 for additional details of this location.

D-55

The plan preserves the existing stream alignment as the south channel,
but then leaves it so narrow by the grading that it is nearly closed. What
is the thinking here? What alternatives were explored? Please
reevaluate this location, modify if possible, and provide analysis
demonstrating the thought process which led to the ultimate design.

Please refer to Sheet PP-55 for the design of the
confluence with Reach 14. To avoid erosion potentials
which are typical at creek confluences, this confluence
area is being widened and an island to exist near the
center of the confluence for habitat.

Why are the sycamore trees located southwest of the proposed channel
at STA 225+00 proposed for removal? Please reevaluate this location,
modify if possible, and provide analysis demonstrating the thought
process which led to the ultimate design.

Agreed. The Project team has reviewed the Project
design to avoid and preserve as many native trees,
especially sycamores, as is possible for the entire length
of the approximate 13 mile long Project. Please refer to
sheet PP-56 for the unavoidable Project impacts to these
existing sycamores. If the channel is moved to the west,
additional sycamores would potentially be impacted.

How can storm drain outfalls and other points of discharge to the
proposed channel be redesigned to avoid or reduce the use of
hardscape? Please reevaluate these locations, modify if possible, and
provide analysis demonstrating the thought process which led to the
ultimate design at each location.

The Project team will evaluate the possibility of reducing
the use of hardscape at storm drain outfall locations.
However, to protect from bank scour at the storm drain
discharge location, thus minimizing water quality issues,
some minor form of hardscape will be needed at these
various discharge points.

Why is the existing channel being abandoned between STA 136+00 and
STA 145+00? Please reevaluate this location, modify if possible, and
provide analysis demonstrating the thought process which led to the
ultimate design.

The channel is not being abandoned. The original PL566 project had this portion of the channel abandoned
and filled in. However, the Project team has decided to
use the existing channel for split flows with an island to
be created and vegetated (increase roughness) to
provide enhanced habitat.

D-56

D-62, D-72,
D-89, et. al.

D-68

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

21

22

23

24

The lower portion of Reach 4 has been very difficult
hydraulically to size for "no induced flooding", while
maintaining a geomorphology bankfull channel design
and maximizing roughness. Please refer to the Project
design team's responses to both your July 15, 2013 and
August 1, 2013 (response to question 4i) letters for
responses to the Central Coast Water Board's earlier
Project comments.

D-71

Where will the low-flow channel be placed? There is an established
bench between STA 112+00 and STA 118+00—why does the design
ignore it and plow right through it? Please reevaluate this location,
modify if possible, and provide analysis demonstrating the thought
process which led to the ultimate design.

CCRWQCB

D-73

Would widening the proposed channel in a southwesterly direction
reduce the potential for erosion and the need for hardscape at the
Buena Vista Avenue crossing? Please reevaluate this location, modify if
possible, and provide analysis demonstrating the thought process which
led to the ultimate design.

Currently, the only hardscape planned for the existing
Buena Vista Avenue bridge is at the channel invert, under
the bridge to protect the existing bridge abutments from
scour, which, if allowed to occur, could potentially
damage the bridge structure or cause it's failure/collapse.

CCRWQCB

D-41, D-47,
D-70, et. al.

The plans show a cross-hatched pattern that does not appear to be
explained in the Legend. Please provide an explanation.

Agree. These are areas at top of bank that will not be
impacted by Project excavation. The plans will be
updated to address your comment and define the crosshatched pattern.

The need for all proposed RSP and other hardscape must be
demonstrated through hydraulic analysis. The analysis must show that
all less-impacting bank stabilization methods, including channel
realignment, were evaluated found to be inadequate, and must provide
the reasons each method was rejected.

Agree. The Project team would prefer installing RSP at
only those locations absolutely necessary based on the
velocities expected through the hydraulic analysis. The
Project team's preference is to avoid having to pay the
added Project costs associated with purchasing and
installing RSP, if not absolutely necessary.

CCRWQCB

CCRWQCB

various

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

1a.

1b.

The Project design must be based
on current development conditions,
rather than development conditions
presumed to exist at some future
date.

The Project hydrology was based on 2050 conditions. Per your request, District staff has done analysis to
compare the 2006 to 2050 conditions. There is a minor difference between the 2006 flows and the 2050 flows as
described in the District memorandum titled, "Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project - Detention Basin
Analysis Using 2006 Hydrologic Data", dated November 6, 2013, and also described in the additional information
to the March 14, 2013 meeting notes.

The Project design must be treat all
development that has occurred
since the City of Morgan Hill’s
adoption of stormwater detention
requirements for new development
(c. 1980) as having runoff conditions
in compliance with the City’s
requirements. It is the City’s
responsibility to ensure that
development since that time has
implemented and maintained
stormwater detention features
achieving the City’s requirements.

As mentioned in the additional information provided to the March 14, 2013 meeting notes, City of Morgan Hill
has had a policy in place since 1980 requiring new developments to have their own retention pond system in
place to contain the 100-year event. District staff has contacted the City of Morgan Hill to obtain information
regarding these systems. While the intent of the policy was to reduce the runoff, there appears to be no
regulation for post construction performance of these features or required maintenance of constructed
elements. It is not possible for District staff to know this information and without regulatory processes in place
to enforce post construction monitoring and maintenance. Obtaining this information now is onerous and may
provide little in the way of usable information to reduce Project limits. Since the existing conditions
demonstrates that even with these features in place since 1980, there still continues to be often and extensive
flooding within the City of Morgan Hill.
In regards to City of Morgan Hill developments, District staff (Community Projects Review Unit) has years of
correspondences with the City of Morgan Hill urging for stormwater detention facilities, but District did not and
does not have enforcement authority to require such facilities.
The tracking and compliance of constructed features built after 2012, due to the CCRWQCB Post Construction
Stormwater Management Requirements for Development Projects in the Central Coast Region, will be easier to
manage into the future.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

1c.

The Project design must incorporate
additional off-channel and
floodplain storage wherever
feasible. The Central Coast Water
Board understands that this will
require cooperation between the
District and other project
stakeholders, but exploring and
developing storage options which
reduce the Project design flow is an
essential element of impact
avoidance and eventual Central
Coast Water Board approval of the
Project.

District previously provided two studies on off-channel and floodplain storage - City of Morgan Hill study
prepared in 1981 and another study prepared by the District in 1997. In summary from the studies, the upstream
flows were not significant enough that detaining these flows by constructing a detention facility would not
prevent downstream inflows from causing flooding. Downstream in-creek modifications would still need to be
constructed to meet Project objectives. Therefore, construction of an upstream detention facility was eliminated
as an alternative because it could not avoid the need for creek modifications and associated environmental
impacts.
The Project team has studied and adopted a tunnel alternative to avoid impacts to the existing creek and its
habitat within Reach 8.
Per your request, District completed an additional off-stream detention facility analysis at Reach 7A which was
previously provided. The issues regarding off-stream detention were determined to be:
• A detention facility constructed in Reach 7A to capture all upstream Project flow increase would only be slightly
less in size (2006 vs. 2050) and would still result in the need for downstream modifications, thus resulting in
similar environmental impacts to the recommended design;
• This large a detention facility would have inherent issues with operation and maintenance, species
entrainment, public safety, mosquito abatement, and potential water quality issues;
• A smaller detention facility could be constructed in Reach 7A, which could allow for increased channel
roughness downstream. However, such a facility would not eliminate the need for downstream modifications,
and existing soil conditions in Reaches 4, 5 and 6 are nutrient deficient and likely would not support an increase
in plant density over what is proposed. The District’s revegetation strategy is to maximize vegetation given the

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

soil and water constraints within the project limits. If plant density is increased, the nutrient content in the soils
and lack of available surface and groundwater may not support this increased density, thus vegetation would
never reach its desired habitat potential;
• A detention facility constructed to capture upstream flows to avoid induced flooding in the downstream
reaches of 4, 5, and 6 would not address the incision issue within Llagas Creek as identified in the Stable Channel
Design and Sediment Impact Assessment Report (Noble Consultants, Inc.; Northwest Hydraulic Consultants)
completed in 2008 for the USACE and confirmed in the Recommended Bankfull Geometries For Flood Protection
Channel Design Report (Senter, Hecht, Strudley, & Richmond) completed in 2012 for the District.
• A detention facility within Reach 7A would interfere with planned mitigation in the lower section of Reach 7A
(the bowtie parcel), which is currently under development with the Lake Silveira design. It would be
environmentally beneficial to take advantage of the better soil quality and higher groundwater to plant mesic
riparian vegetation. This mitigation element will provide connectivity to the higher quality habitats within the
Lake Silveira parcel and upstream reaches.
• A total detention facility footprint of 150+ acres in size is not practical, would face its own environmental
issues, and would likely not receive favorable public support.
As the CCRWQCB stated at the March 14, 2013 meeting, widening the bank 5 feet doesn't necessarily have less
impact than widening the bank 30 feet. District staff analysis has shown that it is not possible to practically store
the volume of water necessary upstream that would eliminate the need for downstream creek widening.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

1d.

Where channel capacity to convey
the Project design flow is reduced
by channel constrictions, these
channel constrictions must be
removed or reduced.

There is only one location, approximate location Station 449+00, where an entirely new crossing is proposed to
be constructed. At Station 449+00, a triple cell box culvert creek crossing is proposed to continue to allow the
land owner (farmers) to maintain access to their entire property that will be split as a result of the Project. To
construct a clear span bridge at this location for a private crossing, that will be used intermittently, would cost
millions and may be considered a mis-use of public funds.
There are several other locations, Edes Ct., Cosmo Ave, etc. where an existing box culvert crossing exists along
the creek. The proposed Project will install additional box culverts at these crossings to accommodate the
proposed creek widening upstream and downstream. It is in the District's best interest, to not have constrictions
in the creek, as constrictions increase flow velocities, which lead to channel erosion and downstream sediment
deposition that will result in additional creek maintenance at a significant cost to the District (public). These
crossings have been designed to accommodate the creek widening without significantly increasing flow velocities
to erosive conditions, head loss, and backwater conditions where hydraulic capacity is compromised.

1e.

Design flow reductions achieved
through elements (a) through (d),
above, must be incorporated into
the design to reduce channel
impacts, where possible, and to
optimize channel revegetation
conditions where reducing impacts
is not possible.

As discussed at the last Resource Agency meeting on June 25, 2013, the appropriate plant palette has been
chosen for the soil conditions throughout the Project and vegetation replacement has been maximized based on
soil and hydrology conditions. District staff is proposing different methods to optimize channel revegetation.
The proposed Project will result in a geomorphically stable channel and improved sediment transport. There is a
tunnel that will preserve the existing creek within the City of Morgan Hill and thus will avoid impacts to the
existing creek. District staff has avoided higher quality vegetation where possible by alternating roads and only
doing work to one side of the creek where practical. District staff has added infill planting areas to the Project
revegetation design by removing trash and debris on the opposite bank where work is to take place to maximize
revegetation opportunities and provide greater opportunities for ecological and creek enhancements. District
staff has also increased woody debris features to enhance habitat within the creek.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

1f.

2a.

Revegetation/roughness increases
resulting from element (e) above
must be implemented in accordance
with the best habitat potential.
Where the best conditions exist at
bench level, channel width should
be maximized in order to maximize
bench area; but where the best
conditions exist at top of bank,
channel width should be decreased
in order to maximize planting area
at the top of bank.
The comparison between 2006 and
2050 development conditions
mentioned above indicates a design
flow of 2,093 cfs in West Little
Llagas Creek downstream of
Edmundson Creek. This is identical
to the design flow at this location
posited in the 2012 hydraulic report
for the 30% Project design and in
the 2003 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers hydraulic study for the
project. Therefore it is impossible
that the June 28, 2013 model
incorporates all of the elements
listed in Issue No. 1, since Central

District staff has worked with the Design and Revegetation consultants to evaluate opportunities where to
maximize planting areas while still maintaining the delicate balance of maintaining hydrologic capacity and a
geomorphically stable channel.

Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1a from your July 15, 2013 letter.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

Coast Water Board staff has raised
those elements with District staff
only in the last several months
(March 14, 2013, and
subsequently).

2b.

The Reach 7A Detention Basin
Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter.
Analysis prepared by District staff,
dated June 20, 2013, uses the same
design flow (2,093 cfs) in calculating
the storage volume needed at
Monterey Road to avoid flooding
along West Little Llagas Creek and
avoid induced flooding in reach 6 of
Llagas Creek. As a result, it is
impossible that this analysis
incorporates all of the elements
listed in Issue No. 1.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

3a.

To date District staff has considered Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter.
two detention pond alternatives.
The first, described in West Little
Llagas Creek Detention Pond Study
and Flood Protection Measures
(May, 1997), indicated that a 15acre pond located south of Llagas
Road could reduce the peak flow
entering reach 8 by 353 cfs (p. 13).
The second alternative, described in
the Reach 7A Detention Basin
Analysis, determined that a 1,170
acre-foot basin would be needed
south of Watsonville Road to avoid
any induced flooding downstream.
However, a smaller basin would still
provide some reduction in design
flow that could be used to optimize
revegetation (roughness) within the
modified channel footprints
downstream.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

3b.

Review of aerial photographs of the
City of Morgan Hill indicates
additional areas of undeveloped
land within the City and near
reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14 that could be
used for detention storage to
reduce peak design flows.
Numerous plan sheets in the 65%
design plan set ((e.g., D-13, D-34
through D-37, D-40, D-45 through D48, D-53, D-54, D-75 through D-77,
D-79 through D-89, et. al.) also
indicate undeveloped land adjacent
to the proposed channel
modifications that could be
acquired by the District and
modified for use as floodplain
storage to attenuate peak flows.

Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter.
In addition, District staff is concerned with fish entrainment at detention facilities within Reaches 4, 5, and 6 as
this area is designated critical habitat for SCCC-steelhead by NMFS. Fish & Wildlife has expressed a similar
concern of fish entrainment.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4

The 65% design plans continue to
indicate that the Project will use
existing culverts and crossings,
some of which appear undersized.
In addition, the Project includes
construction of a new crossing near
station 449+00, consisting of three
parallel box culverts rather than a
bridge which would span the entire
channel and avoid obstructing and
constricting flow at this location. In
addition, bridges provide superior
habitat potential and wildlife
passage, and can require less longterm sediment and vegetation
maintenance.

Comment Central Coast Regional
Water Quality Control Board
Comment
(August 1, 2013 Letter)
1

CCRWQCB staff has no comments
on this memorandum at this time.

Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1d from your July 15, 2013 letter.
The geomorphology analysis completed provides for locations where sediment is to drop out (i.e. confluence of
Reaches 4, 5, 14). The O&M document will state where these locations are, the frequency of maintenance, and
the trigger (i.e. quantity of sediment to be removed when flood protection is compromised) for when this
maintenance will take place.

SCVWD Response

Ok, thank you for your review.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

2a.

2b.

2c.

The impact analysis was based on
the Project Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Act Report CAR), which
was prepared using the Habitat
Evaluation Procedure (HEP)
conducted by USACE and CDFW to
assess impacts to fish and wildlife
resources. Therefore, it is unclear
that the impact analysis covers all
waters of the State or fully identifies
and evaluates all impacts to water
quality and beneficial uses caused
by the Project.
The “perennial emergent marsh”
designation refers to wetland
habitats within USACE jurisdiction.
Are there any wetland areas outside
of USACE jurisdiction that could
potentially be impacted by the
Project?
According to the memorandum, the
“riparian scrub-shrub” (PSS)
designation includes species that
are in early developmental stages of
habitat designated as “riparian
forest” (PFO) (p. 2). How will this

The CAR is intended to provide early recommendations for conservation of fish and wildlife species. Impacts to
waters of the state and water quality and beneficial uses will be in the EIR/EA.

There are no impacts to wetlands outside of USACE jurisdiction.

The PSS designation does come from the CAR and refers to "woody plant growth averaging 20 feet or less in
height along the stream corridor. Scrub-shrub along the stream is generally an early succession stage of riparian
forest." The Forest habitat type has a higher species diversity even though it includes the same shrub species as
the scrub palette but it also includes a variety of riparian tree species. The PSS will be tracked via the planting
polygons and success criteria will be established in coordination with the agencies.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

“early developmental stage” PFO be
tracked and mitigated? Early
developmental stage PFO habitat
must be treated as PFO, not as PSS
(see Comment No. 3.g, below).
2d.

The memorandum states that the
mitigation ratios are taken from the
CAR and were confirmed “per
consultation with regulatory
agencies” (p. 9). When did this
consultation occur? Was CCRWQCB
staff involved? CCRWQCB staff has
commented previously on the
replanting/mitigation approach for
the Project. If mitigation ratios are
still based on the CAR, it is unlikely
that the District has incorporated all
CCRWQCB staff comments.

District staff has coordinated with resource agency staff, including CCRWQCB and did note during the 30% design
meeting on August 2, 2012 that we would be following the 2003 revised CAR. The agencies in attendance did
agree to allow the CAR to be the guidance document for mitigation. However, District's staff approach to
revegetation is to simply maximize plantings and habitat values at each channel section taking into account the
hydraulic constraints, soil types, and subsurface water conditions. The accounting and impact analysis is
secondary in the planning effort and the District staff believes that maximizing habitat values by creating a selfsustaining system to improve beneficial uses is the acceptable approach for which the CCRWQCB endorses.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

2e.

The mitigation ratios identified in
the memorandum range from 1.5:1
to 1.7:1 for permanent impacts to
PFO and PSS, reduced by 40% for
impacts to non-native PFO and PSS,
and by 33% for impacts to native
PSS under PFO canopy that will
remain. These mitigation ratios do
not appear adequate. CCRWQCB
requires mitigation of permanent
impacts to riparian habitat at a
minimum ratio of 2:1, with higher
ratios for higher-quality habitat. For
instance, the typical mitigation ratio
for native species greater than 24”
dbh is 10:1. In addition, CCRWQCB
expects mitigation at a minimum
ratio of 2:1 for all lost habitat
functions and beneficial uses.
Therefore it is not appropriate to
reduce mitigation for impacts to PSS
just because it is under PFO canopy
that is not being impacted.

District staff will make that change to remove the 40 and 33% reduction respectively during the next iteration of
analysis. However, District staff has asked all the agencies to consider out-of kind mitigation in the form of
invasive species control to bring the ratios up since we believe that the invasive species are contributing to the
decline of the existing riparian structure and homogenizing habitats. District staff will work with resource agency
staff in the coming months to discuss the particulars.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

2f.

3a.

Please clarify the Project’s
revegetation objective for sycamore
woodland. The memorandum cites
conclusions from the development
of the Santa Clara Valley Habitat
Conservation Plan which appear to
disagree with statements in the
Planting Palette and Planting
Polygon memoranda. CCRWQCB
staff expects sycamore woodland
restoration in Project areas
wherever site conditions are
capable of supporting it.

The memorandum mentions the
following documents on p. 3:
• Upper Llagas Creek Stormwater
Improvements Project Preliminary
Delineation of Wetlands and Other
Waters (2013);
• Upper Llagas Creek Baseline
Biological Resources Report (2012);
• Upper Llagas Creek Riparian
Corridor Assessment (2012); and
• Draft Phase 2 Technical
Memorandum (2012)
When will these documents be

The revegetation objective is to maximize planting of Sycamores where soil and hydrology are appropriate. This
means Lake Silveira mitigation area, Reach 6, and Reach 7a. The Project team agrees with the CCRWQCB
expectation to plant sycamore woodland in all applicable Project areas where favorable site conditions exist to
support them.
District staff also understands the value of this important vegetative community. Therefore, we plan to propose
an academic evaluation to advance the science of vegetative propagation of local stock of Sycamores to make up
for any deficiency in mitigation ratios for this vegetation type. District staff will present a formal proposal to the
agencies in coming months.
Additionally, District staff is undertaking additional avoidance and minimization approaches to further attempt to
avoid impacts to the native Sycamore as the Project design evolves.
SCVWD staff apologizes for inadvertently not including the subject documents in the last submittal. Sorry for any
inconvenience that occurred as a result of this oversight.
The subject documents are included in this latest submittal. Please note the corrected name for the one report:
Upper Llagas Creek Project Preliminary Delineation of Wetlands and Other Waters, Santa Clara County, California
(2013)

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

provided to regulatory agencies? It
is difficult to conduct a complete
evaluation of the channel designs
and documents received to-date
without this additional information.

3b.

3c.

The memorandum states that
channel geometry and
hydrologic/hydraulic modeling
inform planting locations. However,
these models have not yet been
adjusted in response to previous
CCRWQCB comments. Therefore
replanting plans will likely need to
be revised.
The memorandum states that soil
restrictions will control replanting
possibilities (p. 4). However, District
consultants stated at the 65%
design meeting that revegetation
will be optimized through the use of
soil amendments. Please reconcile

The revegetation planning documents are iterative and will be revised several more times before Project design
completion.

District staff is investigating the use of soil amendments to better improve initial growing conditions (i.e. nutrient
availability) for the revegetation plantings. More information regarding this approach will be presented to
resource agency staff at the next Project update meeting. However, given that this watershed is lacking also in
available water, all conditions must be taken into account to ensure that what is planted will be self-sufficient
and sustainable.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

these two statements.

3d.

The plant size potential and planting
density requirements provided in
Table 1 for Reach 7 do not appear to
be sufficiently diverse. How will
these requirements be incorporated
into the Project? Also, the density
requirements are per linear foot.
How will these densities be
reflected in planting areas of varying
width?

Table 1: The CAR had a very simplistic recommendation for Reach 7 which is what Table 1 reflects. If you note
what was proposed in Reach 7 (Table 5), this reflects more vertical and horizontal complexity (i.e. diversity of
structure). However, recent data collection efforts has revealed high groundwater is expected in Reach 7a during
normal and above normal precipitation years. This new information has prompted the Project team to rethink
the revegetation strategy within this area to take advantage of the high groundwater opportunities. Upland
habitat is more prolific in this watershed than is wetland habitats since the watershed does not have perennial
tributaries on the valley floor. To minimize long term maintenance to maintain Channel hydraulic capacity in
Reach 7a and to maximize habitat values for wetlands, the new approach would allow for growth and
colonization of wetland habitats to occur on the channel invert while planting trees at the top of bank. This
would eliminate the upland habitats which were planned on the new banks of the channel.
To specifically answer your question regarding density with varying widths - The proposed area first is converted
to square footage. The second step is to determine what kind of spacing is required for successful establishment.
Then, the on center spacing are divided into the square footage of your planting area to produce the number of
plants needed. To add additional plant types, subtract the number of plants already occupying space.

3e.

Table 2 identifies Reaches 7A and 7B Reach 7a, south of Middle Avenue, is planned for mesic riparian plantings to connect to the higher quality habitat
as having some of the best soil and of Lake Silveira.
hydrology conditions in the Project
area. Please see Comment No. 4.g,

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

below.
3f.

3g.

The vegetation types assumed for
typical channel cross-sections
shown in Attachment 3 are
inconsistent with the vegetation
types indicated in the planting
polygons in some locations.
The memorandum does not appear
to account for the statement made
in the 65% Design Habitat Impact
Analysis Technical Memorandum
that the “riparian scrub-shrub” (PSS)
designation includes areas that are
early developmental stages of
habitat designated as “riparian
forest” (PFO) (see Comment No. 2.c,
above). None of the PSS subtypes
described in the memorandum
appear consistent with PFO species.
Therefore how will this early
developmental stage PFO be
tracked separately from PSS
vegetation types? In addition, it
must be replaced with PFO, not PSS.

Agreed, District staff will work with our consultants to rectify this inconsistency during the next iteration of
Project design plans.

The PSS designation in the CAR is related to habitat values and is described as "woody species under 20 feet".
Therefore, the plant palette was selected for those species that could achieve this target. Or alternatively, PFO is
woody species over 20 feet in height. The CAR and the subsequent plant palette was intended to increase the
vertical and horizontal complexity of the existing riparian corridor making it contiguous with the higher quality
upstream habitats. The PSS will be mapped as such and monitored with requisite success criteria. If the
CCRWQCB has suggested changes to the planting palette, we will certainly take them into consideration.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4a.

4b.

The memorandum states that the
District will claim 25% more area for
mitigation than is planted, since the
mature canopy will extend beyond
the planting area. Combined with
the low mitigation ratios proposed,
this would reduce the mitigation
ratio for permanent impacts to
riparian habitat to little more than
1:1, which is not acceptable.
CCRWQCB staff has not
encountered such a proposal
before. How is the District defining
“planting area”—as only the area
enclosed by panting holes, as
though a string were wrapped
around the stems/trunks and only
the area within the string is
counted?
The first goal of the replanting plan
should be to optimize riparian
vegetation within Project sites. The
second goal should be to provide
mitigation at appropriate ratios for
impacted habitat that cannot be
provided through optimal replanting
of Project areas.

The impacts are calculated using high resolution aerial imagery in which the total canopy is calculated as impacts.
Presuming that the trees grow to their full potential, it is not unreasonable to assume 25% increase over the
planting area (which your analogy works for description) for which the trees will provide canopy. This is matching
the impact assessment methodology with the revegetation potential and is not an attempt to reduce payment
for impacts.

Agreed. The Project team shares these goals and this has been the approach employed during development of
design and revegetation planning.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4c.

4d.

4e.

The memorandum states that
topsoil in replanting areas will be
excavated, stockpiled, and reused.
The District should excavate and
stockpile all usable topsoil, not just
topsoil located in future replanting
areas, for use in the replanting
areas.
The memorandum states that the
replanting polygons rely heavily on
the mitigation requirements in the
CAR (p. 3). What are these
mitigation requirements? They are
not clear in the CAR. In addition,
recommendations 8, 10, 17, and 24
suggest that PSS can be planted as
mitigation/replacement for PFO.
This is not acceptable. Impacted
PFO must be replaced with PFO.
Table 2 should be linked explicitly to
Table 2 of the 65% Design Impact
Analysis and to mitigation ratios in
order to relate the size of replanting
areas to the quantity of impact.
CCRWQCB staff cannot evaluate the
adequacy of the

Agreed.

The mitigation recommendations for planting locations, type and densities came from the CAR. The Project team
understands your concerns regarding the PFO category and to date we have maximized planting to the extent
feasible given the site conditions. The Project team will ensure your comment is fully addressed in the next
iteration of impacts and revegetation.

Agreed. The Project team will do as you suggest for the next iteration of impacts.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

replanting/mitigation plan until this
is done.

4f.

4g.

CCRWQCB staff notes that the
impact analysis is not complete.
When will it be completed, and how
will the results be reported to
regulatory agencies?
The replanting plan for upper Reach
7A includes only grass floodway.
The memorandum states that this is
because backwater caused by
hydraulic conditions between
Middle Avenue and Watsonville
Road require that the WSEL be kept
below 320 feet at the bifurcation of
West Little Llagas Creek.
•What is the cause of the backwater

The impact analysis should be completed in January 2014. Once the analysis is completed, it will be disseminated
to resource agency staff for their review and comments.

The Project team hydraulic engineers quickly determined that Elevation 320 near West Little Llagas Creek was a
Project control point. A water surface above Elevation 320 would require levees and/or floodwalls, which have
some other inherent objectionable issues. At this control point, there is existing development along both sides of
the existing creek that restricts widening. This location is also a control point due to existing topography, low top
of bank elevations relative to channel invert. Design team hydraulic engineers looked at lowering the channel
invert, but this flatter profile gradient caused an unacceptable rise in the water surface elevation (above El. 320)
and lowering the invert was not possible given the r/w constraints at this particular location.
Reach 7a was initially modeled to be fully vegetated from Monterey Road upstream to West Little Llagas Creek.
However, the increased roughness from the proposed plantings between Middle Avenue and West Little Llagas

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

condition? How can it be remedied
so that Reach 7A can be fully
vegetated?
•What other solutions have been
considered, such as widening the
channel, so that Reach 7A can be
fully vegetated?
Since the District is designing Reach
7A from scratch, and the channel is
not constrained by encroaching

Creek caused the water surface elevation at the control (West Little Llagas Creek) to rise above El. 320. The
channel geometry and associated roughness was the cause for this backwater condition. The Project team
looked at a vegetation strategy of very limited (sparsely) plantings from Monterey Road to Watsonville Road, but
instead decided to eliminate these limited plantings upstream of Middle Avenue to focus our mitigation towards
the higher quality habitats of Lake Silveira, adjacent Reach 7a ("triangular" parcel and "bowtie" area), and along
the mainstem of Llagas Creek. Hydraulic modeling showed the closer the plantings (roughness increased) were
proposed to the control point, the more sensitive this increase in channel roughness was to adversely impacting
the water surface at the El. 320 control point.
As suggested in your comment, the Project could purchase additional r/w between Middle Avenue and

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

development, CCRWQCB staff
expects the District to design the
reach in such a way that it can be
fully vegetated to the extent
feasible according to soil and
hydrology conditions (see Comment
No. 3.e, above).

Watsonville Road which would allow for some additional plantings within this portion of Reach 7a. However, the
plantings would be limited without possibly having to replace the existing Watsonville Avenue and Middle
Avenue bridges with much larger bridges. In addition, the existing constraints in r/w (development along both
sides of the creek) between Watsonville Avenue and West Little Llagas Creek (control point) would still need to
be overcome (possibly buying adjacent homes) to completely allow Reach 7a to be fully vegetated.
Reach 7a, south of Middle Avenue, is planned for mesic riparian plantings to connect to the higher quality habitat
of Lake Silveira and the surrounding areas to be planted. The "bowtie" parcel was not included in the 65% plans
and that will be fully vegetated with mesic riparian plantings to take advantage of the higher quality soils and
higher groundwater.
In addition, a large "triangular shaped" parcel has been identified to be acquired for the Project within Reach 7a
for planting Sycamores because of it's proximity/continuity to Lake Silveira, existing soil conditions, and typically
high groundwater availability . This triangular shaped parcel (several acres in size), immediately north and
adjacent to Lake Silveira, will be graded to an optimum bench elevation, and fully vegetated with Sycamores.

4h.

Attachment 1 states that West Little
Llagas Creek will be lined with
concrete or riprap between STA
425+00 and 428+00. This does not
appear to be represented in the
65% design plans, and has not been
justified by engineering analysis.

The Project team believes you are referring to Llagas Creek between approximately STA 425+00 and STA 428+00.
This location is at the existing Monterey Road Bridge and existing UPRR bridge. The riprap is proposed at this
location to protect the existing Bridge abutments. Protection of these two existing bridge structures is a Project
requirement of Caltrans and UPRR.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4i.

The memorandum identifies many
areas within channels where
revegetation will be limited to
grasses.
• If this habitat type is necessitated
by hydraulic conditions, the District
should (i) reduce design flows as
much as possible through the
methods described in Comment No.
5.a below and through
incorporation of off-channel and
floodplain storage wherever
feasible; (ii) increase the allowable
roughness in channels to the
maximum that can convey the
reduced design flows; and (iii)
revegetate with a planting pallet
that optimizes riparian habitat
consistent with the site conditions.
• If grasses are preferred in order to
reduce maintenance, the District
should (i) follow the same steps
identified in the previous sentence,
and (ii) identify a vegetation palette
that balances environmental
benefits with maintenance needs.
(For instance, scattered single-stem

Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter to address
detention facilities.
Grasses are not preferred to reduce maintenance. Maintenance efforts to maintain only grass revegation
(eliminate voluntary trees and shrubs) takes similar efforts as maintaining a revegetated bank with trees to a
specific not-to-exceed roughness and removing fallen trees, etc.
What makes the Upper Llagas Creek Project different in many respects from other SCVWD projects is the Reach
4, Reach 5, and Reach 6 objective of "no induced flooding". Most SCVWD flood protection projects simply are
designed for the 1% level of protection. Upper Llagas is not, which has required much effort on the part of the
Project hydraulic engineers to balance channel geometry, avoidance of homes/structures, avoidance of native
heritage trees, channel roughness, all without inducing flooding to the surrounding community. For example, if
the Reach 6 channel is widened to provide greater protection than exists their now, then the downstream
reaches would have to be sized even greater as to not induce flooding. The more and more you go downstream,
the more difficult it becomes to avoid inducing flooding, because the flow (Q) is increasing rapidly from the lack
of overbank flooding.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

trees may provide greater habitat
function than grassland, with lower
maintenance than scrub.)
Please also see Comment No. 5.c,
below.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4j.

The memorandum states that
shade- and drought-tolerant
riparian species will be planted in
locations where they would be
shaded or out-competed for water
by existing Eucalyptus stands.
Where competition from nonnatives reduces the viability of
PFO/PSS, the non-natives should be
removed and replaced with native
species. Where the non-natives
provide current habitat value, the
replanting plan should consider
both short-term and long-term
objectives (e.g., planting a fastgrowing “shrub” species for shortterm habitat replacement, and a
“forest” species that will outgrow
and shade-out the scrub species
over time). At the very least, the
non-natives should be thinned to
allow optimal planting of native
riparian species, and removed as
the native plants become
established and provide habitat
functions.

Agreed. District staff concurs with this approach but typically mitigation is required for removal of non-native
trees and not all resource agencies agree with such an approach. All agencies would have to agree with the
strategy and not require additional mitigation for this to be considered as a strategy to move forward.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

4k.

4l.

In some places, the text in the
memorandum is inconsistent with
the polygons shown in the figures.
For instance, for Reach 4 the
memorandum describes forest in
canopy gaps and on banks
downslope to mid-bank, with scrub
below forest and streamside scrub
below scrub and on active channel
banks; Figures 2.11 through 2.13
depict grassland on the in-channel
benches; and Attachment 1
describes forest on banks and
benches between STA 450+00 to
468+00.
CCRWQCB staff notes that the
replanting analysis is not complete.
When will it be completed, and how
will the results be provided to
regulatory agencies?

Agreed, District staff will work with our consultants to rectify this inconsistency during the next iteration of
Project design plans.

The replanting analysis should be completed in January 2014. Once the analysis is completed, it will be
disseminated to resource agency staff for their review and comments.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

5a.

The analysis is based on a design
Please refer to District staff prior responses to your Question 1a, 1b, and 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter.
flow of 2,093 cfs in West Little
Llagas Creek at Watsonville Road.
This is identical to the design flow at
this location posited in the 2012
hydraulic report for the 30% Project
design and in the 2003 U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers hydraulic study
for the project. Therefore the
analysis does not incorporate all of
CCRWQCB staff’s previous
comments that the Project design
must incorporate at least the
following elements (please see the
July 12, 2012 Design Considerations
memorandum from CCRWQCB
staff):
• The Project design must be based
on current development conditions,
rather than development conditions
presumed to exist at some future
date.
• The Project design must treat all
development that has occurred
since the City of Morgan Hill’s
adoption of stormwater detention
requirements for new development

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

(c. 1980) as having runoff conditions
in compliance with the City’s
requirements. It is the City’s
responsibility to ensure that
development since that time has
implemented and maintained
stormwater detention features
achieving the City’s requirements.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

5b.

On March 14, 2013, District staff
stated that the Project will increase
peak flow downstream of Monterey
Road by 5%, or approximately 600
cfs, due to improvements in
Reaches 7 and 8. On June 28, 2013,
District staff revised this statement,
indicating that peak flow
downstream of Monterey Road will
increase by 50%, or approximately
1,000 cfs. However, the analysis
states that the capacity of the
existing West Little Llagas Creek
channel is only 80 cfs. Since a 50%
increase over 80 cfs is only 40 cfs,
please provide further explanation
of the hydraulic model and the
current and design flows in West
Little Llagas Creek in the vicinity of
Watsonville Road.

Please refer to District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter.
Per your request, District staff has done analysis to compare the 2006 to 2050 conditions. There is a minor
difference between the 2006 flows and the 2050 flows as described in the District memorandum titled, "Upper
Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project - Detention Basin Analysis Using 2006 Hydrologic Data", dated November 6,
2013, and also described in the additional information to the March 14, 2013 meeting notes.

CCRWQCB Comments for 65% Design for Upper Llagas Creek

5c.

6a.

7a.

The analysis does not fully evaluate
alternatives which would provide
smaller (incremental) decreases in
design flow. While such smaller
decreases would not significantly
reduce project impacts, they might
enable the preservation of
additional existing mature
vegetation. In addition, smaller
decreases could be translated into
increased roughness allowances in
downstream channels, which would
improve the post-project habitat
benefits of the project. CCRWQCB
staff expects the District to
incorporate design flow reductions
achieved through implementation
of the elements described in
Comment No. 5.a above to reduce
Project impacts, and to optimize
channel revegetation.
How will the District report on the
monitoring program described in
the memorandum?
CCRWQCB staff has no comments
on this assessment at this time.

The hydraulics is not the only reason for limiting the channel roughness, but instead the lack of soil nutrients and
available water. A Project objective is to install successful self-sustaining vegetation.
According to Project team hydraulic engineers, a 5% reduction in flow due to a smaller detention facility would
not noticeably increase the channel roughness downstream. The hydraulic model may allow you to add a very
slight increase in roughness (i.e. .06 to .065), but how densely vegetation is planted to achieve this channel
roughness and ultimately to maintain this roughness to a .065 instead of .06 is very subjective and within this 5%
variance.
Larger, significant size detention facilities could change your downstream roughness enough to make a
difference, but please refer District staff prior response to your Question 1c from your July 15, 2013 letter for the
inherent issues with detention facilities analyzed for this Project.

Typically, mitigation and monitoring programs are required to submit annual reports to resource agency staff to
describe the progress of the revegetation and established success criteria milestones.
Ok, thank you for your review.

October 25, 2013

BY ELECTRONIC MAIL

Sunshine Julian
Santa Clara Valley Water District
5750 Almaden Expressway
San Jose, CA 95118
Email: svjulian@valleywater.org
Christopher Eng
United States Army Corps of Engineers
San Francisco District
1455 Market Street, 15th Floor
San Francisco, CA 94103
Email: Christopher.K.Eng@usace.army.mil
Karl Bjarke
Director of Public Works / City Engineer
City of Morgan Hill
17575 Peak Avenue
Morgan Hill, CA 95037
Email: karl.bjarke@morganhill.ca.gov
Dear Ms. Julian, Mr. Eng, and Mr. Bjarke:
CRITERIA FOR DEMONSTRATING MINIMIZATION AND MITIGATION OF IMPACTS TO
WATERS OF THE STATE, UPPER LLAGAS CREEK FLOOD PROTECTION PROJECT,
SANTA CLARA COUNTY
The Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project (Project) proposes significant impacts to
Waters of the State in southern Santa Clara County in order to provide improved flood
protection in the City of Morgan Hill (City) and surrounding areas. The Project will require Clean
Water Act Section 401 Water Quality Certification (401 Certification) from the Central Coast
Regional Water Quality Control Board (Central Coast Water Board). In order to receive 401
Certification from the Central Coast Water Board, the Project must demonstrate minimization
and mitigation of impacts to water quality and beneficial uses of Waters of the State. The
purpose of this letter is to communicate the criteria Central Coast Water Board staff plans to use
to evaluate the Project’s minimization and mitigation of impacts to Waters of the State. These
criteria must be addressed for Central Coast Water Board staff to recommend 401 Certification
of the Project. You are receiving this letter because Central Coast Water Board staff anticipates
that satisfying these criteria will require cooperation between key Project proponents and
stakeholders.
Central Coast Water Board staff has previously provided comments on the Project to the Santa
Clara Valley Water District (District) explaining many of the criteria described in this letter that
must be addressed for Central Coast Water Board staff to recommend 401 Certification of the

Santa Clara Valley Water District,
United States Army Corps of Engineers,
City of Morgan Hill

-2-

October 25, 2013

Project. The District has responded to some of our previous comments and has incorporated
some minimization and mitigation features into the Project. This letter reiterates and provides
some further clarification and comments on the criteria that have not yet been fully addressed
by the Project design. Central Coast Water Board staff maintains that all the comments and
requests for information, previously sent to the District, are still relevant and must be addressed
for Central Coast Water Board staff to recommend 401 Certification of the Project.
The following list identifies the comment letters and memoranda previously sent that contain the
specific details related to the criteria.
•
•
•

•
•
•

30% Design Review, Comment Letter, dated August 23, 2012, signed by Watershed
Planning and Protection Section Manager, Lisa H. McCann, for Interim Executive
Officer, Kenneth A. Harris. (Provided comments on the 30% Project design.)
Topics for Discussion, Staff Memorandum via email, dated September 19, 2012, from
staff Water Resource Control Engineer, P.E., Jon Rohrbough. (Identified issues that
required resolution prior to Central Coast Water Board approval of the Project.)
Notice of Preparation Review, Comment Letter, dated November 26, 2012, signed by
Phillip Hammer, Water Quality Certification Program Manager, for Kenneth A. Harris,
Interim Executive Officer. (Provided comments on the Notice of Preparation of a Draft
Environmental Impact Report for the Project.)
65% Design Review, Staff Comment Email, dated May 16, 2013, from Water Resource
Control Engineer, P.E., Jon Rohrbough. (Provided comments on the 65% Project
design.)
Reiteration of Design Considerations, Staff Memorandum, via email, dated July 12,
2013, from Water Resource Control Engineer, P. E., Jon Rohrbough. (Reiterated issues
that still required resolution prior to Central Coast Water Board approval.)
Comments on Technical Support Documents, Staff Memorandum, via email, dated
August 1, 2013, from Water Resource Control Engineer, P.E., Jon Rohrbough.
(Provided comments on six technical support memoranda associated with the 65%
Project design.)

The following sections of this letter describe the criteria.
Minimization
1. Accuracy of the hydraulic model. Project design flow rates must be based on actual
stormwater runoff conditions within the City in order to prevent unnecessary Project impacts.
a. Project design must be based on existing conditions rather than potential land uses and
rough estimates. Earlier stages of Project design assumed 2050 build-out conditions in
the City as the starting point for the hydraulic model, or determined runoff on the basis of
general land use characteristics (e.g., the average percentage of impervious area for a
particular zoning classification). Instead, the hydraulic model must be based on current
conditions and actual land cover.
b. Project design must account for all existing privately-owned runoff-reduction measures.
According to the City’s 2002 Storm Drainage System Master Plan, the City has
implemented several measures since 1982 to reduce stormwater runoff from new
developments within the City. Since the City’s population grew from 18,050 to 37,882
between 1982 and 2010, this means that a significant percentage of the City’s
stormwater runoff is detained or retained before discharge to southern Santa Clara

Santa Clara Valley Water District,
United States Army Corps of Engineers,
City of Morgan Hill

-3-

October 25, 2013

County streams. The hydraulic model must incorporate into Project design runoffreduction measures and actual stormwater discharge rate and time of concentration
information for each area developed since 1982.
c. Project design must account for all existing City-owned and/or operated detention
facilities. Areas within the City that are served by regional detention facilities must be
modeled using the discharge rate and time of concentration characteristics of the
regional facility.
2. Incorporation of additional off-channel and floodplain storage. Reducing Project design
flows reduces Project impacts by allowing increased vegetation roughness in Project
channels. Therefore constructing new facilities to retain/detain runoff from currently
developed areas, and modifying vacant parcels adjacent to Project channels to increase
floodplain storage, are essential elements of impact minimization. The Project must
demonstrate that Project proponents and stakeholders have fully evaluated and identified
opportunities for additional detention and floodplain storage.
3. Removal or reduction of channel constrictions. Bridges, crossings, and changes in channel
width can cause channel constrictions. Channel constrictions reduce flow capacity and
increase head loss and turbulence in channels, requiring more extensive channel
modifications elsewhere, channel armoring, or reduction of vegetation within the transition
zone. Therefore removing or reducing channel constrictions is an essential element of
minimizing Project impacts. The Project must demonstrate that Project proponents and
stakeholders have fully evaluated and identified opportunities for reduction or elimination of
channel constrictions.
4. Avoidance of new channel constrictions. All new bridges and other crossings must be
designed so that transition zones are capable of supporting the same vegetation and habitat
that can be supported upstream and downstream of the transition zone.
5. Removal or reduction of hardscape. The Project must minimize the use of hardscape
channel treatments such as concrete and RSP. All proposed use of hardscape treatments
must be justified through engineering analysis (e.g., shear stress assessment) that
demonstrates softscape treatments and alternative channel alignments cannot achieve
channel stability goals. For softscape methods involving vegetation to provide stabilization,
the analysis must assume mature vegetation.
6. Preservation of the West Little Llagas Creek channel. The Project must preserve beneficial
uses, including flow regimes, habitat, and water quality, in West Little Llagas Creek between
the proposed Reach 7A diversion and the confluence with Madrone Channel east of US
101.
7. Verification that stormwater detention facilities are functioning as designed. Privately-owned
and City owned and operated detention facilities were designed to achieve specific numeric
flow reduction objectives intended to reduce flooding within the City. As such, facilities that
function as designed reduce project impacts by reducing Project design flows. Therefore
verifying that all stormwater detention facilities in the City are functioning as designed is an
essential element of minimizing Project impacts.
8. Preservation of beneficial uses and habitat in tributary streams. The Project involves
lowering the invert of Project channels. This lowering has the potential to impact tributary

Santa Clara Valley Water District,
United States Army Corps of Engineers,
City of Morgan Hill

-4-

October 25, 2013

streams by altering their hydraulics, causing the tributary streams to flow more swiftly and/or
dry up more quickly following rain events. The Project must demonstrate avoidance of
impacts to tributary streams. Where impacts are unavoidable, the Project must demonstrate
minimization and mitigation of impacts.
9. Protection of water quality. Llagas Creek is currently impaired for nutrients, pesticides, and
sediment. Agricultural fields are significant sources of these pollutants to Llagas Creek.
The Proposed Project includes constructing a new channel (Reach 7A) in the midst of
agricultural fields, directly connecting them to Llagas Creek. Therefore the design of Reach
7A must include measures to ensure that the new channel will not contribute to these
impairments in Llagas Creek by receiving and transporting untreated runoff and irrigation
tailwater from agricultural lands.
Mitigation
1. Demonstration that post-project waterbody functions that support beneficial uses will meet
or improve upon pre-project functions. The Project must protect, restore, and enhance
water quality and beneficial uses of waters of the State. Due to the scope and severity of
environmental impacts associated with the Project, the Project must clearly demonstrate that
post-project waterbody functions that support beneficial uses will be at least equal or better
than pre-project functions in all affected channels, considering the full range of beneficial
uses and waterbody functions. Affected channels include not only channels where work is
proposed, but also downstream channels and channels affected by the diversion of flow
from West Little Llagas Creek (i.e., West Little Llagas Creek from the vicinity of Watsonville
Road to US 101 and East Little Llagas Creek from West Little Llagas Creek to Reach 14).
2. Optimization of revegetation and habitat development.
The Project must optimize
replacement and restoration of habitat and beneficial uses in the following ways:
a. Central Coast Water Board staff expects that implementing the minimization measures
described above will result in reduced Project design flow rates. This “gain” must be
used to increase roughness in Project channels to optimize revegetation and riparian
and aquatic habitat. “Optimal revegetation” means the habitat type that supports the
most beneficial uses and is best suited to a particular location given soil quality and
moisture conditions. Where possible and optimal, proposed revegetation habitat types
must be upgraded (e.g., from Riparian Scrub to Riparian Forest).
b. Revegetation must be implemented according to the best habitat potential. Where the
best conditions exist at bench level, channel width should be maximized to maximize
bench area; but where the best conditions exist at the top of bank, channel/bench width
should be decreased in order to maximize planting area at the top of bank.
c. Hydraulic conditions resulting in the proposal to revegetate Reach 7A as a grass-lined
channel must be remedied so that Reach 7A can be optimally vegetated based on soil
and moisture conditions.
d. Where competition from non-natives reduces the viability of optimal revegetated riparian
habitat, the non-natives should be removed and replaced with native species. Where
the non-natives provide current habitat value, the replanting plan should consider both
short-term and long-term objectives (e.g., planting a fast-growing “shrub” species for
short-term habitat replacement, and a “forest” species that will outgrow and shade-out
the scrub species over time). At the very least, the non-natives should be thinned to
allow optimal planting of native riparian species, and removed as the native plants
become established and provide habitat functions.

Santa Clara Valley Water District,
United States Army Corps of Engineers,
City of Morgan Hill

-5-

October 25, 2013

3. Restoration of streambed habitat. The Project must restore and enhance optimal streambed
habitat in Project channels, including meander, low-flow channel, channel complexity, riffles
and pools, large woody debris, and streambed material (sediments and gravels) supporting
beneficial uses.
4. Offsite mitigation. To date it is still unclear whether restoration of Project channels and
restoration activities associated with Lake Silviera will fully mitigate for all Project impacts.
Therefore additional offsite mitigation may be required.
Project proponents and
stakeholders must identify potential mitigation areas and mitigation plans that are capable of
mitigating beneficial use impacts by the Project. Central Coast Water Board staff cannot
recommend 401 Certification for the Project unless mitigation plans clearly indicate how the
Project will fully mitigate beneficial use impacts.
Information Demonstrating Minimization and Mitigation
Central Coast Water Board staff cannot issue a 401 Certification for this Project without
information that addresses all the criteria above. This information is necessary so staff can
determine that the Project minimizes and mitigates impacts to water quality and beneficial uses
of Waters of the State. At a minimum, the District should provide the information listed below so
that Central Coast Water Board staff can determine minimization according to minimization
criteria 1.b, above. This information to address minimization criteria 1.b., above, serves as an
example of the type of information the District should provide to demonstrate minimization and
mitigation of Project impacts to meet the other criteria above.
Information to determine accurate modeling of privately-owned runoff-reduction measures
(per minimization criteria 1.b, above)
• The effective date and specific stormwater control requirements of each stormwater
control measure approved by the City since 1982;
• A list of all new developments constructed within the City since 1982, and the specific
stormwater control requirements (e.g., post-development peak discharge rate must not
exceed the 10-year pre-development peak discharge rate) to which each new
development was subject;
• An engineering estimate of the current expected stormwater discharge flow rate from
each new development constructed since 1982, in a form that can be quantitatively
compared with the specific stormwater control requirements applicable to each new
development and which can be incorporated into the Project hydraulic model (i.e., 100year discharge rate and time of concentration); and
• A map indicating the location and boundaries of each new development constructed
within the City since 1982.
Project and Application Schedule
Central Coast Water Board staff requires the information requested in this letter and an
adequate response to our previous comments in order to determine the Project’s suitability for
401 Certification. Central Coast Water Board staff needs to receive this information such that
staff has adequate time for comprehensive review and analysis of the information. Without the
required information and adequate time to review it, Central Coast Water Board staff may not be
able to condition the Project without causing delays in the Project schedule.

Santa Clara Valley Water District,
United States Army Corps of Engineers,
City of Morgan Hill

-6-

October 25, 2013

To facilitate Central Coast Water Board staff’s review of information and issuance of a 401
Certification, please provide a complete Project schedule that includes the following:
•
•
•

Dates when the District will submit information and responses to comments to address
the criteria for Central Coast Water Board staff to recommend 401 Certification of the
Project (as discussed in this letter and previous letters and memorandum),
Dates when the District will issue Project CEQA documents,
Dates when the District will submit the application for 401 Certification for this Project.

Upon receipt of the Project schedule, Central Coast Water Board staff will be able to indicate
whether the schedule provides sufficient time for review and analysis of information and timely
issuance of the 401 Certification.
Central Coast Water Board staff would like to meet with representatives from each of your
agencies together to discuss the criteria described in this letter, and will be contacting you soon
for the purpose of arranging such a meeting. Central Coast Water Board staff encourages
cooperation between Project proponents and stakeholders to achieve and demonstrate
minimization and mitigation of Project impacts, and to facilitate 401 Certification of the Project.
If you have questions please contact Jon Rohrbough at (805) 549-3458 or via email at
Jon.Rohrbough@waterboards.ca.gov, or Phil Hammer at (805) 549-3882.
Sincerely,

Kenneth A. Harris, Jr.
Executive Officer
S:\Seniors\Shared\401\Projects\Santa Clara\Upper Llagas Creek\Communications\Stakeholder Letter_Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection_final.doc

Central Coast Regional
Water Quality Control Board

Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project
Interagency Pre-401 Certification Meeting
February 11, 2014
Santa Clara Valley Water District, Room A-143
1:00 – 4:00
1:00

1:05

Introductions
Michael Martin, Melissa Moore, Sunshine Julian, Scott Ferensi, Liang Su (SCVWD); Kark
Bjarke, Charlie Ha (MH)
Background and Review of Agenda
•

1:10

Project must demonstrate minimization and mitigation of impacts to waters. WB sent 10/25/13
letter identifying criteria WB will use to evaluate minimization and minimization. Purpose of
meeting is to discuss those criteria; see value in interagency discussion

1. Water Board, District, and City of Morgan Hill Project Objectives
District Objectives
• 1% protection in urban Morgan Hill, 10% protection in reach 14, no induced flooding
• Stabilize channels
• Provide habitat replacement that: (i) achieves hydraulic objectives; (ii) suits (and maximizes
the potential of, subject to hydraulic limitations) site conditions; and (iii) reduces need for
subsequent maintenance; and (iv) develop self-sustaining riparian corridor
City
• Achieve 1% flood protection in urban Morgan Hill (WLLC watershed)
Water Board
• Preserve or replace (and improve) waterbody function, WQ, habitat, and BUs
• Maximize revegetation potential through minimization
Accurately model existing conditions
Reduce design flows (through use of storage, etc.)
• Accumulate incremental gains achieved through minimization measures
• Optimize revegetation and habitat development (most beneficial placement)

1:30

2. Water Board Criteria for Demonstrating Minimization and Mitigation of Impacts
and Information Demonstrating Minimization and Mitigation (prioritized from
10/25/2013 Water Board letter; see attached)
a) Optimization of post-project revegetation and habitat development
•

WB’s objective is for project design to accumulate incremental gains through
minimization measures, and translate accumulated gains into optimization of revegetation
and habitat development & most beneficial placement of revegetation

b) Accuracy of the hydraulic model
•

District verified that current models are based on 2006 conditions (with impervious areas
measured from on aerial photographs; 1-foot deep flooding in streets during 100-yr
events; overbanking in unimproved areas; and channel designs in each reach based on
the correct flow condition (10-yr vs. 100-yr)

c) Consideration of existing private and municipally-operated detention storage

•

•

•

•

WB noted that the Morgan Hill 2002 Master Plan identifies 44 basins; and states that
basins achieving attenuation (difference between inflow and outflow) ≥ 3 cfs is significant.
While individually these basins might not be significant, their cumulative effect may be
significant for Q and time-of-concentration. In addition, more basins have been built
since 2002. Together, they affect Q and time-of-concentration for a potentially large
impervious area.
City staff noted that basins are designed for 25-yr events; only P310 and P425 were
designed for the 100-yr event. Since the 2002 Master Plan, only Butterfield basin was
designed for the 100-yr event; many basins designed for 25-yr condition are in the Reach
14 watershed and may have a significant effect there.
WB isn’t comfortable throwing out the others before determining whether they affect
quantity or timing of the peak. More work is needed to address basins—either by
incorporating them into the model or demonstrating that they don’t have a significant
effect on quantity or time-of-concentration of peak (design) flows.
District will look at cumulative effect of the basins and see if they are significant. District
must demonstrate they don’t significantly alter the project.

d) Assessing potential for additional off-channel and floodplain storage
•
•

•

Fish entrainment is a huge concern for fisheries agencies; screens would be required,
and they may not be able to pass water fast enough to serve a flood control project.
Project is adding instream complexity (LWD, etc.)
District understood “off-channel” as equivalent to floodplain storage. WB pointed out that
that “off-channel” refers to providing additional detention/retention to runoff before it
enters the channel. District/City is willing to look into the potential for creating additional
off-channel storage
City is concerned about how to move forward—what can be done within the timeframe of
the design that WB would be happy with? District believes first step is to start looking at
the large outfalls. District will analyze urban “watersheds” with outfalls ≥ 36”, looking for
the potential for creating additional detention/retention in the watersheds

e) Preserving water quality, habitat, and beneficial uses in West Little Llagas Creek
•
•
•

f)

This topic was tabled for a later conversation.
The District has additional studies on WLLC impacts (biotic investigation, proposed
mitigation for hydrologic modifications) and will send them to WB.
District: “What are WB expectations for mitigation for hydrologic modifications? WB:
“We go back to beneficial uses—what uses are being impacted, and will mitigation
replace them?” District would like some guidance; WB doesn’t have a precedent to offer
as an example. Further discussion is needed.

Meeting or improving upon pre-project waterbody functions
•

This topic was tabled for a later conversation

g) Invasive species control as a mitigation measure
•

•

District has had the impression that WB is opposed to removing invasives all at once,
based on comment “Mitigation 2.d” from 10/25/13 letter. District noted that phasing
invasive species removal is difficult, so District discourages it. In addition, fisheries
agencies support invasive species removal.
WB clarified the referenced comment. WB supports invasive species removal as well,
but has some concerns about temporal losses when invasives provide habitat functions
that are not quickly replaced by native habitat.

h) Future development policies
•

City asked if WB has concerns about how the area adjacent to Reach 7A will be
developed post-project. City will implementing PCRs for all new development, which will
improve the type of development.

•

2:40

2. Water Board Criteria for Demonstrating Minimization and Mitigation of Impacts
and Information Demonstrating Minimization and Mitigation (cont.)
•

•
•

3:30

•

WB has provided many different “sets” of comments, and there are many different “tracks” of
comments and responses currently in process. WB hasn’t had time yet to evaluate all
responses (e.g., District responses to comments on 65% Design), and needs to confirm that
District has responded to all comments.
This topic was tabled for a later conversation.

4. Project Schedule
•
•

3:50

District made the following points:
Historical ecology study and work in Reach 3 indicate that this watershed doesn’t
support a multi-tiered riparian corridor.
Soil testing did provide answers to some questions: (1) there isn’t enough topsoil for
forest; (2) there is a (universal) problem with densic soils. District is looking at
amendments to assist establishment, but doesn’t want to fertilize, etc., because it
isn’t sustainable
WB does not expect District to “push” an unnatural habitat condition, though some areas
could support higher-value habitat (e.g., RPO) than existed historically
District is not at the point where it can’t do more, but it’s unlikely there’s more that will
produce large improvements; it’s more likely the that the increase wouldn’t be an
increase in planting density, but in letting vegetation grow out more between
maintenance cycles, or in increasing instream complexity; District wants self-regenerating
habitats

3. Response to Water Board Comments
•

3:40

WB’s role will be to enforce the PCRS; new development will need to handle its own
stormwater runoff

District will be Submitting pre-application to Corps, and the project is on the agenda for preapp meeting on 3/12. District will be submitting permit applications around the end March.
EIR comments are due 3/20 (EIR doesn’t have much detail about post-project); this will be
covered in the MMP (to agencies at the end of March).

5. Next Steps and Wrap-up
•

District will look at cumulative effect of the other basins in the City and see if
they are significant. District must demonstrate they don’t significantly alter
the project.

•

District will analyze urban “watersheds” with outfalls ≥ 36”, looking for the
potential for creating additional detention/retention in the these areas

•

District will send additional studies on WLLC impacts (biotic investigation,
proposed mitigation for hydrologic modifications)

•

District would like some guidance for mitigation for modifications to WLLC.
Since WB doesn’t have a precedent, the District will send a proposal

E:\2014.02.11_Agenda_final_meeting notes.docx

USACE

Appendix E

Impacts to Vegetation Types and Habitats for the Tunnel
Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 1 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic

Hale Ave

Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Park Way

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

De l Monte Ave

Map 2 of 25

De l Monte Ave

Legend
Wright Ave

Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Ha le Ave

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Reach 8

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

0

´

Crest Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

125
Scale in Feet

250

Monterey St

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

3Rd St

4Th St

Map 3 of 25

Legend

2Nd St

Reach Break
Project Footprint

Main Ave

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

onte Ave

CAR Habitat Types
De l Monte Ave

Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
No b Hill Ter

Aquatic

Warren Ave

Developed

Reach 8
Hale Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

Crest Ave

125
Scale in Feet

250

Churc h St

San Pedro Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 4 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary

Monterey St

Temporary Impact
Ciolino Ave

Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types

Du nne Av e

Riparian Forest (PFO)

Reach 8

Reach 7b

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic

M anor

Ct

Spring Ave

Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

Mcgraw Ave

Barnell A

ve

125
Scale in Feet

250

Edmundson Av e

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Keith

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

Av e

Map 5 of 25

Edmunds on

Monterey St

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint

Co smo A
ve

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)

Reach 7b

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Del Monte Ave
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Keith Way

n t Av
e

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Tenn
a

Map 6 of 25

Monte

Legend
rey S t

Reach Break
Project Footprint
Vin
e

ya r
d

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
B lv

d

Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Ct

Aquatic
Developed

Vi
lla

ge

W
ay

Vi

l
zu
aA

n Ave

Reach 7b
Reach 7a
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

´

Edmundso

La

Dr
se
s
o
Cr

125
Scale in Feet

250

te r e

yS

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 7 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
ts
Wa

Temporary Impact

on v

Permanent Impacts

ille
Rd

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

La Jolla D

r

7a
h
c
a
Re

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

´

M on

125
Scale in Feet

250

y

onterey Hwy

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 8 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Middle Ave

M

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Reach 7a

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Monterey Hwy

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 9 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Reach 7a

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

LAKE
SYLVEIRA

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 10 of 25
Lla

Legend

ga

Reach 6

sA
ve

Reach Break
Project Footprint

Reach 7a

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Lla
ga
s

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

M
on
te
re
yH
wy

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 11 of 25
ag
Ll
as

Legend

Av
e

Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)

Re

Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)

ac

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

h6

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

M
on
te
re
y
Hw
y

Diessner

Murph y Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 12 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact

Reach 6

Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed
San Martin Ave

Llagas Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Murph y Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 13 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

Re
ac
h

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)

6

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Llagas Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

South St

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Mcconnell Dr

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 14 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types

ch
a
Re

Riparian Forest (PFO)

6

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Llagas Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 15 of 25
Churc h Ave

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact

Reach 6

Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

0

´

Santa Clara Valley
Water District
Percolation Ponds

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

125
Scale in Feet

250

Re
a
ch

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

5

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 16 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
US

Project Footprint

H
w
y
10

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary

1

Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types

Reach 5

Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)

Reach 6

Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Santa Clara Valley
Water District
Percolation Ponds

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

e
Co lumb

t Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 17 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

Masten Ave

Rea
ch
14

Reach 4

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

0

´

h5
Reac

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

125
Scale in Feet

250

Ce
n

te r

Av

e

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

ste
n

Av
e

Map 18 of 25

Ma

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)

Reach 4

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic

Ru
c

ke

rA
ve

Developed

Ko r

nL

n

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 19 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic

ch
a
Re

4

Developed

r Av e
Ru cke

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

Kor n

Ln

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 20 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact

ta A
ve

Permanent Impacts

Vi s

CAR Habitat Types

na

Riparian Forest (PFO)

Bue

Ln

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Reach
4
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

´

Eric

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 21 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary

Re
ac
h

Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

14

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)

Sy
ca
US

Hw

y

10

m

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
or

e

Av

e

Other Habitat Types

1

Aquatic
Developed

´

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Columbet Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 22 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
San Martin Ave

CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types

Reach 14

Aquatic
Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

Columbet Ave

Map 23 of 25

e
Ha g

Legend

rC

Reach Break

t

Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)

Reach 14

Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

Sycamore Ave

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area

Co lumbet Ave

Map 24 of 25

Legend
Reach Break
Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact
Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)

Reach 14

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Ln
Amis tad

Aquatic
Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

´

0

Sycamore Ave

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix E
Impacts to Vegetation Types
and Habitats for the
Study Area
Map 25 of 25

Legend
Reach Break

Church Ave

Project Footprint
CDFW Jurisdiction Boundary
Temporary Impact

Reach 14

Permanent Impacts

CAR Habitat Types
Riparian Forest (PFO)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS)
Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

Other Habitat Types
Aquatic
Developed

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a and
Cardno ENTRIX, 2013

0

´

Ln
Amis tad

125
Scale in Feet

250

USACE

Appendix F

Potential Jurisdictional Waters and California Sycamore
Woodland

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 1 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat

Llagas Rd

California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Ce

Park
Way

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland

Del Monte Ave

Map 2 of 23

Legend
Wright Ave

Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond
Ha le Av e

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh

Reach 8

Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

4Th St

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland

Central Ave

Map 3 of 23

Legend
2Nd St

Park
Way

Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

Main Av e

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
De l Monte Ave

Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Reach 8
Warren Av e

Hale Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

t

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland

Dunne Ave

Map 4 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area
5Th S t

Monterey St

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Ciolino Ave

Reach 8

Perennial Streams
Pond

Reach 7b

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Mathilda C
t

tS
De po

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´
Mcgraw Ave

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Edmundson Av e

Mast
St

Keith Way

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Keith

Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 5 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area

Monterey St

Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters

Reach 7b

Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat

Mathilda C

t

California Sycamore Woodland

Cosmo Ave

Del Monte Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Tennan t Ave

nA

Keith Way

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 6 of 23

Legend
Monterey St

Reach Break
Vin
e

ya r
d

Delineation Study Area
B lv
d

Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
La C

e
ros s

Dr

Via

Az

C
ul

t

California Sycamore Woodland

Edmundson Av e

Reach 7b
Reach 7a
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

M on

te r e

y St

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 7 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

le R
n vil
tso
Wa

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams

d

Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Reach 7a
La J

olla

Dr

Ct

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

e
er Av
Crow
n

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 8 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area
Mo

n te

re

yH

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
wy

Culverts
Intermittent Streams

Reach 7a

Perennial Streams

Reach 6

Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 9 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area

h
ac
Re

Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters

6

Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Lla

Seasonal Wetland

ga
sA
ve

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

M
on
te
re
y
Hw
y

Diessn
Ave

Murph y Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 10 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters

Reach 6

Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

San Martin Ave
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 11 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts

Re

Intermittent Streams

ac

Perennial Streams

h6

Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

Llagas Ave

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 12 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters

R

c
ea

h

6

Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Llagas Ave

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 13 of 23

Legend
Reach Break

Church Ave

Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

Reach 6

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Llagas Ave

Santa Clara Valley
Water District
Percolation Ponds

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

y

Ln

Re
a
ch

hy
ve

el

5

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 14 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams

Reach 5

Perennial Streams
Pond
US

Perennial Marsh

Hw

Reach 6

Wetland Waters
y
10

Seasonal Wetland

1

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Santa Clara Valley
Water District
Percolation Ponds

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

A
Co lumbet

ve

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 15 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Masten Ave

Rea
ch 1
4

h4
c
a
e
R

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

h5
Reac

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

Lena Ave

´
Ra
m

p

Kannely Ln

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 16 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams

Borges Ct

Perennial Streams

Reach 4

Pond

Wetland Waters
Ru
cke

Perennial Marsh

rA
ve

Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Ce

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 17 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh

Bo

r

s
ge

C

Seasonal Wetland

t

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland
r Av e
Ru cke

ch
a
e
R

4

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´
Kelly L

n

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 18 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

r A ve

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
ve

Culverts

Vis

ta A

Intermittent Streams

na

Perennial Streams
Pond

Bue

Ce n
te

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Ma

rc e
ll

aA

ve

Reach
4
Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 19 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
M

Re
ac
h
Sy

ca

m

or

am

Project Study Area
m

in
i

Ct

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters

14

Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams

e

Av

Pond

e

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
US

Seasonal Wetland
Hw

y

10

Sensitive Habitat

1

California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 20 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
San Martin Ave

Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Reach 14

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 21 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Reach 14

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F

Co lumbet Ave

Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 22 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters
Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Perennial Marsh

Reach 14

Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´
Sycamore Ave

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

Mary
Ct

Columbet Ave

Upper Llaga s Creek Project

Appendix F
Potential Jurisdictional Waters
and California Sycamore Woodland
Map 23 of 23

Legend
Reach Break
Delineation Study Area
Project Study Area

USACE Jurisdictional Waters of the US
Non-wetland Waters

Reach 14

Culverts
Intermittent Streams
Perennial Streams
Pond

Wetland Waters
Church Ave

Perennial Marsh
Seasonal Wetland

Sensitive Habitat
California Sycamore Woodland

Imagery: Microsoft, 05/12/2010
Source: HT Harvey, 2013a

´

Sycamore Ave

Kannely Ln

0

125
Scale in Feet

250

USACE

Appendix G

Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the
Project Vicinity

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

G.1

Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Common Name
Scientific Name

Status

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Bent-flowered fiddleneck
(Amsinckia lunaris)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in coastal bluff scrub,
cismontane woodlands and valley and foothill
grasslands at elevations from 3-500 meters.
Blooms: March-June

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

Anderson’s manzanita
(Arctostaphylos andersonii)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs in openings and
edges of broadleafed upland forest, chaparral, and
north coast coniferous forest at elevations from 60760 meters.

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>5 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

Blooms: Nov – May
Hooker’s manzanita
(Arctostaphylos hookeri ssp.
hookeri)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs in closed-cone
coniferous forest, chaparral, cismontane
woodland, and coastal scrub in sandy soil and
sandstone outcrops at elevations from 85-536
meters.
Blooms: Jan – Jun

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

Pajaro manzanita
(Arctostaphylos pajaroensis)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs in chaparral in sandy
soils at elevations from 30-760 meters.
BLOOM: DEC – MAR

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Kings Mountain manzanita
(Arctostaphylos
regismontana)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs at granitic or
sandstone sites in broadleafed upland forest,
chaparral, and North Coast coniferous forest at
elevations from 305-730 meters.
Blooms: JAN – APR

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area and this species is known from
higher elevations than elevations in the study
area.

San Joaquin spearscale
(Atriplex joaquiniana)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in chenopod scrub,
meadows and seeps, playas, and valley and
foothill grassland on alkaline substrates at
elevations from 1-835 meters.
Blooms: APR – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Big-scale balsamroot
(Balsamorhiza macrolepis
var. macrolepis)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in chaparral,
cismontane woodland, valley and foothill
grassland, sometimes serpentinite, at elevations
from 90-1555 meters.
Blooms: MAR – JUN

Potential to occur in the study area in Grassland
or various woodland habitats. Closest CNDDB
occurrence is approximately 2.6 miles from the
Tunnel Alternative Project Area.

G-1

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Round-leaved filaree
(California macrophylla)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in cismontane woodland,
valley and foothill grassland on clay soils at
elevations from 15-1,200 meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

Santa Cruz Mountains
pussypaws
(Calyptridium parryi var.
hesseae)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in sandy or gravelly soil in
openings of chaparral and cismontane woodland
at elevations from 305-1530 meters.
Blooms: MAY – AUG

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>5 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area and this species is known from higher
elevations than elevations in the study area.

Chaparral harebell
(Campanula exigua)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in chaparral (rocky,
usually serpentinite) habitats at elevations from
275-1250 meters.

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Blooms: MAY – JUN
CT, 1B

FE

Pink creamsacs
(Castilleja rubicundula ssp.
rubicundula)

1B

None

Coyote ceanothus
(Ceanothus ferrisiae)

1B

Congdon’s tarplant
(Centromadia parryi ssp.
congdonii)
Monterey spineflower
(Chorizanthe pungens var.
pungens)

Tiburon paintbrush
(Castilleja affinis ssp.
neglecta)

G-2

Perennial herb that occurs in valley and foothill
grassland on rocky serpentine sites at elevations
from 75-400 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; this species is a strict
serpentine endemic (ICF 2012) and serpentinite
is not present in the study area.

Annual herb that occurs in moist serpentinite soil in
chaparral openings, cismontane woodland,
meadows and seeps, and valley and foothill
grassland at elevations from 20-910 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat and
serpentinite are not present in the study area.

FE

Evergreen shrub that occurs in serpentinite soil in
chaparral, coastal scrub, and valley and foothill
grassland at elevations from 120-460 meters.
Blooms: JAN – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable serpentinite habitat is
not present in the study area.

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in alkaline and white clay
soils in valley and foothill grassland habitats at
elevations from 1-230 meters.
Blooms: MAY – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

1B

FT

Annual herb that occurs in sandy chaparral
(maritime), cismontane woodland, coastal dunes,
coastal scrub, and valley and foothill grassland at
elevations from 3-450 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUL

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Robust spineflower
(Chorizanthe robusta var.
robusta)

1B

FE

Annual herb that occurs in chaparral (maritime),
cismontane woodland (openings), coastal dunes,
and coastal scrub habitats with sandy or gravelly
soil at elevations from 3-300 meters.
Blooms: APR – SEP

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Mt. Hamilton fountain thistle
(Cirsium fontinale var.
campylon)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in serpentinite seeps
and moist areas within chaparral, cismontane
woodland, and valley and foothill grassland at
elevations from 100-890 meters.
Blooms: FEB – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable moist, serpentinite
habitat is not present in the study area.

San Francisco collinsia
(Collinsia multicolor)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in mudstone
(decomposed shale) mixed with humus or
serpentinite soils, closed-cone coniferous forests,
and coastal scrub at elevations from 30-250
meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Hospital Canyon larkspur
(Delphinium californicum
ssp. interius)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in wet, boggy meadows
of cismontane woodlands and openings in
chaparral and in canyons, at elevations from 2301095 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Santa Clara Valley dudleya
(Dudleya abramsii ssp.
setchellii)

1B

FE

This perennial occurs in serpentinite and rocky
soils and outcrops in cismontane woodland and
valley and foothill grassland at elevations from 60455 meters.
No serpentine soils in the study area.
Blooms: APR – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable serpentinite habitat is
not present in the study area. Restricted to
rocky, serpentine outcrops and is only found in
Santa Clara County in the vicinity of Coyote
Valley (ICF 2012).

Brandegee’s eriastrum
(Eriastrum brandegeeae)

1B

None

Annual herb that herb occurs in chaparral and
cismontane woodlands on barren volcanic soils in
open areas at elevations from 300-1030 meters..
Blooms: APR – AUG

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Tracy’s eriastrum
(Eriastrum tracyi)

1B

None

Annual herb that plant occurs in clay and gravelly
soils in chaparral habitats and cismontane
woodlands (frequently in openings), at elevations
from 315-1125 meters.
Blooms: JUN – JUL

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

G-3

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Hoover’s button-celery
(Eryngium aristulatum var.
hooveri)

1B

None

Occurs in vernal pools, alkaline depressions and
roadside ditches at elevations from 3-45 meters.
Blooms: JUL

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Sand-loving wallflower
(Erysimum ammophilum)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in sandy soil and
openings in chaparral (maritime), coastal dunes,
and coastal scrub at elevations from 0-60 meters.
Blooms: FEB – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Fragrant fritillary
(Fritillaria liliacea)

1B

None

This perennial usually occurs on serpentinite and
sometimes in heavy clay soils in cismontane
woodland, coastal prairie, coastal scrub, and valley
and foothill grassland, at elevations from3-410
meters.
Blooms: FEB – APR

Potential to occur in the study area in Grassland
or woodland habitats; clay soils are present in
the study area. Closest CNDDB occurrence is
approximately 6.3 miles from the Tunnel
Alternative Project Area.

CT, 1B

FE

Annual herb that occurs in sandy soil in openings
in chaparral (maritime), cismontane woodland,
coastal dunes, and coastal scrub at elevations
from 0-45 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

1B

None

Perennial herb that usually occurs on serpentinite,
mesic sites in chaparral, cismontane woodland,
and riparian woodland at elevations from 30-860
meters..
No serpentine soils in the Project Area.
Blooms: MAY – JUL

Potential to occur in the study area in or
woodland habitats. Closest CNDDB occurrence
is approximately 1.7 miles from the Tunnel
Alternative Project Area.

SE, 1B

FT

Annual herb that occurs in coastal prairie and
valley and foothill grasslands, in areas with light,
sandy soil or sandy clay. Often occurs with nonnatives, and is extant only in Monterey and Santa
Cruz Counties and Wildcat Canyon. Found at
elevations from 10-260 meters.
Blooms: JUN – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Monterey gilia
(Gilia tenuiflora ssp.
arenaria)

Loma Prieta hoita
(Hoita strobilina)

Santa Cruz tarplant
(Holocarpha macradenia)

G-4

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Kellogg's horkelia
(Horkelia cuneata ssp.
sericea)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in closed-cone
coniferous forest, chaparral (maritime), coastal
dunes and sandhills, and coastal scrub in
openings with sandy or gravelly soils at elevations
from10-200 meters.
Blooms: APR – SEP

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Contra Costa goldfields
(Lasthenia conjugens)

1B

FE

Annual herb that occurs in cismontane woodland,
alkaline playas, valley and foothill grassland, and
vernal pools, often on mesic sites, at elevations
from 0-470 meters.
Blooms: MAR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Legenere
(Legenere limosa)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in vernal pools at
elevations from 1-880 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Mt. Hamilton coreopsis
(Leptosyne hamiltonii)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in rocky talus soils in
cismontane woodlands with open southwest
exposure, ranging at elevations from 550-1300
meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Smooth lessingia
(Lessingia micradenia var.
glabrata)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in serpentinite soil, often
along roadsides in chaparral and cismontane
woodland at elevations from 120-420 meters.
Blooms: JUL – NOV

Unlikely to occur; suitable moist, serpentinite
habitat is not present in the study area.

Mt. Hamilton lomatium
(Lomatium observatorium)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in sedimentary and
volcanic soils in cismontane woodlands (often
associated with oaks and Coulter pines) at
elevations from 1219-13030 meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Showy golden madia
(Madia radiata)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs on clay soils in
cismontane woodland and valley and foothill
grassland at elevations from 25-900 meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

Arcuate bush-mallow
(Malacothamnus arcuatus)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs on gravelly soils and
alluvium in chaparral and cismontane woodland at
elevations from 15-355 meters.
Blooms: APR – SEP

Potential to occur in the study area in woodland
habitats. Closest CNDDB occurrence is
approximately 2.0 miles from the Tunnel
Alternative Project Area.

G-5

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Hall's bush-mallow
(Malacothamnus hallii)

1B

None

Evergreen shrub that occurs in chaparral and
coastal scrub, sometimes on serpentinite soils, at
elevations from 10-760 meters.
Blooms: MAY – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Oregon meconella
(Meconella oregana)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in coastal prairie and
scrub in open moist places at elevations from 250620 meters.
Blooms: MAR – APR

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Woodland woolythreads
(Monolopia gracilens)

1B

None

This fire adapted annual occurs in serpentine soils
in broadleafed upland forest openings, chaparral
openings, cismontane woodland, North Coast
coniferous forest openings, and valley and foothill
grassland at elevations from 100-1200 meters.
Blooms: FEB – JUL

Unlikely to occur; suitable moist, serpentinite
habitat is not present in the study area.

Rare, 1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in chaparral (maritime),
cismontane woodland, North Coast coniferous
forest (such as old growth redwoods), and valley
and foothill grassland at elevations from 60-900
meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Santa Cruz Mountains
beardtongue
(Penstemon rattanii var.
kleei)

1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs on sandy slopes in
chaparral, lower montane coniferous forest, North
Coast coniferous forest (especially at
forest/chaparral ecotones) at elevations from 4001100 meters.
Blooms: MAY – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

San Benito pentachaeta
(Pentachaeta exilis ssp.
aeolica)

1B

None

Annual herb that herb occurs on grassy areas in
cismontane woodlands, and valley and foothill
grassland habitats at elevations from 640-855
meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the study area.

Mt. Diablo phacelia
(Phacelia phacelioides)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in chaparral and
cismontane woodlands on rock outcrop/talus
slopes, sometimes serpentine soils, and edges of
trails, between at elevations from 500-1370
meters.
Blooms: APR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Dudley’s lousewort
(Pedicularis dudleyi)

G-6

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

State

Federal

Monterey pine
(Pinus radiata)

1B

None

Occurs in closed-cone coniferous forest and
cismontane woodland habitats at elevations from
25-185 meters. Widely planted ornamental tree.

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat for local native
populations is not present in the study area.

Yadon’s rein orchid
(Piperia yadonii)

1B

FE

Perennial herb that occurs in sandy soil in coastal
bluff scrub, closed-cone coniferous forest, and
chaparral (maritime) habitats at elevations from
10-510 meters.
Blooms: FEB – AUG

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Choris’ popcorn-flower
(Plagiobothrys chorisianus
var. chorisianus)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in mesic habitats,
chaparral, coastal prairie, and coastal scrub at
elevations from15-160 meters.
Blooms: MAR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Hairless popcorn-flower
(Plagiobothrys glaber)

1A

None

Annual herb that herb occurs in meadows, seeps,
marshes, swamps, coastal salt marsh and alkaline
meadows at elevations from 15-180 meters.
Blooms: MAR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Hooked popcorn-flower
(Plagiobothrys uncinatus)

1B

None

Annual herb that herb occurs in sandy soils,
outcrops and canyon walls in chaparral,
cismontane woodlands, and valley and foothill
grassland habitats at elevations from 300-760
meters.
Blooms: APR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Rare, 1B

None

Perennial herb that occurs in broadleafed upland
forest, chaparral, and valley and foothill grassland
habitats on bedrock outcrops and talus slopes at
elevations from 615-1215 meters.
Blooms: APR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Metcalf Canyon jewel-flower
(Streptanthus albidus ssp.
albidus)

1B

FE

Annual herb that occurs in serpentinite soil in
valley and foothill grassland (open, dry, grassy
areas) at elevations from 45-800 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUL

Unlikely to occur; suitable serpentinite habitat is
not present in the study area. This species is a
serpentine endemic (ICF 2012).

Most beautiful jewel-flower
(Streptanthus albidus ssp.
peramoenus)

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in chaparral, cismontane
woodland, and valley and foothill grassland
habitats, often on serpentine outcrops, ridges and
slopes at elevations from120-730 meters
Blooms: APR – SEP

Unlikely to occur; suitable serpentinite habitat is
not present in the study area. This species is
almost entirely restricted to serpentinite
outcrops or serpentinite soils.

Rock sanicle
(Sanicula saxatilis)

G-7

Appendix G
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Status

Common Name
Scientific Name

State

Federal

Mt. Hamilton jewel-flower
(Streptanthus callistus)

1B

None

Showy rancheria clover, twoforked clover
(Trifolium amoenum)

1B

Santa Cruz clover
(Trifolium buckwestiorum)

Saline clover
(Trifolium hydrophilum)

General Habitat Requirement and
Blooming Period

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Potential to Occur in the Study Area

Annual herb that occurs in chaparral and
cismontane woodland (often with grey pine or
black oak) at elevations from 600-790 meters.
Blooms: APR – MAY

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

FE

Annual herb that occurs in valley and foothill
grasslands, and coastal bluff scrub. It may occur
on serpentine soils, open sunny sites, swales, and
has recently been sighted along a roadside and
eroding cliff face. Grows at elevations from 5-560
meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; closest CNDDB occurrence is
>10 miles from the Tunnel Alternative Project
Area.

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in gravelly soils on moist
grassland on the margins of broadleafed upland
forest, cismontane woodland, and coastal prairie at
elevations from 105-610 meters.
Blooms: APR – OCT

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

1B

None

Annual herb that occurs in marshes and swamps,
valley and foothill grassland (mesic, alkaline), and
vernal pools at elevations from 0-300 meters.
Blooms: APR – JUN

Unlikely to occur; suitable habitat is not present
in the study area.

Status Code Definitions:
1A

=

Presumed extinct in California; California Rare Plant Rank (RPR)

1B

=

Rare or Endangered in California and elsewhere; California Rare Plant Rank (RPR)

CT

=

California Threatened under the CESA.

FE

=

Federally Endangered; listed by USFWS as in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range.

FT

=

Federally Threatened; listed by USFWS as likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range.

Rare =

State listed as Rare

SE

California Endangered Status under the CESA

G-8

=

USACE

Appendix H

CNDDB Occurrences in the Project Vicinity

California Department of Fish and Game
Natural Diversity Database
Selected Elements by Scientific Name - Portrait
Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, Gilroy, Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Lorna Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa
Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West 7.5 minute USGS quadrangles

Scientific Name/Comn1on Name

FederalStatus

State Status

CDFG or
CNPS

GRank

SRank

IILEEOG040

G2G3

5253

2 Agelaius tricolor
tricolored blackbird

A8P8X80020

G2G3

52

5C

3 Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander

AAAAA01180

Threatened

Threatened

G2G3

5253

5C

4 Ambystoma macrodactylum croceum
Santa Cruz long-toed salamander

AAAAA01082

Endangered

Endangered

G5T1

51

5 Anniella pulchra nigra
black legless lizard

ARACC01011

G3G4T2T3

52

5C

6 Antrozous pallidus

AMACC10010

G5

53

5C

7 Aquila chrysaetos
golden eagle

A8NKC22010

G5

53

8 Arctostaphylos andersonii

PDERI04030

G2

52?

18.2

PDERI040J1

G3T2?

52?

18.2

10 Arctostaphylos pajaroensis
Pajaro manzanita

PDERI04100

G2

52.1

18.1

11 Arctostaphylos regismontana
Kings Mountain manzanita

PDERI041CO

G2

52.2

18.2

12 Ardea herodias
great blue heron

A8NGA04010

G5

54

13 Athene cunicularia
burrowing owl

A8N5810010

G4

52

14 Atriplexjoaquinana
San Joaquin spearscale

PDCHE041F3

G2

52

18.2

15 Balsamorhiza macrolepis
big-scale balsamroot

PDA5T11061

G2

52

18.2

16 Calyptridium parryi var. hesseae
Santa Cruz Mountains pussypaws

PDPOR09052

G3G4T2

52

18.1

17 Campanula exigua
chaparral harebell

PDCAM020AO

G2

52.2

18.2

18 Castilleja affinis ssp. neglecta
Tiburon paintbrush

PD5CROD013

G4G5T1

51

18.2

19 Castilleja rubicundula ssp. rubicundula
pink creamsacs

PD5CROD482

G5T2

52

18.2

20 Ceanothus ferrisiae
Coyote ceanothus

PDRHA041NO

G2

52

18.1

21 Central Dune Scrub

CTT21320CA

G2

52.2

22 Centromadia parryi ssp. congdonii
Congdon's tarplant

PDA5T4ROP1

G4T2

52

23 Charadrius alexandrinus nivosus
western snowy plover

A8NN803031

G4T3

52

Adela oplerella

Element Code

Opler's longhorn moth

Q

pallid bat

Anderson's manzanita

9 Arctostaphylos hookeri ssp. hookeri
Hooker's manzanita

Endangered

Endangered

Threatened

Commercial Version- Dated December 30, 2012- Biogeographic Data Branch
Report Printed on Thursday, April11, 2013

Threatened

5C

18.2
5C

Page 1
Information Expires 06/30/2013

California Department of Fish and Game
Natural Diversity Database
Selected Elements by Scientific Name Portrait
Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, Gilroy, Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Lorna Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa
Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West 7.5 minute USGS quadrangles
R

Federal Status State Status

GRank

SRank

CDFG or
CNPS

PDPGN040M2

Threatened

G2T2

52

18.2

PDPGN040Q2

Endangered

G2T1

51

18.1

PDAST2E163

G2T2

52

18.2

PDONA050A1

G5?T3

53.3

4.3

28 Coastal and Valley Freshwater Marsh

CTT52410CA

G3

52.1

29 Collinsia multicolor

PDSCROHOBO

G2

52.2

ABNUA01010

G4

52

IILEPP2010

G5

53

AMAFD03042

G4T1

51

G3T2

52

Scientific Name/Common Name
24 Chorizanthe pungens var. pungens

Element Code

Monterey s·pineflower
25 Chorizanthe robusta var. robusta

robust spineflower
26 Cirsium fontinale var. campy/on

Mt. Hamilton fountain thistle
27 Clarkia concinna ssp. automixa

Santa Clara red ribbons

18.2

San Francisco collinsia
30 Cypseloides niger

sc

black swift
31 Danaus plexippus

monarch butterfly
32 Dipodomys venustus venustus

Santa Cruz kangaroo rat
Endangered

33 Dud/eya abramsii ssp. setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya

PDCRA040ZO

34 Elanus leucurus

ABNKC06010

G5

53

ARAAD02030

G3G4

53

PDAPIOZ043

G5T2

52.1

18.1

PDBRA16010

G2

52.2

18.2

G5T1

51

G2

52

18.2

G3G4T2

52

18.2

G2

52

18.1

G1

51

18.1
18.1

1B.1

white-tailed kite
35 Emys marmorata

sc

western pond turtle
36 Eryngium aristulatum var. hooveri

Hoover's button-celery
37 Erysimum ammophilum

sand-loving wallflower
38 Euphydryas editha bayensis
Bay checkerspot bulterfly

IILEPK4055

39 Fritillaria liliacea

PMLILOVOCO

Threatened

fragrant fritillary
40 Gilia tenuiflora ssp. arenaria

PDPLM041P2

Endangered

Threatened

sand gilia
41 Hoita strobilina

PDFAB5Z030

Lema Prieta hoita
42 Holocarpha macradenia

PDAST4X020

Threatened

Endangered

Santa Cruz tarplant
43 Horkelia cuneata var. sericea
Kellogg's horkelia

PDROSOW043

G4T2

52?

44 Lasiurus cinereus
hoary bat

AMACC05030

G5

54?

45 Legenere limosa

PDCAMOC010

G2

52.2

18.1

PDAST2LOCO

G2

52.2

18.2

legenere
46 Leptosyne hamiltonii

Mt. Hamilton coreopsis

Commercial Version-- Dated December 30, 2012-- Biogeographic Data Branch
Report Printed on Thursday, April11, 2013

Page2
Information Expires 06/30/2013

California Department of Fish and Game
Natural Diversity Database
Selected Elements by Scientific Name- Portrait
Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, Gilroy, Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Lorna Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa
Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West 7.5 minute USGS quadrangles

Scientific Name/Common Name

Element Code

Federal Status

State Status

GRank

SRank

CDFG or
CNPS

47 Lessingia micradenia var. glabrata
smooth lessingia

PDAST55062

G2T2

52

18.2

48 Malacothamnus aboriginum
Indian Valley bush-mallow

PDMALOQ020

G2

52

18.2

49 Malacothamnus arcuatus
arcuate bush-mallow

PDMALOQOEO

G2Q

52.2

18.2

50 Malacothamnus hallii
Hall's bush-mallow

PDMALOQOFO

G2Q

52

18.2

51 Microcina homi
Hom's micro-blind harvestman

ILARA47020

G1

51

52 Mono/opia gracilens
woodland woollythreads

PDA5T6G010

G2G3

5253

53 Myotis yumanensis
Yuma myotis

AMACC01020

G5

54?

54 Navarretia prostrata
prostrate vernal pool navarretia

PDPLMOCOQO

G2

52

55 Neotoma fuscipes annectens
San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat

AMAFF08082

G5T2T3

5253

56 Oncorhynchus mykiss irideus
steelhead -central California coast DPS

AFCHA0209G

Threatened

G5T2Q

52

57 Oncorhynchus mykiss irideus
AFCHA0209H
steelhead -south/central California coast DPS

Threatened

G5T2Q

52

G1

51

G2

52.2

18.2
18.2

18.2

18.1
5C

5C

58 Optioservus canus
Pinnacles optioservus riffle beetle

IICOL5E020

59 Pedicularis dudleyi
Dudley's lousewort

PD5CR1KODO

60 Penstemon rattanii var. kleei
Santa Cruz Mountains beardtongue

PD5CR1L581

G4T2

52.2

61 Phrynosoma blainvi/Iii
coast horned lizard

ARACF12100

G4G5

5354

62 P/agiobothrys chorisianus var. chorisianus
Choris' popcornflower

PD80ROV061

G3T2Q

52.2

18.2

63 Plagiobothrys glaber
hairless popcornflower.

PD80ROV080

GH

5H

1A

64 Rana boylii
foothill yellow-legged frog

AAA8H01050

G3

5253

5C

65 Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog

AAA8H01022

G4T2T3

5253

5C

66 Riparia riparia
bank swallow

A8PAU08010

Threatened

G5

5253

67 Sanicu/a saxatilis
rock sanicle

PDAPI1ZOHO

Rare

G2

52

68 Serpentine Bunchgrass

CTT42130CA

G2

52.2

69 Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewel-flower

PD8RA2G011

G2T1

51

Rare

Threatened

Endangered

Commercial Version-- Dated December 30, 2012-- Biogeographic Data Branch
Report Printed on Thursday, April11, 2013

5C

18.2

18.1

Page3
Information Expires 06/30/2013

California Department of Fish and Game
Natural Diversity Database
Selected Elements by Scientific Name- Portrait
Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, Gilroy, Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Lorna Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa
Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West 7.5 minute USGS quadrangles

Scientific Name/Common Name

Element Code

Federal Status

State Status

GRank

5Rank

CDFG or
CNP5

70 Streptanthus albidus ssp. peramoenus
most beautiful jewel-flower

PDBRA2G012

G2T2

52.2

1B.2

71 Streptanthus callistus
Mt. Hamilton jewel-flower

PDBRA2GOAO

Gt

51

1B.3

72 Sycamore Alluvial Woodland

CTT62100CA

Gt

51.1

73 Taxidea taxus
American badger

AMAJF04010

GS

54

74 TrifOlium buckwestiorum
Santa Cruz clover

PDFAB402WO

Gt

51.1

1B.t

75 Trifolium hydrophilum
saline clover

PDFAB400R5

G2

52

1B.2

76 Vireo be/Iii pusillus
least Bell's vireo

ABPBW01114

Endangered

Endangered

G5T2

52

77 Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox

AMAJA03041

Endangered

Threatened

G4T2T3

5253

Commercial Version- Dated December 30, 2012- Biogeographic Data Branch
Report Printed on Thursday, April11, 2013

5C

Page4
Information Expires 06/30/2013

USACE

Appendix I

USFWS List of Species in the Project Vicinity

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 1 of 16

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office
Federal Endangered and Threatened Species that Occur in
or may be Affected by Projects in the Counties and/or
U.S.G.S. 7 1/2 Minute Quads you requested

Document Number: 130128124310
Database Last Updated: September 18, 2011

Quad Lists
SAN FELIPE (385B)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Oncorhynchus mykiss
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

CHITTENDEN (386A)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Oncorhynchus mykiss
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 2 of 16

California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)

Birds
Brachyramphus marmoratus
marbled murrelet (T)
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

WATSONVILLE EAST (386B)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Oncorhynchus mykiss
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)

Birds
Brachyramphus marmoratus
marbled murrelet (T)
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Holocarpha macradenia
Critical habitat, Santa Cruz tarplant (X)
Santa Cruz tarplant (T)

MISSISSIPPI CREEK (405B)
Listed Species
Fish

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 3 of 16

Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)

GILROY HOT SPRINGS (405C)
Listed Species
Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 4 of 16

Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)

MT. SIZER (406A)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)
winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Ceanothus ferrisae
Coyote ceanothus (E)
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

MORGAN HILL (406B)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 5 of 16

Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, Central California coastal steelhead (X) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)
winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Castilleja affinis ssp. neglecta
Tiburon paintbrush (E)
Ceanothus ferrisae
Coyote ceanothus (E)
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

MT. MADONNA (406C)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 6 of 16

winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Holocarpha macradenia
Critical habitat, Santa Cruz tarplant (X)
Santa Cruz tarplant (T)

GILROY (406D)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)
winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 7 of 16

Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

SANTA TERESA HILLS (407A)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, Central California coastal steelhead (X) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)

Birds
Brachyramphus marmoratus
marbled murrelet (T)
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 8 of 16

LOMA PRIETA (407D)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Eucyclogobius newberryi
tidewater goby (E)
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, Central California coastal steelhead (X) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)

Birds
Brachyramphus marmoratus
marbled murrelet (T)
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Ceanothus ferrisae
Coyote ceanothus (E)
Holocarpha macradenia
Critical habitat, Santa Cruz tarplant (X)
Santa Cruz tarplant (T)

LICK OBSERVATORY (426C)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 9 of 16

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

ISABEL VALLEY (426D)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Proposed Species
Amphibians

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 10 of 16

Rana draytonii
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (PX)

SAN JOSE EAST (427D)
Listed Species
Invertebrates
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)

Fish
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, Central California coastal steelhead (X) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)
winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Birds
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)

Mammals
Vulpes macrotis mutica
San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Chorizanthe robusta var. robusta
robust spineflower (E)
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Lasthenia conjugens
Contra Costa goldfields (E)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)

County Lists
Santa Clara County
Listed Species

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 11 of 16

Invertebrates
Branchinecta conservatio
Conservancy fairy shrimp (E)
Branchinecta lynchi
vernal pool fairy shrimp (T)
Desmocerus californicus dimorphus
valley elderberry longhorn beetle (T)
Euphydryas editha bayensis
bay checkerspot butterfly (T)
Critical habitat, bay checkerspot butterfly (X)
Lepidurus packardi
Critical habitat, vernal pool tadpole shrimp (X)
vernal pool tadpole shrimp (E)

Fish
Acipenser medirostris
green sturgeon (T) (NMFS)
Eucyclogobius newberryi
tidewater goby (E)
Hypomesus transpacificus
delta smelt (T)
Oncorhynchus kisutch
coho salmon - central CA coast (E) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, coho salmon - central CA coast (X) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus mykiss
Central California Coastal steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Central Valley steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Critical habitat, Central California coastal steelhead (X) (NMFS)
South Central California steelhead (T) (NMFS)
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon (T) (NMFS)
winter-run chinook salmon, Sacramento River (E) (NMFS)

Amphibians
Ambystoma californiense
California tiger salamander, central population (T)

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 12 of 16

Critical habitat, CA tiger salamander, central population (X)
Rana draytonii
California red-legged frog (T)
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (X)

Reptiles
Gambelia (=Crotaphytus) sila
blunt-nosed leopard lizard (E)
Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus
Alameda whipsnake [=striped racer] (T)
Critical habitat, Alameda whipsnake (X)
Thamnophis gigas
giant garter snake (T)
Thamnophis sirtalis tetrataenia
San Francisco garter snake (E)

Birds
Brachyramphus marmoratus
Critical habitat, marbled murrelet (X)
marbled murrelet (T)
Charadrius alexandrinus nivosus
western snowy plover (T)
Pelecanus occidentalis californicus
California brown pelican (E)
Rallus longirostris obsoletus
California clapper rail (E)
Sternula antillarum (=Sterna, =albifrons) browni
California least tern (E)
Vireo bellii pusillus
Least Bell's vireo (E)

Mammals
Reithrodontomys raviventris
salt marsh harvest mouse (E)
Vulpes macrotis mutica

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 13 of 16

San Joaquin kit fox (E)

Plants
Acanthomintha duttonii
San Mateo thornmint (E)
Castilleja affinis ssp. neglecta
Tiburon paintbrush (E)
Ceanothus ferrisae
Coyote ceanothus (E)
Chorizanthe robusta var. robusta
robust spineflower (E)
Cirsium fontinale var. fontinale
fountain thistle (E)
Dudleya setchellii
Santa Clara Valley dudleya (E)
Eriophyllum latilobum
San Mateo woolly sunflower (E)
Hesperolinon congestum
Marin dwarf-flax (=western flax) (T)
Holocarpha macradenia
Critical habitat, Santa Cruz tarplant (X)
Santa Cruz tarplant (T)
Lasthenia conjugens
Contra Costa goldfields (E)
Critical habitat, Contra Costa goldfields (X)
Streptanthus albidus ssp. albidus
Metcalf Canyon jewelflower (E)
Suaeda californica
California sea blite (E)
Trifolium amoenum
showy Indian clover (E)

Proposed Species

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 14 of 16

Amphibians
Rana draytonii
Critical habitat, California red-legged frog (PX)

Key:
(E) Endangered - Listed as being in danger of extinction.
(T) Threatened - Listed as likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future.
(P) Proposed - Officially proposed in the Federal Register for listing as endangered or threatened.
(NMFS) Species under the Jurisdiction of the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Service.
Consult with them directly about these species.
Critical Habitat - Area essential to the conservation of a species.
(PX) Proposed Critical Habitat - The species is already listed. Critical habitat is being proposed for it.
(C) Candidate - Candidate to become a proposed species.
(V) Vacated by a court order. Not currently in effect. Being reviewed by the Service.
(X) Critical Habitat designated for this species

Important Information About Your Species List
How We Make Species Lists
We store information about endangered and threatened species lists by U.S. Geological
Survey 7½ minute quads. The United States is divided into these quads, which are about the
size of San Francisco.
The animals on your species list are ones that occur within, or may be affected by projects
within, the quads covered by the list.






Fish and other aquatic species appear on your list if they are in the same watershed as your
quad or if water use in your quad might affect them.
Amphibians will be on the list for a quad or county if pesticides applied in that area may be
carried to their habitat by air currents.
Birds are shown regardless of whether they are resident or migratory. Relevant birds on the
county list should be considered regardless of whether they appear on a quad list.

Plants
Any plants on your list are ones that have actually been observed in the area covered by the
list. Plants may exist in an area without ever having been detected there. You can find out
what's in the surrounding quads through the California Native Plant Society's online
Inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants.

Surveying
Some of the species on your list may not be affected by your project. A trained biologist
and/or botanist, familiar with the habitat requirements of the species on your list, should
determine whether they or habitats suitable for them may be affected by your project. We
recommend that your surveys include any proposed and candidate species on your list.
See our Protocol and Recovery Permits pages.
For plant surveys, we recommend using the Guidelines for Conducting and Reporting
Botanical Inventories. The results of your surveys should be published in any environmental
documents prepared for your project.

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 15 of 16

Your Responsibilities Under the Endangered Species Act
All animals identified as listed above are fully protected under the Endangered Species Act of
1973, as amended. Section 9 of the Act and its implementing regulations prohibit the take of
a federally listed wildlife species. Take is defined by the Act as "to harass, harm, pursue,
hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect" any such animal.
Take may include significant habitat modification or degradation where it actually kills or
injures wildlife by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns, including breeding,
feeding, or shelter (50 CFR §17.3).

Take incidental to an otherwise lawful activity may be authorized by one of two
procedures:


If a Federal agency is involved with the permitting, funding, or carrying out of a project that may
result in take, then that agency must engage in a formal consultation with the Service.
During formal consultation, the Federal agency, the applicant and the Service work together to
avoid or minimize the impact on listed species and their habitat. Such consultation would result
in a biological opinion by the Service addressing the anticipated effect of the project on listed and
proposed species. The opinion may authorize a limited level of incidental take.



If no Federal agency is involved with the project, and federally listed species may be taken as
part of the project, then you, the applicant, should apply for an incidental take permit. The
Service may issue such a permit if you submit a satisfactory conservation plan for the species
that would be affected by your project.
Should your survey determine that federally listed or proposed species occur in the area and are
likely to be affected by the project, we recommend that you work with this office and the
California Department of Fish and Game to develop a plan that minimizes the project's direct and
indirect impacts to listed species and compensates for project-related loss of habitat. You should
include the plan in any environmental documents you file.

Critical Habitat
When a species is listed as endangered or threatened, areas of habitat considered essential
to its conservation may be designated as critical habitat. These areas may require special
management considerations or protection. They provide needed space for growth and
normal behavior; food, water, air, light, other nutritional or physiological requirements;
cover or shelter; and sites for breeding, reproduction, rearing of offspring, germination or
seed dispersal.
Although critical habitat may be designated on private or State lands, activities on these
lands are not restricted unless there is Federal involvement in the activities or direct harm to
listed wildlife.
If any species has proposed or designated critical habitat within a quad, there will be a
separate line for this on the species list. Boundary descriptions of the critical habitat may be
found in the Federal Register. The information is also reprinted in the Code of Federal
Regulations (50 CFR 17.95). See our Map Room page.

Candidate Species
We recommend that you address impacts to candidate species. We put plants and animals
on our candidate list when we have enough scientific information to eventually propose them
for listing as threatened or endangered. By considering these species early in your planning
process you may be able to avoid the problems that could develop if one of these candidates
was listed before the end of your project.

Species of Concern

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office Species List

Page 16 of 16

The Sacramento Fish & Wildlife Office no longer maintains a list of species of concern.
However, various other agencies and organizations maintain lists of at-risk species. These
lists provide essential information for land management planning and conservation efforts.
More info

Wetlands
If your project will impact wetlands, riparian habitat, or other jurisdictional waters as defined
by section 404 of the Clean Water Act and/or section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, you
will need to obtain a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Impacts to wetland
habitats require site specific mitigation and monitoring. For questions regarding wetlands,
please contact Mark Littlefield of this office at (916) 414-6520.

Updates
Our database is constantly updated as species are proposed, listed and delisted. If you
address proposed and candidate species in your planning, this should not be a problem.
However, we recommend that you get an updated list every 90 days. That would be April 28,
2013.

http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists.cfm

12/10/15

USACE

Appendix J

Instream Aquatic Habitat Features

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District, Feb 2013
Note: 65% Submittal Not for Construction

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix J

|

Figure 1 of 3

General Instream Complexities

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District, Feb 2013
Note: 65% Submittal Not for Construction

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix J

|

Figure 2 of 3

General Instream Complexities

Source: Santa Clara Valley Water District, Feb 2013
Note: 65% Submittal Not for Construction

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix J

|

Figure 3 of 3

General Instream Complexities

USACE

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-a Ambient Air Standards

Table 3.11-1 Ambient Air Quality Standards
Pollutant
Ozone (O3) Nitrogen
Dioxide (NO2)
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)

California Standards

Averaging Time

Federal Standards
ʊ

μg/m
ʊ

137

0.075

147

338

0.100

188

1-hour

0.09

μg/m
177

8-hour

0.07

1-hour

0.18

ppmv

3

ppmv

Annual

0.03

56

0.053

100

1-hour

0.25

655

0.075

196

3

3-hour Secondary

ʊ

ʊ

0.50

1,309

24-hour

0.04

105

ʊ

ʊ

1-hour

20

22,898

35

40,071

8-hour

9

10,304

9

10,304

Lake Tahoe (8-hr)

6

6,869

ʊ

ʊ

24-hour

ʊ

50

ʊ

150

20

ʊ

ʊ

Carbon Monoxide (CO)

Particulates (as PM10)
Particulates (as PM2.5)

Annual

ʊ

24-hour

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

35

Annual Primary

ʊ

12

ʊ

12

Annual Secondary

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

15

30-day

ʊ

1.5

ʊ

ʊ

3-month (rolling)

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

0.15

24-hour

ʊ

25

ʊ

ʊ

Lead (Pb)
Sulfates (as SO4)
Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S)

1-hour

0.03

42

ʊ

Vinyl Chloride (C2H3Cl)

24-hour

0.01

26

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

Visibility Reducing Particles

8-hour

Extinction coefficient of
0.23 per km; visibility of
10 miles or more (0.07 to
30 miles or more for Lake
Tahoe) due to particles
when relative humidity is
less than 70%.

ʊ

Sources: CARB 2012a, USEPA 2011a
Notes:
ppmv = parts per million by volume
μg/m 3 = micrograms per cubic meter
The 1.5 μg/m 3 federal quarterly lead standard applied until 2008; 0.15 μg/m 3 rolling 3-month average thereafter
For gases, ug/m 3 calculated from ppmv based on molecular weight and standard conditions
Standard Temperature

25 deg C

Standard Molar Volume

24.465 liter/g-mole

K-1

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-b Attainment Status

Table 3.11-2 Attainment Status Summary - Bay Area Region
Criteria Pollutant

State Designation

Federal Designation

Ozone (O3) (1-hour)

Nonattainment

ʊ

Ozone (O3) (8-hour)

Nonattainment

Nonattainment

Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) (1-hour)

Attainment

Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) (annual)

Attainment

Unclassified
Attainment

(1)

(2)

Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)

Attainment

Attainment

Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Respirable Particulates (as PM10) (24-hour)

Attainment

Attainment

Nonattainment

Respirable Particulates (as PM10) (annual)

Nonattainment

Fine Particulates (as PM2.5) (24-hour)

ʊ

Nonattainment

Fine Particulates (as PM2.5) (annual)

Nonattainment

Attainment

Lead (Pb)
Sulfates (as SO4)

Attainment

Attainment

Attainment

ʊ

Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S)
Vinyl Chloride (C2H3Cl)
Visibility

Unclassified
n/d

(2)

Unclassified

(2)

Unclassified
ʊ

(2)

ʊ
ʊ
ʊ

Source: BAAQMD 2012a, CARB 2012b, USEPA 2012a
Notes:
(1)

The 0.08 ppmv federal 8-hour ozone standard applied until 2008; 0.075 ppmv thereafter

(2)

At the time of designation, if the available data does not support a designation of attainment or nonattainment, the
area is designated as unclassified.

n/d - no data/information available

K-2

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-c Ambient AQ

Table 3.11-3 Ambient Air Quality in Project Vicinity - Santa Clara County
San Jose
Criteria Pollutant

Ozone (O3) (1-hour max
ppmv)
Ozone (O3) (8-hour max
ppmv)
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) (1hour max ppmv)
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
(annual average ppmv)
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) (1hour max ppmv)
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) (24hour max ppmv)
Carbon Monoxide (CO) (1hour max ppmv)
Carbon Monoxide (CO) (8hour max ppmv)
Resp. Particulates (as
PM10) (24-hour max μg/m3)
Resp. Particulates (as
PM10) (annual avg μg/m3)
Fine Particulates (as PM2.5)
3

(24-hour max μg/m )
Fine Particulates (as PM2.5)
3

(annual avg μg/m )

Year

San Martin

Gilroy

monitored days over monitored days over monitored days over
value
standard
value
standard
value
standard

2011

0.098

1

0.091

0

0.081

0

2010

0.126

5

0.109

2

0.094

0

2009

0.088

0

0.107

4

0.098

1

2011

0.067

0

0.072

2

0.073

1

2010

0.086

3

0.087

8

0.081

7

2009

0.068

0

0.081

6

0.078

4

2011

0.061

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

0.064

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

0.069

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

0.015

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

0.014

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

0.015

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

0.0072

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

0.0049

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

ʊ

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

0.0024

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

0.0018

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

0.0010

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

2.5

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

2.8

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

3.4

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

2.3

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

2.2

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

2.5

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

44

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

47

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

43

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

19.2

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2010

19.5

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2009

20.4

0

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

2011

50.5

3

ʊ

ʊ

35.5

1

2010

41.5

3

ʊ

ʊ

29.9

0

2009

35.0

0

ʊ

ʊ

36.6

1

2011

9.9

0

ʊ

ʊ

8.1

0

2010

8.8

0

ʊ

ʊ

8.2

0

2009

10.1

0

ʊ

ʊ

8.9

0

Source: BAAQMD 2013

K-3

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-10 CEQA Significance Thresholds - BAAQMD (1999)
Applicability

VOC

NOX

CO

SOX

PM10

(2)

(2)

Operation, tons/year

15

CAAQS

15

Operation, pounds/year

30,000

CAAQS

30,000

80,000

30,000

20,000

Operation, pounds/day

80

CAAQS

80

ʊ

80

ʊ

Construction, pounds/day

80

CAAQS

80

40

ʊ

15

PM2.5

80

(3)

10

ʊ

Sources: BAAQMD 1999, 2012b (see note 4), 40 CFR 51.166
Notes:
(1)

No violation of CAAQS for CO (9 ppmv for 1 hour, 20 ppmv for 8 hours)

(2)

Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD), annual only

(3)

For construction projects, applies to exhaust emissions only, not fugitive dusts

(4)

On March 5, 2012 the Alameda County Superior Court issued a judgment finding that the District had failed to comply with CEQA
when it adopted the thresholds of significance. The court did not determine whether the thresholds were valid on the merits, but found
that the adoption of the thresholds was a project under CEQA. The court issued a writ of mandate ordering the District to set aside the
2010 thresholds and cease dissemination of them until the District had complied with CEQA. The District is no longer recommending
that the 2010 thresholds be used as a generally applicable measure of a project’s significance. Lead Agencies may continue to rely on
the District’s 1999 thresholds and may continue to make determinations regarding the significance of an individual project’s air quality
impacts based on the substantial evidence in the record for that project.

Table 3.11-11 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 NRCS or Culvert/Channel Alternatives
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

38

210

260

0.5

14

12

62

8

Year 3

38

207

257

0.5

13

12

62

8

Year 4

19

104

128

0.3

7

6

31

4

Year 5

19

104

128

0.3

7

6

21

3

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

38

210

260

0.5

14

12

62

8

Significance

LTS

LTS

S

ʊ

LTS

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
Reach 8 Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation

K-4

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries

Table 3.11-12 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 Tunnel Alternative
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

44

242

303

0.6

16

15

64

9

Year 3

44

240

300

0.6

16

14

64

9

Year 4

25

136

171

0.3

9

8

33

5

Year 5

25

136

171

0.3

9

8

23

3

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

44

242

303

0.6

16

15

64

9

Significance

LTS

LTS

S

ʊ

LTS

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation

Table 3.11-13 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 Tunnel and Reach 6 Bypass Alternatives
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

40

221

277

0.5

15

13

55

8

Year 3

40

219

274

0.5

14

13

55

8

Year 4

21

115

145

0.3

8

7

24

4

Year 5

21

115

145

0.3

8

7

14

2

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

40

221

277

0.5

15

13

55

8

Significance

LTS

LTS

S

ʊ

LTS

ʊ

ʊ

ʊ

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation

K-5

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-14 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 NRCS or Culvert/Channel Alternatives
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.1

17.1

21.2

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.5

0.6

Year 3

3.2

17.2

21.4

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.6

0.6

Year 4

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.02

0.6

0.6

2.5

0.3

Year 5

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.02

0.6

0.6

1.8

0.2

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.2

17.2

21.4

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.6

0.6

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
Reach 8 Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)

Table 3.11-15 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 Tunnel Alternative
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.7

20.1

25.2

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Year 3

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Year 4

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.03

0.8

0.8

2.7

0.4

Year 5

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.03

0.8

0.8

1.9

0.3

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter

K-6

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-16 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 8 Tunnel and Reach 6 Bypass Alternatives
Project Phase

VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.5

19.2

24.0

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.2

0.6

Year 3

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.3

0.6

Year 4

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.03

0.8

0.7

2.2

0.3

Year 5

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.03

0.8

0.7

1.5

0.2

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.3

0.6

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter

Table 3.11-17 Estimated Total Criteria Emissions for All Project Alternatives
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

11.5

62.7

77.4

0.15

4.0

3.7

16.5

2.2

with Reach 8 Tunnel

13.7

74.7

93.2

0.18

4.9

4.5

17.2

2.4

with Tunnel and Bypass

12.9

71.3

88.9

0.17

4.7

4.3

15.5

2.2

Project Options
NRCS or Culvert/Channel

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
Reach 8 Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)

K-7

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-18 Estimated GHG Emissions for NRCS or C/C Alternative
CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,380

0.3

0.1

3,422

Year 3

3,406

0.3

0.1

3,449

Year 4

1,893

0.1

0.1

1,917

Year 5

1,893

0.1

0.1

1,917

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

Highest Year

3,406

0.3

0.1

3,449

Project Phase

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b
Notes:
1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Reach 8 Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)

Table 3.11-19 Estimated GHG Emissions for Reach 8 Tunnel Alternative
Project Phase

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,977

0.3

0.1

4,027

Year 3

4,003

0.3

0.1

4,054

Year 4

2,491

0.2

0.1

2,522

Year 5

2,491

0.2

0.1

2,522

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

Highest Year

4,003

0.3

0.1

4,054

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b
Notes:
1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds

K-8

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-20 Estimated GHG Emissions for Tunnel and Bypass Alternatives
Project Phase

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,808

0.3

0.1

3,855

Year 3

3,834

0.3

0.1

3,882

Year 4

2,321

0.2

0.1

2,350

Year 5

2,321

0.2

0.1

2,350

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

Highest Year

3,834

0.3

0.1

3,882

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b
Notes:
1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds

Table 3.11-21 Estimated Total GHG Emissions for All Project Alternatives
Project Options

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

MT

MT

MT

MT

12,386

0.9

0.4

12,543

with Reach 8 Tunnel

14,777

1.1

0.5

14,962

with Tunnel and Bypass

14,179

1.0

0.5

14,354

NRCS or Culvert/Channel

Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b
Notes:
1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Reach 8 Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)

K-9

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-d Emissions Summaries
Table 3.11-22 Screening Health Risk Assessment for Excavation Activity
DPM Screen Parameter
Onsite Emission Rate
Receptor Distance

Units

Reach 7a

Reach 7b

Reach 8

lb/day

0.526

0.351

0.526

g/sec

2.76E-03

1.84E-03

2.76E-03

meters

20

20

10

2.478

1.652

5.588

0.248

0.165

0.559

(μg/m )
days

3.00E-04

3.00E-04

3.00E-04

5

12

20

Modeled Hourly Concentration

μg/m

3

Corrected Annual Concentration

μg/m

3

3 -1

Unit Risk Value (70-year MEI)
Activity Duration
Annual MEI Correction
Cancer Risk
CEQA Threshold

fraction

2.0E-04

4.7E-04

7.8E-04

probability

1.5E-08

2.3E-08

1.3E-07

per million

0.01

0.02

0.13

per million

10

10

10

significance

LTS

LTS

LTS

Sources: NOAA 2008, USEPA 1992, USEPA 2011c, OEHHA 2009, WC 2013, BAAQMD 1999
Notes:
DPM = diesel particulate matter (PM10)
70-year Maximally Exposed Individual = 25,550 days = 613,200 hours
LTS = Less Than Significant; S = Significant

K-10

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-e Dry Air Composition

Table 3.11-4 Standard Composition of Dry Air
Gas MW

Concentration

Fraction

Fraction MW

g/mole

ppmv

percent

g/mole

Principal Gas

Chemical
Symbol

Nitrogen

N2

28.014

780,805.00

78.080500

21.873471

Oxygen

O2

31.998

209,440.00

20.944000

6.701661

Argon

Ar
CO2

39.948

9,340.00

0.934000

0.373114

Carbon Dioxide

44.009

387.69

0.038769

0.017062

Neon

Ne

20.183

18.21

0.001821

0.000368

Helium

He
CH4

4.003

5.24

0.000524

0.000021

16.043

1.81

0.000181

0.000029

83.800

1.14

0.000114

0.000096

2.016

0.50

0.000050

0.000001

Methane
Hydrogen

Krypton

Kr
H2

Nitrous Oxide

N2O

44.013

0.32

0.000032

0.000014

Xenon

Xe

31.300

0.09

0.000009

0.000003

1,000,000.00

100.000

28.966

Totals

Sources: UIG 2008, USEPA 2012b, du Pont 1971, Jennings 1970
Notes:
MW = molecular weight, g/mole
ppmv = parts per million by volume (10-6)

K-11

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-f Fuels

Table 3.11-5 Typical GHG Contents of Common Fuels
Fuel

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

kg/mmBTU kg/mmBTU kg/mmBTU lb/mmBTU

Energy

CO2 e

BTU/gal

lb/gal

Diesel Fuel No. 2

73.96

0.0105

0.0006

163.97

138,300

22.68

Kerosene

73.19

0.0105

0.0006

162.27

138,700

22.51

Jet Fuel

72.23

0.0105

0.0006

160.17

135,000

21.62

Motor Gasoline

71.35

0.0105

0.0006

158.23

122,600

19.40

Aviation Gasoline

69.15

0.0105

0.0006

153.38

120,200

18.44

Propane

62.22

0.0053

0.0001

137.49

91,300

12.55

Pipeline Natural Gas

53.02

0.0053

0.0001

117.20

͸

͸

Sources: USEPA 2012b, USEPA 2011b
Notes:
kg/mmBTU - kilograms per million British Thermal Units
lb/mmBTU - pounds per million British Thermal Units
BTU - the amount of energy (heat) required to raise 1 pound of liquid water 1 degree Fahrenheit from 39 to 40 °F

K-12

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-g GHG Inventories

Table 3.11-6 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventories - Gross Basis
Summary Year

National

California

Bay Area

MMT CO2 e

MMT CO2 e

MMT CO2 e

2005

7,204

482.5

ʊ

2006

7,159

481.9

ʊ

2007

7,253

488.8

95.8

2008

7,048

484.7

ʊ

2009

6,608

456.8

ʊ

5-Year Average

7,054

478.9

ʊ

Average Annual Variation

2.6%

1.8%

ʊ

Sources: USEPA 2012b, CARB 2011b, BAAQMD 2010b
Notes:
MMT - million metric tonnes (annual)
1 metric tonne = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
2009 is most recent CARB published data; Bay Area for 2007 only

Table 3.11-7 Bay Area GHG Emissions by Sector
District Emissions
End-Use Sector

Percent

Industrial / Commercial

36.4%

MMT CO2 e
34.9

Residential Fuel Use

7.1%

6.8

Local Electric Power Generation

8.5%

8.1

Imported Electric Power Generation

7.4%

7.1

Offroad Equipment

3.0%

2.9

36.4%

34.9

1.2%

1.1

100.0%

95.8

Transportation
Agriculture / Farming
Totals
Source: BAAQMD 2010b
Notes:
MMT - million metric tonnes (annual)
1 metric tonne = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds

K-13

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-g GHG Inventories

Table 3.11-8 Bay Area GHG Emissions by County
District Emissions
County

Percent

MMT CO2 e

Alameda

16.4%

15.7

Contra Costa

32.9%

31.5

Marin

2.8%

2.7

Napa

1.8%

1.7

San Francisco

7.4%

7.1

San Mateo

8.9%

8.5

Santa Clara

19.6%

18.8

5.9%

5.7

Solano (within BAAQMD)
Sonoma (within BAAQMD)
Totals

4.3%

4.1

100.0%

95.8

Source: BAAQMD 2010b
Notes:
MMT - million metric tonnes (annual)
1 metric tonne = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds

Table 3.11-9 Mobile Sectors GHG Emissions by County
County

Offroad

Transportation

MT CO2 e

MT CO2 e

Alameda

569,000

8,351,000

Contra Costa

406,000

4,998,000

Marin

99,000

1,286,000

Napa

50,000

917,000

San Francisco

415,000

2,673,000

San Mateo

270,000

4,850,000

Santa Clara

790,000

7,859,000

Solano (within BAAQMD)

147,000

1,834,000

Sonoma (within BAAQMD)
Totals

175,000

2,103,000

2,921,000

34,871,000

Source: BAAQMD 2010b
Notes:
MT - metric tonnes (annual)
1 metric tonne = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Values rounded to nearest 1,000 tonnes
"Offroad" is offroad equipment category

K-14

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 4
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

2

190

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

12

5964

1988

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

1

90

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

1

80

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

6

2982

994

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

20

40

19880

6627

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

20

20

9940

3313

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

50

100

49700

16567

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

4

3

22.9

4.33

5

497

50

200

99400

33133

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

18

4014

2007

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

6

1338

669

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

20

40

8920

4460

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

20

20

4460

2230

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

50

100

22300

11150

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

2

10.3

4.33

5

223

50

300

66900

33450

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

18

18054

3611

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

6

6018

1204

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

20

40

40120

8024

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

20

20

20060

4012

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

50

100

100300

20060

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

5

46.3

4.33

5

1003

50

300

300900

60180

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

6

2982

994

122.82

Reach 5

6

1338

669

Reach 6

6

6018

1204

K-15

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 4
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.098

7.183

7.203

0.016

0.351

0.323

1458.2

0.099

0.044

1473.9

545.7

3570.0

3579.8

8.2

174.3

160.3

724708

49.2

21.9

732527

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

218.9

1062.5

1202.9

1.8

95.4

87.8

147784

19.8

8.8

150920

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

288.9

1566.4

2100.0

4.0

98.9

91.0

359437

26.1

11.6

363576

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

272.9

1785.0

1789.9

4.1

87.1

80.2

362354

24.6

10.9

366263

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

418.7

1405.3

3315.6

5.4

130.7

120.3

477535

37.8

16.8

483533

Pavment Breaker

0.350

2.378

2.281

0.004

0.145

0.133

349.2

0.032

0.014

354.2

174.2

1181.8

1133.5

2.1

72.1

66.3

173554

15.7

7.0

176049

Air Compressor

0.347

1.560

1.601

0.002

0.126

0.116

197.1

0.031

0.014

202.1

172.5

775.4

795.6

1.2

62.6

57.6

97953

15.6

6.9

100424

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

142.3

1026.3

959.0

1.8

64.6

59.4

154253

12.8

5.7

156291

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

299.3

1772.0

1935.5

3.2

131.4

120.9

276632

27.0

12.0

280920

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

231.9

1295.1

1551.8

2.3

113.6

104.5

202557

20.9

9.3

205879

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

257.8

806.8

2105.9

3.9

72.8

67.0

350666

23.3

10.3

354360

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

81.2

292.6

394.5

0.6

19.5

17.9

49585

7.3

3.3

50749

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

28.9

129.3

336.0

0.8

16.9

13.9

83659

1.3

1.3

84077

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

14.4

64.7

168.0

0.4

8.4

6.9

41830

0.7

0.6

42039

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

74.7

496.1

531.8

1.4

21.4

17.2

141150

3.3

3.1

142186

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.120

1.076

0.103

0.002

0.019

0.012

221.3

0.011

0.016

226.6

59.7

534.7

51.0

1.1

9.4

6.2

109964

5.3

8.2

112615

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

367.3

2402.7

2409.3

5.5

117.3

107.9

487756

33.1

14.7

493019

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

98.2

476.7

539.7

0.8

42.8

39.4

66309

8.9

3.9

67717

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

129.6

702.8

942.2

1.8

44.4

40.8

161277

11.7

5.2

163134

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

122.4

800.9

803.1

1.8

39.1

36.0

162585

11.0

4.9

164340

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

187.9

630.6

1487.7

2.4

58.7

54.0

214266

17.0

7.5

216957

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

63.8

460.5

430.3

0.8

29.0

26.7

69212

5.8

2.6

70127

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

134.3

795.1

868.4

1.4

59.0

54.3

124123

12.1

5.4

126047

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

104.1

581.1

696.3

1.1

51.0

46.9

90886

9.4

4.2

92376

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

115.7

362.0

944.9

1.7

32.7

30.0

157341

10.4

4.6

158998

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

36.4

131.3

177.0

0.3

8.7

8.0

22249

3.3

1.5

22770

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

13.0

58.0

150.8

0.4

7.6

6.2

37537

0.6

0.6

37725

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

6.5

29.0

75.4

0.2

3.8

3.1

18769

0.3

0.3

18862

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

33.5

222.6

238.6

0.6

9.6

7.7

63333

1.5

1.4

63798

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

40.2

359.8

34.3

0.7

6.3

4.1

74010

3.5

5.5

75794

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

1652.1

10806.9

10836.6

24.7

527.5

485.3

2193810

149.1

66.3

2217478

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

441.8

2144.3

2427.6

3.6

192.5

177.1

298244

39.9

17.7

304573

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

583.1

3161.1

4238.0

8.2

199.7

183.7

725384

52.6

23.4

733737

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

550.7

3602.3

3612.2

8.2

175.8

161.8

731270

49.7

22.1

739159

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

845.0

2836.1

6691.2

10.8

263.8

242.7

963717

76.2

33.9

975822

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

287.1

2071.2

1935.3

3.7

130.3

119.9

311299

25.9

11.5

315413

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

604.0

3576.0

3906.1

6.4

265.2

244.0

558273

54.5

24.2

566927

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

468.0

2613.7

3131.7

4.7

229.2

210.9

408781

42.2

18.8

415487

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

520.3

1628.2

4249.9

7.8

146.9

135.1

707682

46.9

20.9

715136

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

163.9

590.4

796.2

1.3

39.3

36.2

100069

14.8

6.6

102416

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

58.3

261.0

678.2

1.6

34.1

28.0

168833

2.7

2.5

169677

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

29.1

130.5

339.1

0.8

17.0

14.0

84417

1.3

1.3

84838

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

150.7

1001.1

1073.2

2.7

43.3

34.7

284857

6.7

6.3

286947

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

180.9

1618.5

154.4

3.2

28.4

18.6

332878

15.9

24.8

340904

Reach 5

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 6

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

K-16

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 4
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

181.9

1190.0

1193.3

2.7

58.1

53.4

241569

16.4

7.3

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

73.0

354.2

401.0

0.6

31.8

29.3

49261

6.6

2.9

50307

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

96.3

522.1

700.0

1.3

33.0

30.3

119812

8.7

3.9

121192

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

244176

91.0

595.0

596.6

1.4

29.0

26.7

120785

8.2

3.6

122088

139.6

468.4

1105.2

1.8

43.6

40.1

159178

12.6

5.6

161178

Pavment Breaker

58.1

393.9

377.8

0.7

24.0

22.1

57851

5.2

2.3

58683

Air Compressor

57.5

258.5

265.2

0.4

20.9

19.2

32651

5.2

2.3

33475

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

47.4

342.1

319.7

0.6

21.5

19.8

51418

4.3

1.9

52097

Grader

99.8

590.7

645.2

1.1

43.8

40.3

92211

9.0

4.0

93640

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

77.3

431.7

517.3

0.8

37.9

34.8

67519

7.0

3.1

68626

Hydraulic Crane

85.9

268.9

702.0

1.3

24.3

22.3

116889

7.8

3.4

118120

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

27.1

97.5

131.5

0.2

6.5

6.0

16528

2.4

1.1

16916

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

9.6

43.1

112.0

0.3

5.6

4.6

27886

0.4

0.4

28026

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

4.8

21.6

56.0

0.1

2.8

2.3

13943

0.2

0.2

14013

Flatbed Trucks

24.9

165.4

177.3

0.5

7.1

5.7

47050

1.1

1.0

47395

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

19.9

178.2

17.0

0.4

3.1

2.1

36655

1.8

2.7

37538

Reach 5
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

183.7

1201.4

1204.7

2.7

58.6

54.0

243878

16.6

7.4

246509

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

49.1

238.4

269.9

0.4

21.4

19.7

33155

4.4

2.0

33858

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

64.8

351.4

471.1

0.9

22.2

20.4

80638

5.8

2.6

81567

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

61.2

400.5

401.6

0.9

19.5

18.0

81293

5.5

2.5

82170

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

93.9

315.3

743.8

1.2

29.3

27.0

107133

8.5

3.8

108479

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

31.9

230.3

215.1

0.4

14.5

13.3

34606

2.9

1.3

35063

Grader

67.1

397.5

434.2

0.7

29.5

27.1

62061

6.1

2.7

63023

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

52.0

290.6

348.1

0.5

25.5

23.4

45443

4.7

2.1

46188

Hydraulic Crane

57.8

181.0

472.4

0.9

16.3

15.0

78671

5.2

2.3

79499

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

18.2

65.6

88.5

0.1

4.4

4.0

11124

1.6

0.7

11385

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

6.5

29.0

75.4

0.2

3.8

3.1

18769

0.3

0.3

18862

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

3.2

14.5

37.7

0.1

1.9

1.6

9384

0.1

0.1

9431

Flatbed Trucks

16.8

111.3

119.3

0.3

4.8

3.9

31667

0.7

0.7

31899

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

20.1

179.9

17.2

0.4

3.2

2.1

37005

1.8

2.8

37897

330.4

2161.4

2167.3

4.9

105.5

97.1

438762

29.8

13.3

443496

88.4

428.9

485.5

0.7

38.5

35.4

59649

8.0

3.5

60915

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

116.6

632.2

847.6

1.6

39.9

36.7

145077

10.5

4.7

146747

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

110.1

720.5

722.4

1.6

35.2

32.4

146254

9.9

4.4

147832

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

169.0

567.2

1338.2

2.2

52.8

48.5

192743

15.2

6.8

195164

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 6
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)
Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor
Backhoe (0.8 CY)
Grader
Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

57.4

414.2

387.1

0.7

26.1

24.0

62260

5.2

2.3

63083

120.8

715.2

781.2

1.3

53.0

48.8

111655

10.9

4.8

113385

93.6

522.7

626.3

0.9

45.8

42.2

81756

8.4

3.8

83097

104.1

325.6

850.0

1.6

29.4

27.0

141536

9.4

4.2

143027

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

32.8

118.1

159.2

0.3

7.9

7.2

20014

3.0

1.3

20483

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

11.7

52.2

135.6

0.3

6.8

5.6

33767

0.5

0.5

33935

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.8

26.1

67.8

0.2

3.4

2.8

16883

0.3

0.3

16968

Flatbed Trucks

30.1

200.2

214.6

0.5

8.7

6.9

56971

1.3

1.3

57389

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

36.2

323.7

30.9

0.6

5.7

3.7

66576

3.2

5.0

68181

Hydraulic Crane

K-17

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Reach 7a

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

290

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

18

5220

2610

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

6

1740

870

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

20

40

11600

5800

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

20

20

5800

2900

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

50

100

29000

14500

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

2

13.4

4.33

5

290

50

300

87000

43500

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13
122.82

Reach 7b

6

1740

870

122.82

496

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

2

190

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

12

5952

1984

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

6

2976

992

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

20

40

19840

6613

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

20

20

9920

3307

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

50

100

49600

16533

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

4

3

22.9

4.33

5

496

50

200

99200

33067

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13
122.82

Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative

6

2976

992

735

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

18

13230

3308

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

40

29400

7350

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

20

14700

3675

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

100

73500

18375

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

300

220500

55125

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

6

4410

1103

K-18

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 7a

0.526 as DPM

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

477.7

3124.6

3133.2

7.1

152.5

140.3

634302

43.1

19.2

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

127.7

620.0

701.9

1.0

55.7

51.2

86232

11.5

5.1

641145
88062

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

168.6

914.0

1225.3

2.4

57.7

53.1

209732

15.2

6.8

212147

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

159.2

1041.5

1044.4

2.4

50.8

46.8

211434

14.4

6.4

213715

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

244.3

820.0

1934.6

3.1

76.3

70.2

278642

22.0

9.8

282142

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

83.0

598.9

559.6

1.1

37.7

34.7

90007

7.5

3.3

91196

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

174.6

1034.0

1129.4

1.9

76.7

70.6

161415

15.8

7.0

163917

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

135.3

755.7

905.5

1.4

66.3

61.0

118192

12.2

5.4

120131

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

150.4

470.8

1228.8

2.3

42.5

39.1

204614

13.6

6.0

206769

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

47.4

170.7

230.2

0.4

11.4

10.5

28933

4.3

1.9

29612

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

16.8

75.5

196.1

0.5

9.8

8.1

48815

0.8

0.7

49059

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

8.4

37.7

98.0

0.2

4.9

4.0

24408

0.4

0.4

24530

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

43.6

289.4

310.3

0.8

12.5

10.0

82361

1.9

1.8

82966

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

52.3

468.0

44.6

0.9

8.2

5.4

96246

4.6

7.2

98566

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 7b

0.351 as DPM

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.098

7.183

7.203

0.016

0.351

0.323

1458.2

0.099

0.044

1473.9

544.7

3562.8

3572.6

8.1

173.9

160.0

723250

49.1

21.8

731053

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

218.5

1060.4

1200.5

1.8

95.2

87.6

147486

19.7

8.8

150616

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

288.3

1563.2

2095.8

4.0

98.7

90.8

358714

26.0

11.6

362845

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

272.3

1781.4

1786.3

4.1

87.0

80.0

361625

24.6

10.9

365527

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

417.9

1402.5

3308.9

5.4

130.5

120.0

476574

37.7

16.8

482560

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

142.0

1024.3

957.1

1.8

64.5

59.3

153943

12.8

5.7

155977

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

298.7

1768.4

1931.6

3.2

131.2

120.7

276075

27.0

12.0

280355

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

231.5

1292.5

1548.7

2.3

113.3

104.3

202149

20.9

9.3

205465

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

257.3

805.2

2101.6

3.9

72.6

66.8

349961

23.2

10.3

353647

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

81.0

292.0

393.7

0.6

19.5

17.9

49486

7.3

3.2

50646

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

28.8

129.1

335.4

0.8

16.8

13.8

83491

1.3

1.3

83908

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

14.4

64.5

167.7

0.4

8.4

6.9

41745

0.7

0.6

41954

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

74.5

495.1

530.7

1.4

21.4

17.2

140866

3.3

3.1

141900

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.120

1.076

0.103

0.002

0.019

0.012

221.3

0.011

0.016

226.6

59.6

533.6

50.9

1.1

9.4

6.1

109742

5.3

8.2

112388

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative

0.526 as DPM

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

1210.6

7919.3

7941.1

18.1

386.6

355.7

1607628

109.2

48.5

1624972

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

323.8

1571.3

1778.9

2.6

141.1

129.8

218553

29.2

13.0

223192

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

427.3

2316.5

3105.6

6.0

146.3

134.6

531562

38.6

17.1

537683

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

403.5

2639.8

2647.0

6.0

128.9

118.6

535876

36.4

16.2

541657

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

619.2

2078.3

4903.3

7.9

193.3

177.9

706213

55.9

24.8

715084

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

210.4

1517.8

1418.2

2.7

95.5

87.9

228121

19.0

8.4

231135

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

442.6

2620.5

2862.4

4.7

194.4

178.8

409104

39.9

17.8

415445

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

343.0

1915.3

2294.9

3.5

168.0

154.5

299556

30.9

13.8

304469

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

381.3

1193.2

3114.3

5.7

107.6

99.0

518591

34.4

15.3

524053

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

120.1

432.7

583.4

0.9

28.8

26.5

73330

10.8

4.8

75051

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

42.7

191.3

497.0

1.2

25.0

20.5

123721

2.0

1.9

124339

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

21.3

95.6

248.5

0.6

12.5

10.2

61861

1.0

0.9

62170

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

110.4

733.6

786.5

2.0

31.7

25.4

208744

4.9

4.6

210275

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

132.5

1186.1

113.1

2.4

20.8

13.7

243934

11.7

18.2

249815

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

K-19

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 7a
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

238.8

1562.3

1566.6

3.6

76.3

70.2

317151

21.5

9.6

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

63.9

310.0

350.9

0.5

27.8

25.6

43116

5.8

2.6

44031

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

84.3

457.0

612.7

1.2

28.9

26.6

104866

7.6

3.4

106074

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

320573

79.6

520.8

522.2

1.2

25.4

23.4

105717

7.2

3.2

106858

122.2

410.0

967.3

1.6

38.1

35.1

139321

11.0

4.9

141071

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

41.5

299.4

279.8

0.5

18.8

17.3

45003

3.7

1.7

45598

Grader

87.3

517.0

564.7

0.9

38.3

35.3

80708

7.9

3.5

81959

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

67.7

377.9

452.7

0.7

33.1

30.5

59096

6.1

2.7

60065

Hydraulic Crane

75.2

235.4

614.4

1.1

21.2

19.5

102307

6.8

3.0

103385

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

Tractor Crawler / Dozer
Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

23.7

85.4

115.1

0.2

5.7

5.2

14467

2.1

0.9

14806

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

8.4

37.7

98.0

0.2

4.9

4.0

24408

0.4

0.4

24530

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

4.2

18.9

49.0

0.1

2.5

2.0

12204

0.2

0.2

12265

Flatbed Trucks

21.8

144.7

155.2

0.4

6.3

5.0

41181

1.0

0.9

41483

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

26.1

234.0

22.3

0.5

4.1

2.7

48123

2.3

3.6

49283
243684

Reach 7b
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

181.6

1187.6

1190.9

2.7

58.0

53.3

241083

16.4

7.3

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

72.8

353.5

400.2

0.6

31.7

29.2

49162

6.6

2.9

50205

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

96.1

521.1

698.6

1.3

32.9

30.3

119571

8.7

3.9

120948

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

90.8

593.8

595.4

1.4

29.0

26.7

120542

8.2

3.6

121842

139.3

467.5

1103.0

1.8

43.5

40.0

158858

12.6

5.6

160853

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

47.3

341.4

319.0

0.6

21.5

19.8

51314

4.3

1.9

51992

Grader

99.6

589.5

643.9

1.1

43.7

40.2

92025

9.0

4.0

93452

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

77.2

430.8

516.2

0.8

37.8

34.8

67383

7.0

3.1

68488

Hydraulic Crane

85.8

268.4

700.5

1.3

24.2

22.3

116654

7.7

3.4

117882

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

Tractor Crawler / Dozer
Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

27.0

97.3

131.2

0.2

6.5

6.0

16495

2.4

1.1

16882

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

9.6

43.0

111.8

0.3

5.6

4.6

27830

0.4

0.4

27969

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

4.8

21.5

55.9

0.1

2.8

2.3

13915

0.2

0.2

13985

Flatbed Trucks

24.8

165.0

176.9

0.5

7.1

5.7

46955

1.1

1.0

47300

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

19.9

177.9

17.0

0.4

3.1

2.0

36581

1.8

2.7

37463

302.7

1979.8

1985.3

4.5

96.6

88.9

401907

27.3

12.1

406243

80.9

392.8

444.7

0.7

35.3

32.4

54638

7.3

3.2

55798

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

106.8

579.1

776.4

1.5

36.6

33.7

132891

9.6

4.3

134421

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

100.9

659.9

661.8

1.5

32.2

29.6

133969

9.1

4.0

135414

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

154.8

519.6

1225.8

2.0

48.3

44.5

176553

14.0

6.2

178771

Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)
Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor
Backhoe (0.8 CY)

52.6

379.5

354.6

0.7

23.9

22.0

57030

4.7

2.1

57784

110.7

655.1

715.6

1.2

48.6

44.7

102276

10.0

4.4

103861

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

85.7

478.8

573.7

0.9

42.0

38.6

74889

7.7

3.4

76117

Hydraulic Crane

95.3

298.3

778.6

1.4

26.9

24.8

129648

8.6

3.8

131013

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

30.0

108.2

145.9

0.2

7.2

6.6

18333

2.7

1.2

18763

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

10.7

47.8

124.2

0.3

6.2

5.1

30930

0.5

0.5

31085

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.3

23.9

62.1

0.1

3.1

2.6

15465

0.2

0.2

15542

Flatbed Trucks

27.6

183.4

196.6

0.5

7.9

6.4

52186

1.2

1.2

52569

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

33.1

296.5

28.3

0.6

5.2

3.4

60983

2.9

4.5

62454

Grader

K-20

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

18

13230

3308

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

40

29400

7350

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

20

14700

3675

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

100

73500

18375

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

300

220500

55125

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

2

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

12

8820

2205

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

1

80

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

40

29400

7350

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

20

20

14700

3675

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

100

73500

18375

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

8

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

50

400

294000

73500

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

offroad

1

280

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.08318

0.55163

0.64262

0.00162

0.02713

0.02496

154.24

0.00751

0.00334

155.43

Impact Pile Driver

offroad

1

280

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

6

6

4410

1103

0.08318

0.55163

0.64262

0.00162

0.02713

0.02496

154.24

0.00751

0.00334

155.43

Drilling Jumbo

offroad

1

60

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.02266

0.25656

0.21306

0.00047

0.00514

0.00473

37.62

0.00204

0.00091

37.95

Roadheader

offroad

1

100

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.07565

0.37558

0.40931

0.00060

0.03318

0.03053

50.52

0.00683

0.00303

51.61

Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit

offroad

1

120

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.07141

0.40381

0.44595

0.00069

0.03456

0.03180

58.91

0.00644

0.00286

59.94

Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)

offroad

1

350

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.12053

0.41386

0.93056

0.00194

0.03248

0.02989

184.19

0.01088

0.00483

185.92

Spader

offroad

1

180

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.16097

0.83015

1.22145

0.00168

0.06517

0.05996

149.16

0.01452

0.00646

151.47

Pump (dewatering)

offroad

1

80

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.07143

0.36260

0.40337

0.00065

0.02768

0.02547

53.03

0.00644

0.00286

54.05

Shotcrete Pump

offroad

1

160

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

8

8

5880

1470

0.08910

0.66491

0.77125

0.00140

0.03983

0.03664

123.17

0.00804

0.00357

124.44

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

onroad HD

2

4

33.9

4.33

5

735

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

6

4410

1103

122.82

Reach 8 - Tunnel Alternative

6

50

4410

100

1103

73500

18375

K-21

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

1210.6

7919.3

7941.1

18.1

386.6

355.7

1607628

109.2

48.5

1624972

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

323.8

1571.3

1778.9

2.6

141.1

129.8

218553

29.2

13.0

223192

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

427.3

2316.5

3105.6

6.0

146.3

134.6

531562

38.6

17.1

537683

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

403.5

2639.8

2647.0

6.0

128.9

118.6

535876

36.4

16.2

541657

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

619.2

2078.3

4903.3

7.9

193.3

177.9

706213

55.9

24.8

715084

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

210.4

1517.8

1418.2

2.7

95.5

87.9

228121

19.0

8.4

231135

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

442.6

2620.5

2862.4

4.7

194.4

178.8

409104

39.9

17.8

415445

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

343.0

1915.3

2294.9

3.5

168.0

154.5

299556

30.9

13.8

304469

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

381.3

1193.2

3114.3

5.7

107.6

99.0

518591

34.4

15.3

524053

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

120.1

432.7

583.4

0.9

28.8

26.5

73330

10.8

4.8

75051

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

42.7

191.3

497.0

1.2

25.0

20.5

123721

2.0

1.9

124339

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

21.3

95.6

248.5

0.6

12.5

10.2

61861

1.0

0.9

62170

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

110.4

733.6

786.5

2.0

31.7

25.4

208744

4.9

4.6

210275

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

132.5

1186.1

113.1

2.4

20.8

13.7

243934

11.7

18.2

249815

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.098

7.183

7.203

0.016

0.351

0.323

1458.2

0.099

0.044

1473.9

807.1

5279.5

5294.0

12.1

257.7

237.1

1071752

72.8

32.4

1083314

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

323.8

1571.3

1778.9

2.6

141.1

129.8

218553

29.2

13.0

223192

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

427.3

2316.5

3105.6

6.0

146.3

134.6

531562

38.6

17.1

537683

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

403.5

2639.8

2647.0

6.0

128.9

118.6

535876

36.4

16.2

541657

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

619.2

2078.3

4903.3

7.9

193.3

177.9

706213

55.9

24.8

715084

Air Compressor

0.463

2.080

2.134

0.003

0.168

0.155

262.8

0.042

0.019

269.4

340.2

1529.0

1568.8

2.4

123.5

113.6

193146

30.7

13.6

198020

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

210.4

1517.8

1418.2

2.7

95.5

87.9

228121

19.0

8.4

231135

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

442.6

2620.5

2862.4

4.7

194.4

178.8

409104

39.9

17.8

415445

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

343.0

1915.3

2294.9

3.5

168.0

154.5

299556

30.9

13.8

304469

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

381.3

1193.2

3114.3

5.7

107.6

99.0

518591

34.4

15.3

524053

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

120.1

432.7

583.4

0.9

28.8

26.5

73330

10.8

4.8

75051

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

42.7

191.3

497.0

1.2

25.0

20.5

123721

2.0

1.9

124339

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

21.3

95.6

248.5

0.6

12.5

10.2

61861

1.0

0.9

62170

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

110.4

733.6

786.5

2.0

31.7

25.4

208744

4.9

4.6

210275

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.240

2.152

0.205

0.004

0.038

0.025

442.5

0.021

0.033

453.2

176.7

1581.4

150.8

3.2

27.8

18.2

325245

15.6

24.2

333087

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

0.499

3.310

3.856

0.010

0.163

0.150

925.4

0.045

0.020

932.6

366.8

2432.7

2834.0

7.1

119.6

110.1

680205

33.1

14.7

685460

Impact Pile Driver

0.499

3.310

3.856

0.010

0.163

0.150

925.4

0.045

0.020

932.6

366.8

2432.7

2834.0

7.1

119.6

110.1

680205

33.1

14.7

685460

Drilling Jumbo

0.181

2.052

1.704

0.004

0.041

0.038

301.0

0.016

0.007

303.6

133.3

1508.6

1252.8

2.8

30.3

27.8

221208

12.0

5.3

223117

Roadheader

0.605

3.005

3.274

0.005

0.265

0.244

404.2

0.055

0.024

412.9

444.8

2208.4

2406.7

3.5

195.1

179.5

297082

40.1

17.8

303455

Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit

0.571

3.230

3.568

0.006

0.276

0.254

471.3

0.052

0.023

479.5

419.9

2374.4

2622.2

4.1

203.2

187.0

346411

37.9

16.8

352427

Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)

0.964

3.311

7.444

0.015

0.260

0.239

1473.5

0.087

0.039

1487.3

708.7

2433.5

5471.7

11.4

191.0

175.7

1083033

63.9

28.4

1093187

Spader

1.288

6.641

9.772

0.013

0.521

0.480

1193.3

0.116

0.052

1211.8

946.5

4881.3

7182.1

9.9

383.2

352.6

877089

85.4

38.0

890649

Pump (dewatering)

0.571

2.901

3.227

0.005

0.221

0.204

424.2

0.052

0.023

432.4

420.0

2132.1

2371.8

3.8

162.8

149.8

311798

37.9

16.8

317815

Shotcrete Pump

0.713

5.319

6.170

0.011

0.319

0.293

985.3

0.064

0.029

995.5

523.9

3909.7

4534.9

8.2

234.2

215.4

724221

47.3

21.0

731727

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

0.145

0.651

1.690

0.004

0.085

0.070

420.8

0.007

0.006

422.9

106.7

478.1

1242.4

3.0

62.4

51.2

309303

4.9

4.7

310848

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 8 - Tunnel Alternative

Pavment Breaker

K-22

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

302.7

1979.8

1985.3

4.5

96.6

88.9

401907

27.3

12.1

80.9

392.8

444.7

0.7

35.3

32.4

54638

7.3

3.2

55798

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

106.8

579.1

776.4

1.5

36.6

33.7

132891

9.6

4.3

134421

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

100.9

659.9

661.8

1.5

32.2

29.6

133969

9.1

4.0

135414

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

154.8

519.6

1225.8

2.0

48.3

44.5

176553

14.0

6.2

178771

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

406243

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor
Backhoe (0.8 CY)

52.6

379.5

354.6

0.7

23.9

22.0

57030

4.7

2.1

57784

110.7

655.1

715.6

1.2

48.6

44.7

102276

10.0

4.4

103861

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

85.7

478.8

573.7

0.9

42.0

38.6

74889

7.7

3.4

76117

Hydraulic Crane

95.3

298.3

778.6

1.4

26.9

24.8

129648

8.6

3.8

131013

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

30.0

108.2

145.9

0.2

7.2

6.6

18333

2.7

1.2

18763

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

10.7

47.8

124.2

0.3

6.2

5.1

30930

0.5

0.5

31085

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.3

23.9

62.1

0.1

3.1

2.6

15465

0.2

0.2

15542

Flatbed Trucks

27.6

183.4

196.6

0.5

7.9

6.4

52186

1.2

1.2

52569

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

33.1

296.5

28.3

0.6

5.2

3.4

60983

2.9

4.5

62454

201.8

1319.9

1323.5

3.0

64.4

59.3

267938

18.2

8.1

270829

80.9

392.8

444.7

0.7

35.3

32.4

54638

7.3

3.2

55798

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

106.8

579.1

776.4

1.5

36.6

33.7

132891

9.6

4.3

134421

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

100.9

659.9

661.8

1.5

32.2

29.6

133969

9.1

4.0

135414

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

154.8

519.6

1225.8

2.0

48.3

44.5

176553

14.0

6.2

178771

Air Compressor

85.0

382.2

392.2

0.6

30.9

28.4

48287

7.7

3.4

49505

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

52.6

379.5

354.6

0.7

23.9

22.0

57030

4.7

2.1

57784

110.7

655.1

715.6

1.2

48.6

44.7

102276

10.0

4.4

103861

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

85.7

478.8

573.7

0.9

42.0

38.6

74889

7.7

3.4

76117

Hydraulic Crane

95.3

298.3

778.6

1.4

26.9

24.8

129648

8.6

3.8

131013

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

30.0

108.2

145.9

0.2

7.2

6.6

18333

2.7

1.2

18763

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

10.7

47.8

124.2

0.3

6.2

5.1

30930

0.5

0.5

31085

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.3

23.9

62.1

0.1

3.1

2.6

15465

0.2

0.2

15542

Flatbed Trucks

27.6

183.4

196.6

0.5

7.9

6.4

52186

1.2

1.2

52569

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

44.2

395.4

37.7

0.8

6.9

4.6

81311

3.9

6.1

83272

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

91.7

608.2

708.5

1.8

29.9

27.5

170051

8.3

3.7

171365

Impact Pile Driver

91.7

608.2

708.5

1.8

29.9

27.5

170051

8.3

3.7

171365

Drilling Jumbo

33.3

377.1

313.2

0.7

7.6

7.0

55302

3.0

1.3

55779

Roadheader

111.2

552.1

601.7

0.9

48.8

44.9

74271

10.0

4.5

75864

Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit

105.0

593.6

655.5

1.0

50.8

46.7

86603

9.5

4.2

88107

Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)

177.2

608.4

1367.9

2.8

47.8

43.9

270758

16.0

7.1

273297

Spader

236.6

1220.3

1795.5

2.5

95.8

88.1

219272

21.4

9.5

222662

Pump (dewatering)

105.0

533.0

593.0

0.9

40.7

37.4

77949

9.5

4.2

79454

Shotcrete Pump

131.0

977.4

1133.7

2.1

58.5

53.9

181055

11.8

5.3

182932

26.7

119.5

310.6

0.7

15.6

12.8

77326

1.2

1.2

77712

Grader

Reach 8 - Tunnel Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)
Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

Pavment Breaker

Grader

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

K-23

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 14
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

2

190

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

12

4140

2070

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

80

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

6

2070

1035

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

20

40

13800

6900

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

20

20

6900

3450

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

50

100

34500

17250

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

4

2

15.9

4.33

5

345

50

200

69000

34500

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

offroad

3

190

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

18

13140

3285

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

offroad

1

100

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.07342

0.35631

0.40339

0.00059

0.03199

0.02943

49.56

0.00662

0.00294

50.61

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

offroad

1

200

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.09689

0.52527

0.70422

0.00136

0.03318

0.03052

120.54

0.00874

0.00389

121.92

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

offroad

1

190

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.09151

0.59859

0.60023

0.00137

0.02922

0.02688

121.51

0.00826

0.00367

122.82

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

offroad

1

240

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.14041

0.47127

1.11186

0.00180

0.04384

0.04033

160.14

0.01267

0.00563

162.15

Pavment Breaker

offroad

90

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.05841

0.39630

0.38013

0.00070

0.02417

0.02224

58.20

0.00527

0.00234

59.04

Air Compressor

offroad

1

80

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.05786

0.26003

0.26680

0.00040

0.02101

0.01933

32.85

0.00522

0.00232

33.68

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

offroad

1

120

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.04771

0.34418

0.32159

0.00061

0.02166

0.01992

51.73

0.00430

0.00191

52.41

Grader

offroad

1

140

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.10037

0.59422

0.64906

0.00107

0.04407

0.04055

92.77

0.00906

0.00403

94.21

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

offroad

1

130

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.07777

0.43431

0.52038

0.00079

0.03809

0.03504

67.93

0.00702

0.00312

69.04

Hydraulic Crane

offroad

1

270

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.08646

0.27056

0.70619

0.00130

0.02441

0.02245

117.59

0.00780

0.00347

118.83

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

offroad

1

30

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

0.02723

0.09811

0.13230

0.00021

0.00654

0.00601

16.63

0.00246

0.00109

17.02

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

onroad HD

2

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

20

40

29200

7300

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

onroad HD

1

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

20

20

14600

3650

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

Flatbed Trucks

onroad MD

2

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

50

100

73000

18250

0.00150

0.00998

0.01070

0.00003

0.00043

0.00035

2.84

0.00007

0.00006

2.86

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

onroad LD

6

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

50

300

219000

54750

0.00060

0.00538

0.00051

0.00001

0.00009

0.00006

1.11

0.00005

0.00008

1.13

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

offroad

1

280

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.08318

0.55163

0.64262

0.00162

0.02713

0.02496

154.24

0.00751

0.00334

155.43

Impact Pile Driver

offroad

1

280

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.08318

0.55163

0.64262

0.00162

0.02713

0.02496

154.24

0.00751

0.00334

155.43

Drilling Jumbo

offroad

60

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.02266

0.25656

0.21306

0.00047

0.00514

0.00473

37.62

0.00204

0.00091

37.95

Roadheader

offroad

100

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.07565

0.37558

0.40931

0.00060

0.03318

0.03053

50.52

0.00683

0.00303

51.61

Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit

offroad

120

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.07141

0.40381

0.44595

0.00069

0.03456

0.03180

58.91

0.00644

0.00286

59.94

Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)

offroad

350

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.12053

0.41386

0.93056

0.00194

0.03248

0.02989

184.19

0.01088

0.00483

185.92
151.47

6

2070

1035

122.82

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative

6

4380

1095

Spader

offroad

180

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.16097

0.83015

1.22145

0.00168

0.06517

0.05996

149.16

0.01452

0.00646

Pump (dewatering)

offroad

1

80

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.07143

0.36260

0.40337

0.00065

0.02768

0.02547

53.03

0.00644

0.00286

54.05

Shotcrete Pump

offroad

1

160

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

6

6

4380

1095

0.08910

0.66491

0.77125

0.00140

0.03983

0.03664

123.17

0.00804

0.00357

124.44

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

onroad HD

2

4

33.7

4.33

5

730

0.00145

0.00651

0.01690

0.00004

0.00085

0.00070

4.21

0.00007

0.00006

4.23

50

100

73000

18250

K-24

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 14
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.098

7.183

7.203

0.016

0.351

0.323

1458.2

0.099

0.044

1473.9

378.8

2478.2

2485.0

5.7

121.0

111.3

503067

34.2

15.2

508495

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

152.0

737.6

835.0

1.2

66.2

60.9

102586

13.7

6.1

104763

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

200.6

1087.3

1457.7

2.8

68.7

63.2

249509

18.1

8.0

252382

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

189.4

1239.1

1242.5

2.8

60.5

55.6

251534

17.1

7.6

254247

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

290.6

975.5

2301.5

3.7

90.7

83.5

331488

26.2

11.7

335652

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

98.8

712.4

665.7

1.3

44.8

41.2

107077

8.9

4.0

108492

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

207.8

1230.0

1343.6

2.2

91.2

83.9

192028

18.7

8.3

195005

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

161.0

899.0

1077.2

1.6

78.8

72.5

140608

14.5

6.5

142914

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

179.0

560.1

1461.8

2.7

50.5

46.5

243420

16.1

7.2

245984

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

56.4

203.1

273.9

0.4

13.5

12.4

34420

5.1

2.3

35228

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

20.0

89.8

233.3

0.6

11.7

9.6

58073

0.9

0.9

58363

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

10.0

44.9

116.6

0.3

5.9

4.8

29037

0.5

0.4

29182

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

51.8

344.3

369.2

0.9

14.9

11.9

97982

2.3

2.2

98701

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.120

1.076

0.103

0.002

0.019

0.012

221.3

0.011

0.016

226.6

41.5

371.1

35.4

0.7

6.5

4.3

76333

3.7

5.7

78173

Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)

1.647

10.775

10.804

0.025

0.526

0.484

2187.2

0.149

0.066

2210.8

1202.4

7865.4

7887.0

18.0

383.9

353.2

1596691

108.5

48.2

1613917

Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

0.440

2.138

2.420

0.004

0.192

0.177

297.4

0.040

0.018

303.7

321.6

1560.6

1766.8

2.6

140.1

128.9

217067

29.0

12.9

221673

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

0.581

3.152

4.225

0.008

0.199

0.183

723.2

0.052

0.023

731.5

424.4

2300.7

3084.5

5.9

145.3

133.7

527946

38.3

17.0

534026

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

0.549

3.592

3.601

0.008

0.175

0.161

729.1

0.050

0.022

736.9

400.8

2621.8

2629.0

6.0

128.0

117.7

532230

36.2

16.1

537972

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

0.842

2.828

6.671

0.011

0.263

0.242

960.8

0.076

0.034

972.9

615.0

2064.2

4869.9

7.9

192.0

176.7

701409

55.5

24.7

710219

Air Compressor

0.347

1.560

1.601

0.002

0.126

0.116

197.1

0.031

0.014

202.1

253.4

1138.9

1168.6

1.8

92.0

84.7

143874

22.9

10.2

147505

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

0.286

2.065

1.930

0.004

0.130

0.120

310.4

0.026

0.011

314.5

209.0

1507.5

1408.6

2.7

94.9

87.3

226569

18.9

8.4

229563

Grader

0.602

3.565

3.894

0.006

0.264

0.243

556.6

0.054

0.024

565.2

439.6

2602.7

2842.9

4.7

193.0

177.6

406321

39.7

17.6

412619

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

0.467

2.606

3.122

0.005

0.229

0.210

407.6

0.042

0.019

414.2

340.6

1902.3

2279.3

3.4

166.8

153.5

297518

30.7

13.7

302398

Hydraulic Crane

0.519

1.623

4.237

0.008

0.146

0.135

705.6

0.047

0.021

713.0

378.7

1185.1

3093.1

5.7

106.9

98.3

515063

34.2

15.2

520488

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

0.163

0.589

0.794

0.001

0.039

0.036

99.8

0.015

0.007

102.1

119.3

429.7

579.5

0.9

28.6

26.3

72832

10.8

4.8

74540

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

0.058

0.260

0.676

0.002

0.034

0.028

168.3

0.003

0.003

169.2

42.4

190.0

493.6

1.2

24.8

20.4

122879

2.0

1.8

123493

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

0.029

0.130

0.338

0.001

0.017

0.014

84.2

0.001

0.001

84.6

21.2

95.0

246.8

0.6

12.4

10.2

61440

1.0

0.9

61747

Flatbed Trucks

0.150

0.998

1.070

0.003

0.043

0.035

284.0

0.007

0.006

286.1

109.7

728.6

781.1

2.0

31.5

25.3

207324

4.9

4.6

208845

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

0.180

1.614

0.154

0.003

0.028

0.019

331.9

0.016

0.025

339.9

131.6

1178.0

112.3

2.4

20.7

13.6

242274

11.6

18.1

248116

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

0.499

3.310

3.856

0.010

0.163

0.150

925.4

0.045

0.020

932.6

364.3

2416.1

2814.7

7.1

118.8

109.3

675578

32.9

14.6

680797

Impact Pile Driver

0.499

3.310

3.856

0.010

0.163

0.150

925.4

0.045

0.020

932.6

364.3

2416.1

2814.7

7.1

118.8

109.3

675578

32.9

14.6

680797

Pump (dewatering)

0.429

2.176

2.420

0.004

0.166

0.153

318.2

0.039

0.017

324.3

312.8

1588.2

1766.8

2.8

121.3

111.6

232257

28.2

12.5

236739

Shotcrete Pump

0.535

3.989

4.627

0.008

0.239

0.220

739.0

0.048

0.021

746.7

390.3

2912.3

3378.1

6.1

174.4

160.5

539471

35.2

15.6

545062

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

0.145

0.651

1.690

0.004

0.085

0.070

420.8

0.007

0.006

422.9

106.0

474.9

1234.0

2.9

62.0

50.9

307199

4.9

4.6

308734

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative

Pavment Breaker

Drilling Jumbo
Roadheader
Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit
Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)
Spader

K-25

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 14
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)
Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)
Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)
Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)
Tractor Crawler / Dozer

189.4

1239.1

1242.5

2.8

60.5

55.6

251534

17.1

7.6

76.0

368.8

417.5

0.6

33.1

30.5

51293

6.9

3.0

254247
52382

100.3

543.7

728.9

1.4

34.3

31.6

124754

9.0

4.0

126191

94.7

619.5

621.2

1.4

30.2

27.8

125767

8.5

3.8

127124

145.3

487.8

1150.8

1.9

45.4

41.7

165744

13.1

5.8

167826

Pavment Breaker
Air Compressor
Backhoe (0.8 CY)

49.4

356.2

332.8

0.6

22.4

20.6

53538

4.5

2.0

54246

103.9

615.0

671.8

1.1

45.6

42.0

96014

9.4

4.2

97502

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

80.5

449.5

538.6

0.8

39.4

36.3

70304

7.3

3.2

71457

Hydraulic Crane

89.5

280.0

730.9

1.3

25.3

23.2

121710

8.1

3.6

122992

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

28.2

101.5

136.9

0.2

6.8

6.2

17210

2.5

1.1

17614

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

10.0

44.9

116.6

0.3

5.9

4.8

29037

0.5

0.4

29182

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.0

22.4

58.3

0.1

2.9

2.4

14518

0.2

0.2

14591

Flatbed Trucks

25.9

172.2

184.6

0.5

7.4

6.0

48991

1.1

1.1

49350

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

20.7

185.6

17.7

0.4

3.3

2.1

38166

1.8

2.8

39087

300.6

1966.4

1971.8

4.5

96.0

88.3

399173

27.1

12.1

403479

80.4

390.2

441.7

0.6

35.0

32.2

54267

7.3

3.2

55418

Front End Loader (2.6 – 3.8 CY Bucket)

106.1

575.2

771.1

1.5

36.3

33.4

131987

9.6

4.3

133506

Hydraulic Excavator (0.5 – 2 CY)

100.2

655.5

657.3

1.5

32.0

29.4

133058

9.0

4.0

134493

Tractor Crawler / Dozer

153.7

516.0

1217.5

2.0

48.0

44.2

175352

13.9

6.2

177555

Air Compressor

63.4

284.7

292.2

0.4

23.0

21.2

35969

5.7

2.5

36876

Backhoe (0.8 CY)

52.2

376.9

352.1

0.7

23.7

21.8

56642

4.7

2.1

57391

109.9

650.7

710.7

1.2

48.3

44.4

101580

9.9

4.4

103155

Asphalt Compactor Roller (6 tons)

85.2

475.6

569.8

0.9

41.7

38.4

74379

7.7

3.4

75600

Hydraulic Crane

94.7

296.3

773.3

1.4

26.7

24.6

128766

8.5

3.8

130122

Hydroseeder (3,000 gal)

29.8

107.4

144.9

0.2

7.2

6.6

18208

2.7

1.2

18635

Dump Trucks (12-20 CY)

10.6

47.5

123.4

0.3

6.2

5.1

30720

0.5

0.5

30873

Water Tanker (5,000 gal)

5.3

23.7

61.7

0.1

3.1

2.5

15360

0.2

0.2

15437

Flatbed Trucks

27.4

182.2

195.3

0.5

7.9

6.3

51831

1.2

1.1

52211

Pickup Trucks (worker transportation)

32.9

294.5

28.1

0.6

5.2

3.4

60569

2.9

4.5

62029

Vibratory / Sheet Pile Driver

91.1

604.0

703.7

1.8

29.7

27.3

168895

8.2

3.7

170199

Impact Pile Driver

91.1

604.0

703.7

1.8

29.7

27.3

168895

8.2

3.7

170199

Pump (dewatering)

78.2

397.1

441.7

0.7

30.3

27.9

58064

7.1

3.1

59185

Shotcrete Pump

97.6

728.1

844.5

1.5

43.6

40.1

134868

8.8

3.9

136265

Shotcrete / Concrete Trucks

26.5

118.7

308.5

0.7

15.5

12.7

76800

1.2

1.2

77183

Grader

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative
Hydraulic Excavator, Crawler (2 CY Bucket)
Vibratory / Static Roller (Single Drum)

Pavment Breaker

Grader

Drilling Jumbo
Roadheader
Load/Haul/Dump (Mucking) Unit
Wheeled Loader (4.88 CY)
Spader

K-26

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 4
Bulldozer (tracked)

6

2982

6

2982

6

2982

6

2982

Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
18

8946

Front End Loader

6

2982

Concrete Grinder

6

2982

6

1338

6

1338

6

1338

6

1338

24

5352

6

1338

6

6018

6

6018

6

6018

6

6018

24

24072

6

6018

Hydraulic Excavator

Screener (coarse)
Reach 5
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 6
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-27

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 4
Bulldozer (tracked)

TOTALS

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

Bulldozer (wheeled)

basic

11.5

62.7

77.4

0.2

4.0

3.7

13654

1.0

0.5

13826

Scraper (dumper)

tunnel

13.7

74.7

93.2

0.2

4.9

4.5

16288

1.2

0.6

16493

Dump Truck/ADT

bypass

10.7

59.3

73.1

0.1

3.8

3.5

12995

0.9

0.5

13156

Clamshell Derrick

tun + by

12.9

71.3

88.9

0.2

4.7

4.3

15629

1.1

0.5

15823

Dragline (small)
Motor Grader

For basic project (no options)

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

Maxima

Compactor/Roller

Year 1

13.1

Crane (tracked)

Year 2

38.4

Backhoe/Skip Loader

Year 3

38.0

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

Year 4

Drill Auger/Borer

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

71.7

88.1

0.2

4.7

4.3

15399

209.7

260.0

0.5

13.6

12.4

45611

207.2

256.5

0.5

13.4

12.3

45103

18.9

103.7

128.2

0.3

6.7

6.1

Year 5

18.9

103.7

128.2

0.3

6.7

Hydraulic Excavator

Year 6

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

Front End Loader

PEAK

38.4

209.7

260.0

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

1.2

0.6

15595

3.4

1.6

46184

3.4

1.6

45674

22698

1.7

0.8

22984

6.1

22698

1.7

0.8

22984

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

0.5

13.6

12.4

45611

3.4

1.6

46184

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

For tunnel option project

Reach 5

Maxima

Bulldozer (tracked)

Year 1

lbs/day

lbs/day

13.1

71.7

88.1

0.2

4.7

4.3

15399

1.2

0.6

15595

Bulldozer (wheeled)

Year 2

44.4

242.4

303.2

0.6

15.9

14.5

52780

3.9

1.9

53441

Scraper (dumper)

Year 3

44.0

239.9

299.7

0.6

15.8

14.4

52272

3.9

1.9

52930

Dump Truck/ADT

Year 4

24.9

136.4

171.3

0.3

9.0

8.2

29867

2.2

1.1

30241

Clamshell Derrick

Year 5

24.9

136.4

171.3

0.3

9.0

8.2

29867

2.2

1.1

30241

Dragline (small)

Year 6

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Motor Grader

PEAK

44.4

242.4

303.2

0.6

15.9

14.5

52780

3.9

1.9

53441

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller

For bypass option project

Crane (tracked)

Maxima

Backhoe/Skip Loader

Year 1

13.1

71.7

88.1

0.2

4.7

4.3

15399

1.2

0.6

15595

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

Year 2

34.3

188.7

234.2

0.5

12.2

11.2

41291

3.0

1.4

41800

Drill Auger/Borer

Year 3

33.9

186.2

230.7

0.5

12.1

11.0

40783

3.0

1.4

41290

Hydraulic Excavator

Year 4

14.9

82.7

102.3

0.2

5.3

4.9

18378

1.3

0.6

18600

Front End Loader

Year 5

14.9

82.7

102.3

0.2

5.3

4.9

18378

1.3

0.6

18600

Concrete Grinder

Year 6

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Screener (coarse)

PEAK

34.3

188.7

234.2

0.5

12.2

11.2

41291

3.0

1.4

41800

lbs/day

lbs/day

Reach 6
Bulldozer (tracked)

For tunnel + bypass option project

Bulldozer (wheeled)

Maxima

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Scraper (dumper)

Year 1

13.1

71.7

88.1

0.2

4.7

4.3

15399

1.2

0.6

15595

Dump Truck/ADT

Year 2

40.3

221.5

277.3

0.5

14.6

13.3

48460

3.6

1.7

49057

Clamshell Derrick

Year 3

39.9

219.0

273.8

0.5

14.4

13.2

47952

3.5

1.7

48547

Dragline (small)

Year 4

20.9

115.5

145.4

0.3

7.6

7.0

25547

1.8

0.9

25857

Motor Grader

Year 5

20.9

115.5

145.4

0.3

7.6

7.0

25547

1.8

0.9

25857

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

Year 6

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Compactor/Roller

PEAK

40.3

221.5

277.3

0.5

14.6

13.3

48460

3.6

1.7

49057

Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader

Option

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

5

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

6

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Drill Auger/Borer

6 bypass

9.0

50.9

62.0

0.1

3.2

2.9

11372

0.8

0.4

11506

Hydraulic Excavator

delta 6

-4.1

-20.9

-25.9

0.0

-1.3

-1.2

-4320

-0.4

-0.2

-4384

Front End Loader

8 NRCS

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Concrete Grinder

8 culvert

6.5

35.9

43.9

0.1

2.3

2.1

7846

0.6

0.3

7945

Screener (coarse)

8 tunnel

12.5

68.7

87.1

0.2

4.6

4.2

15015

1.1

0.5

15202

6.0

32.8

43.1

0.1

2.3

2.1

7169

0.5

0.2

7257

delta 8

K-28

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 4
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader

For basic project (no options)

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

Averages

Compactor/Roller

Year 1

1.0

Crane (tracked)

Year 2

3.1

Backhoe/Skip Loader

Year 3

3.2

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

Year 4

Drill Auger/Borer

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

5.6

6.8

0.0

0.4

0.3

1194

0.1

0.0

1210

17.1

21.2

0.0

1.1

1.0

3725

0.3

0.1

3772

17.2

21.4

0.0

1.1

1.0

3754

0.3

0.1

3802

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.0

0.6

0.6

2087

0.2

0.1

2113

Year 5

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.0

0.6

0.6

2087

0.2

0.1

2113

Hydraulic Excavator

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.0

0.2

0.2

787

0.1

0.0

797

Front End Loader

HIGH

3.2

17.2

21.4

0.0

1.1

1.0

3754

0.3

0.1

3802

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

For tunnel option project

Reach 5

Averages

Bulldozer (tracked)

Year 1

tons/yr

tons/yr

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.0

0.4

0.3

1194

0.1

0.0

1210

Bulldozer (wheeled)

Year 2

3.7

20.1

25.2

0.0

1.3

1.2

4384

0.3

0.2

4439

Scraper (dumper)

Year 3

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.0

1.3

1.2

4413

0.3

0.2

4469

Dump Truck/ADT

Year 4

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.0

0.8

0.8

2746

0.2

0.1

2780

Clamshell Derrick

Year 5

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.0

0.8

0.8

2746

0.2

0.1

2780

Dragline (small)

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.0

0.2

0.2

787

0.1

0.0

797

Motor Grader

HIGH

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.0

1.3

1.2

4413

0.3

0.2

4469

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller

For bypass option project

Crane (tracked)

Averages

Backhoe/Skip Loader

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.0

0.4

0.3

1194

0.1

0.0

1210

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

Year 2

2.9

16.2

20.0

0.0

1.0

1.0

3539

0.3

0.1

3582

Drill Auger/Borer

Year 3

3.0

16.3

20.2

0.0

1.1

1.0

3568

0.3

0.1

3612

Hydraulic Excavator

Year 4

1.5

8.6

10.6

0.0

0.6

0.5

1900

0.1

0.1

1923

Front End Loader

Year 5

1.5

8.6

10.6

0.0

0.6

0.5

1900

0.1

0.1

1923

Concrete Grinder

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.0

0.2

0.2

787

0.1

0.0

797

Screener (coarse)

HIGH

3.0

16.3

20.2

0.0

1.1

1.0

3568

0.3

0.1

3612

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Reach 6
Bulldozer (tracked)

For tunnel + bypass option project

Bulldozer (wheeled)

Averages

Scraper (dumper)

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.0

0.4

0.3

1194

0.1

0.0

1210

Dump Truck/ADT

Year 2

3.5

19.2

24.0

0.0

1.3

1.2

4197

0.3

0.1

4249

Clamshell Derrick

Year 3

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.0

1.3

1.2

4226

0.3

0.1

4279

Dragline (small)

Year 4

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.0

0.8

0.7

2559

0.2

0.1

2590

Motor Grader

Year 5

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.0

0.8

0.7

2559

0.2

0.1

2590

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.0

0.2

0.2

787

0.1

0.0

797

Compactor/Roller

HIGH

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.0

1.3

1.2

4226

0.3

0.1

4279

tons/yr

tons/yr

Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader

Option

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

5

0.36

2.00

2.45

0.00

0.13

0.12

437

0.03

0.02

443

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

6

0.65

3.60

4.41

0.01

0.23

0.21

787

0.06

0.03

797

Drill Auger/Borer

6 bypass

0.82

4.65

5.66

0.01

0.29

0.27

1038

0.07

0.03

1050

Hydraulic Excavator

delta 6

-0.20

-0.96

-1.20

0.00

-0.06

-0.06

-187

-0.02

-0.01

-190

Front End Loader

8 NRCS

0.60

3.30

4.04

0.01

0.21

0.19

721

0.05

0.03

730

Concrete Grinder

8 culvert

0.60

3.30

4.04

0.01

0.21

0.19

721

0.05

0.03

730

Screener (coarse)

8 tunnel

1.15

6.31

8.00

0.02

0.42

0.39

1379

0.10

0.05

1397

delta 8

0.55

3.01

3.96

0.01

0.21

0.19

659

0.05

0.02

667

K-29

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 7a
Bulldozer (tracked)

6

1740

6

1740

6

1740

6

1740

24

6960

6

1740

6

2976

6

2976

6

2976

6

2976

18

8928

6

2976

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

24

17640

6

4410

Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 7b
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-30

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

1

2

3

4

5

6

X

Reach 7a
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick

Reach

Dragline (small)

4

Motor Grader

5

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

6

Compactor/Roller

7a

Crane (tracked)

Project Year
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

Backhoe/Skip Loader

8 NRCS

X

X

X

X

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

8 culvert

X

X

X

X

Drill Auger/Borer

8 tunnel

X

X

X

X

14

X

X

6 bypass

X

X

X

X

Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader

7b

Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 7b
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-31

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 7a
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 7b
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - NRCS Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-32

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

24

17640

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

6

4410

18

13230

6

4410

6

2070

6

2070

6

2070

6

2070

18

6210

6

2070

Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 14
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-33

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 14
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-34

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 14
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)

K-35

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)

6

4380

6

4380

6

4380

6

4380

24

17520

6

4380

522

303150

Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

40
20

19880
9940

Work Truck (all trades)

100

49700

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

200

99400

40
20

8920
4460

Work Truck (all trades)

100

22300

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

66900

40
20

40120
20060

Work Truck (all trades)

100

100300

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

300900

Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-36

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-37

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 6 - Bypass Alternative
Bulldozer (tracked)
Bulldozer (wheeled)
Scraper (dumper)
Dump Truck/ADT
Clamshell Derrick
Dragline (small)
Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift
Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)
Backhoe/Skip Loader
Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader
Drill Auger/Borer
Hydraulic Excavator
Front End Loader
Concrete Grinder
Screener (coarse)
Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-38

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

VMT

Project Total Annual Averag
hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 7a
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

40
20

11600
5800

Work Truck (all trades)

100

29000

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

87000

40
20

19840
9920

Work Truck (all trades)

100

49600

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

200

99200

40
20

29400
14700

Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7b
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - NRCS
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)

100

73500

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

220500

40
20

29400
14700

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)

100

73500

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

220500

100
40

73500
29400

20

14700

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)

100

73500

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

400

294000

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-39

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 7a
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7b
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - NRCS
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-40

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 7a
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7b
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - NRCS
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-41

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

Planned Schedule

Offroad
Category

Qty.

BHP

years

months

wks/mo

days/wk

Duration

Offroad

Onroad

days

hrs/day

mi/day

Daily Max
hours

Project Total Annual Averag

VMT

hours

VMT

hours

VMT

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

lb/unit

Reach 14
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

40
20

13800
6900

Work Truck (all trades)

100

34500

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

200

69000

Water Truck (dust control)

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6 - Bypass
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

100

73000

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

40

29200

Water Truck (dust control)

20

14600

Work Truck (all trades)

100

73000

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

300

219000

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

4600

3E+06

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-42

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

lbs tot

Reach 14
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6 - Bypass
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-43

3.11-h Llagas Schedule

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Llagas Creek Equipment and Vehicle Schedule for Proposed Project (from PD Tables 2.5-3 2.5-5)

Offroad Equipments and Onroad Vehicles
Name or Type

ROG

CO

NOX

SOX

PM10

PM2.5

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2 e

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

lbs/yr

Reach 14
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6 - Bypass
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)
Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)
Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)
Water Truck (dust control)
Work Truck (all trades)
Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)
Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)
Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

K-44

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Activity
Earthmoving

Required Variables

Pk. Daily

Project

EET

Moist (M)

Silt (s)

hours

hours

code

percent

percent

Uncontrolled

Drop (d) Speed (S) Wind (U)
feet

mph

mph

Controlled Emissions

Den (D)

Rate (V)

PM10

PM2.5

Control

PM10

PM2.5

PM10

PM2.5

ton/cy

cy/hr

lb/hr

lb/hr

%

lb/day

lb/day

lbs

lbs

Reach 4
Bulldozer (tracked)

2,982

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

225.1

121.3

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,982

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

887.4

68.7

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

2,982

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,982

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

1.4

0.2
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

110.9

6.1

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

18

8,946

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

Front End Loader

6

2,982

D

14

6.7

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3

Concrete Grinder

6

2,982

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

0.2

0.0

117.9

19.6

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

12.7

2.0

Reach 5
1,338

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

101.0

54.4

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

-

6

1,338

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

398.2

30.8

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

1,338

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

1,338

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.1
-

Bulldozer (tracked)

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

49.8

2.7

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

5,352

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

7.6

1.2

6

1,338

6.7

Front End Loader

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.1

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

K-45

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 6
Bulldozer (tracked)

6,018

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

454.3

244.8

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

6

6,018

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

6,018

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

6,018

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

2.9

0.4
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

1,791.0

138.7

-

-

223.9

12.3

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

24,072

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

0.0

0.0

5.7

0.9

6

6,018

6.7

Front End Loader

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

4.3

0.7

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

Reach 7a
Bulldozer (tracked)

1,740

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

131.4

70.8

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

-

6

1,740

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

517.8

40.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

1,740

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

1,740

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.1
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

64.7

3.5

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

6,960

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

9.9

1.5

6

1,740

6.7

Front End Loader

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

1.2

0.2

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

K-46

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 7b
Bulldozer (tracked)

2,976

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

224.7

121.1

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,976

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

885.7

68.6

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

2,976

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,976

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

1.4

0.2
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

110.7

6.1

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

18

8,928

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

12.7

2.0

6

2,976

6.7

Front End Loader

-

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

Reach 8 - NRCS
Bulldozer (tracked)

4,410

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

332.9

179.4

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

4,410

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

1,312.4
164.1

101.6
9.0

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

17,640

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

25.1

3.9

6

4,410

6.7

Front End Loader

-

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

3.1

0.5

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

K-47

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel
Bulldozer (tracked)

4,410

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

332.9

179.4

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

4,410

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

1,312.4
164.1

101.6
9.0

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

17,640

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

25.1

3.9

6

4,410

6.7

Front End Loader

-

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

3.1

0.5

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

Reach 8 - Tunnel
Bulldozer (tracked)

4,410

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

332.9

179.4

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

4,410

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

4,410

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

1,312.4
164.1

101.6
9.0

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

18

13,230

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

18.9

2.9

6

4,410

6.7

Front End Loader

-

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

3.1

0.5

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

K-48

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 14
Bulldozer (tracked)

2,070

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

156.3

84.2

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,070

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

616.0

47.7

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

2,070

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

2,070

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.2
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

77.0

4.2

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

18

6,210

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

8.8

1.4

6

2,070

6.7

Front End Loader

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

1.5

0.2

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

Reach 6 - Bypass
Bulldozer (tracked)

4,380

A

14

9

0.50332

0.27119

85%

0.5

0.2

330.7

178.2

Bulldozer (wheeled)

-

6

-

A

14

9

0.37749

0.20339

85%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

-

-

B+C

14

3

30

3.92192

0.33705

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

-

-

B

14

6

30

0.07623

0.00351

85%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

-

-

B

14

9

30

0.10124

0.00549

85%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

-

-

B

14

12

60

0.24766

0.01506

85%

-

-

-

6

4,380

C

14

4

1.98400

0.15360

85%

1.8

0.1

-

C

14

3

0.83700

0.05612

85%

-

-

6

4,380

C

14

2

0.24800

0.01358

85%

0.2

0.0

-

C

14

1

0.03100

0.00120

85%

-

-

-

-

6

4,380

D

14

6.7

1.5

20

0.00317

0.00049

85%

0.0

0.0

2.1

0.3
-

Motor Grader
Tractor/Offroad Forklift

-

Compactor/Roller
Crane (tracked)

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

5

1,303.5
162.9

100.9
8.9

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

-

-

D

14

6.7

1.5

10

0.00158

0.00024

85%

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

24

17,520

D

14

6.7

1.5

60

0.00950

0.00147

85%

0.0

0.0

25.0

3.9

6

4,380

6.7

Front End Loader

-

D

14

1.5

30

0.00475

0.00073

85%

0.0

0.0

3.1

0.5

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

tons

tons

CHECKSUMS

522

303150

303672

Onsite Equipment

lbs/day

lbs/day

Reach 4

2.7

0.4

0.68

0.11

Reach 5

2.5

0.4

0.28

0.04

Reach 6

2.5

0.4

1.24

0.20

Reach 7a

2.5

0.4

0.36

0.06

Reach 7b

2.5

0.4

0.62

0.10

Reach 8 - NRCS

2.5

0.4

0.92

0.15

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

2.5

0.4

0.92

0.15

Reach 8 - Tunnel

2.5

0.4

0.92

0.15

Reach 14

2.5

0.4

0.43

0.07

Reach 6 - Bypass

2.5

0.4

0.91

0.15

K-49

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Activity
Construction Earthmoving Pk. Daily
hours

Required Variables

Project

EET

Moist (M)

Silt (s)

hours

code

percent

percent

Uncontrolled

Drop (d) Speed (S) Wind (U)
feet

mph

mph

Controlled Emissions

Den (D)

Rate (V)

PM10

PM2.5

Control

PM10

PM2.5

PM10

PM2.5

ton/cy

cy/hr

lb/hr

lb/hr

%

lb/day

lb/day

lbs

lbs

Bulldozer (tracked)

A

7

9

1.32827

0.66775

56%

-

-

-

-

Bulldozer (wheeled)

A

7

9

0.99621

0.50081

56%

-

-

-

-

Scraper (dumper)

B+C

7

3

30

3.93277

0.33743

56%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck/ADT

B

7

6

30

0.09385

0.00432

56%

-

-

-

-

Clamshell Derrick

B

7

9

30

0.12465

0.00675

56%

-

-

-

-

Dragline (small)

B

7

12

60

0.30491

0.01854

56%

-

-

-

-

Motor Grader

C

7

4

1.98400

0.15360

56%

-

-

-

-

Tractor/Offroad Forklift

C

7

3

0.83700

0.05612

56%

-

-

-

-

Compactor/Roller

C

7

2

0.24800

0.01358

56%

-

-

-

-

Crane (tracked)

C

7

1

0.03100

0.00120

56%

-

-

-

-

Backhoe/Skip Loader

D

7

6.7

1.5

20

0.00836

0.00129

56%

-

-

-

-

Bobcat/Skid Steer Loader

D

7

6.7

1.5

10

0.00418

0.00065

56%

-

-

-

-

Drill Auger/Borer

D

7

6.7

1.5

10

0.00418

0.00065

56%

-

-

-

-

Hydraulic Excavator

D

7

6.7

1.5

60

0.02507

0.00387

56%

-

-

-

-

Front End Loader

D

7

6.7

1.5

30

0.01254

0.00194

56%

-

-

-

-

Concrete Grinder

E

10

1.9

40

0.18240

0.03040

78%

-

-

-

-

Screener (coarse)

F

18

1.9

40

0.66120

0.04560

92%

-

-

-

-

5

EET Code A
AP-42 Chapter 11.9 for bulldozer, tractor dozer (Tables 11.9-1):
E = 0.75 * 1.0 * (s)1.5 / (M)1.4 for PM 10
E = 0.105 * 5.7 * (s)1.2 / (M)1.3 for PM 2.5
Simplifies to E = 0.75 * (s)1.5 / (M)1.4 for PM10

Simplifies to E = 0.60 * (s)1.2 / (M)1.3 for PM2.5
E = lb/hr fugitive
s = silt content, percent
M = moisture content, percent
EET Code B
AP-42 Chapter 11.9 for small dragline, clamshell, dumping, scraper (Table 11.9-1):
E = 0.75 * 0.0021 * (d)0.7 / (M)0.3 for PM 10
E = 0.017 * 0.0021 * (d)1.1 / (M)0.3 for PM 2.5
Simplifies to E = 1.6e-3 * (d)0.7 / (M)0.3 for PM10

Simplifies to E = 3.6e-5 * (d)1.1 / (M)0.3 for PM2.5
E = lb/cy * cy/hr = lb/hr fugitive
M = moisture content, percent
d = drop distance = 12 feet (small dragline)
d = drop distance = 9 feet (clamshell)
d = drop distance = 6 feet (dump truck/ADT)
d = drop distance = 3 feet (scraper)

K-50

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
EET Code C
AP-42 Chapter 11.9 for scraper, grader, tractor, compactor, crane (Table 11.9-1) :
E = S * 0.60 * 0.051 x (S)2.0 for PM 10
E = S * 0.031 * 0.040 x (S)2.5 for PM 2.5
Simplifies to E = 0.031 x (S)

3.0

for PM 10

Simplifies to E = 0.0012 x (S)3.5 for PM 2.5
E = lb/VMT * VMT/hr = lb/hr fugitive
S = Mean Vehicle Speed = 5 mph (scrapers)
S = Mean Vehicle Speed = 4 mph (graders)
S = Mean Vehicle Speed = 3 mph (tractors)
S = Mean Vehicle Speed = 2 mph (compactors)
S = Mean Vehicle Speed = 1 mph (cranes)
EET Code D
AP-42 Chapter 13.2.4 Loading/Handling (backhoe, Bobcat, drill auger, excavator, backhoe, front end loader):
E = V * D * 0.35 * 0.0032 * (U/5)1.3/ (M/2)1.4 for PM10
E = V * D * 0.053 * 0.0032 * (U/5)1.3/ (M/2)1.4 for PM 2.5
1.3
1.4
Simplifies to E = V * D * 1.1e-3 * (U/5) / (M/2) for PM10

Simplifies to E = V * D * 1.7e-4 * (U/5)1.3/ (M/2)1.4 for PM2.5
V = cy/hr
M = moisture content, percent
E = lb/ton * tons/cy * cy/hr = lb/hr fugitive
D = 1.3 tons/cy for sand or cinder concrete
D = 1.5 tons/cy for soil (typical)
D = 1.9 tons/cy for sandstone or stone concrete
D = 2.1 tons/cy for granite rock
U = wind speed = 1 m/s or 2.2 mi/hr (light air)
U = wind speed = 2 m/s or 4.5 mi/hr (light breeze)
U = wind speed = 3 m/s or 6.7 mi/hr (light breeze)
U = wind speed = 4 m/s or 8.9 mi/hr (gentle breeze)
U = wind speed = 5 m/s or 11.2 mi/hr (gentle breeze)
U = wind speed = 6 m/s or 13.4 mi/hr (moderate breeze)
U = wind speed = 7 m/s or 15.7 mi/hr (moderate breeze)
EET Code E
AP-42 Chapter 11.19.2 Coarse Tertiary Crushing
E = 0.0024 lb/ton uncontrolled PM10
E = 0.0004 lb/ton uncontrolled PM2.5
E = D * V * 0.0024 lb/hr uncontrolled PM10
E = D * V* 0.0004 lb/hr uncontrolled PM2.5
V = cy/hr
E = lb/ton * tons/cy * cy/hr = lb/hr fugitive
D = 1.3 tons/cy for sand or cinder concrete
D = 1.5 tons/cy for soil (typical)
D = 1.9 tons/cy for sandstone or stone concrete
D = 2.1 tons/cy for granite rock
Control efficiency = 78% where applicable (water spray)

K-51

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project
3.11-i Offroad Dust
Estimated Offroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
EET Code F
AP-42 Chapter 11.19.2 Coarse Screening
E = 0.0087 lb/ton uncontrolled PM10
E = 0.0006 lb/ton uncontrolled PM2.5
E = D * V * 0.0087 lb/hr uncontrolled PM10
E = D * V * 0.0006 lb/hr uncontrolled PM2.5
V = cy/hr
E = lb/ton * tons/cy * cy/hr = lb/hr fugitive
D = 1.3 tons/cy for sand or cinder concrete
D = 1.5 tons/cy for soil (typical)
D = 1.9 tons/cy for sandstone or stone concrete
D = 2.1 tons/cy for granite rock
Control efficiency = 92% where applicable (water spray)
AP-42
Table

Silt Content, percent
lower

upper

AP-42 Figure 13.2.2-2

Moisture Content, percent

g-mean

lower

upper

Moisture (M)

g-mean

Control

11.9-3

3.8

15.1

6.9

2.2

16.8

7.9

11.9-3

7.2

25.2

16.4

0.2

16.3

3.2

0

0.00

0.00%

11.9-3

1.2

19.2

4.3

0.3

20.1

2.4

1

0.25

0.00%

13.2.2-1

2.4

16.0

10.0

2

0.50

0.00%

13.2.2-1

5.0

15.0

8.3

3

0.75

0.00%

13.2.2-1

2.8

18.0

8.4

4

1.00

0.00%

13.2.2-1

0.6

23.0

8.5

5

1.25

18.75%

13.2.2-1

2.2

21.0

6.4

6

1.50

37.50%

13.2.4-1

3.8

15.0

7.5

2.8

20.0

6.9

7

1.75

56.25%

13.2.4-1

5.1

21.0

15.0

0.8

6.4

3.4

8

2.00

75.00%

13.2.4-1

5.0

16.0

9.0

8.9

16.0

12.0

9

2.25

76.67%

13.2.4-1

4.5

7.4

6.0

8.9

11.0

10.0

10

2.50

78.33%

Averages (rounded)

4

18

9

3

15

7

11

2.75

80.00%

EET application as:

coarse

fine

typical

dry

moist

typical

12

3.00

81.67%

13

3.25

83.33%

14

3.50

85.00%

15

3.75

86.67%

16

4.00

88.34%

17

4.25

90.00%

18

4.50

91.67%

19

4.75

93.34%

20

5.00

95.00%

21

5.25

96.67%

22

5.50

98.34%

23

5.75 100.00%

percent

120.00%
100.00%
80.00%
60.00%

Series1

ratio

%

40.00%
20.00%
0.00%
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

K-52

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
All Roads Travelled

Vehicle
Category

Activity

Usage

Pk. Daily

Project

Unpaved

Paved

VMT

VMT

%

%

Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

19880

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

9940

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

49700

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

200

99400

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

8920

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

4460

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

22300

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

66900

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

40120

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

20060

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

100300

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

300900

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7a

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

11600

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

5800

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

29000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

87000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

19840

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

9920

90%

10%

Reach 7b

K-53

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project
Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

49600

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

200

99200

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

29400

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

14700

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

73500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

220500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Reach 8 - NRCS

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

29400

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

14700

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

73500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

220500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

100

73500

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

29400

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

14700

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

73500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

400

294000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 14

onroad LD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

13800

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

6900

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

34500

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

200

69000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

K-54

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 6 - Bypass
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

1%

99%

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

100

73000

1%

99%

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

40

29200

10%

90%

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

20

14600

90%

10%

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

100

73000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

300

219000

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

1%

99%

Unpaved Road Dust

Vehicle
Category

4600 2749140
Activity

Required Variables

Pk. Daily

Project

EET

Moist (M)

Silt (s)

VMT

VMT

code

percent

percent

Uncontrolled

Weight (W) Speed (S) Precip (P)
tons

mph

days/yr

PM10

PM2.5

lb/VMT

lb/VMT

Controlled Emissions
Control

PM10

PM2.5

PM10

PM2.5

%

lb/day

lb/day

lbs

lbs

Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

50

60

2.07888

0.20773

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

1,988

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

477.0

47.7

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

8,946

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

1,988.0

198.6

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

497

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

73.7

7.4

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

2

994

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.3

0.0

107.4

10.7

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

892

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

214.0

21.4

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

4,014

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

892.0

89.1

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

223

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

33.1

3.3

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

669

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

72.3

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

7.2

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

4,012

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

962.7

96.2

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

18,054

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

4,011.9

400.8

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

1,003

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

148.7

14.9

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

3,009

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

325.0

32.4

-

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

K-55

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project
Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Reach 7a
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

1,160

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

278.3

27.8

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

5,220

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

1,160.0

115.9

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

290

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

43.0

4.3

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

870

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

94.0

9.4

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7b

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

1,984

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

476.1

47.6

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

8,928

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

1,984.0

198.2

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

496

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

73.5

7.3

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

2

992

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.3

0.0

107.1

10.7

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - NRCS

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

2,940

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

705.5

70.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

13,230

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

2,939.9

293.7

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

735

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

109.0

10.9

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

2,205

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

238.2

23.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

2,940

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

705.5

70.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

13,230

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

2,939.9

293.7

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

735

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

109.0

10.9

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

2,205

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

238.2

23.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

735

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

0.3

0.0

1

176.4

17.6

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

2,940

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

705.5

70.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

13,230

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

2,939.9

293.7

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

735

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

109.0

10.9

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

4

2,940

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.5

0.1

317.5

31.7

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

-

K-56

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 14 - Tunnel

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

1,380

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

331.1

33.1

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

6,210

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

1,380.0

137.9

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

345

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

51.2

5.1

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

2

690

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.3

0.0

74.5

7.4

-

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6 - Bypass

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

730

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

0.3

0.0

1

175.2

17.5

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

4

2,920

G

14

9

30

20

60

1.91440

0.19128

85%

1.1

0.1

700.7

70.0

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

18

13,140

G

14

9

30

5

60

1.77289

0.17713

85%

4.8

0.5

2,919.9

291.7

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

1

730

G

14

9

8

20

60

1.18292

0.11814

85%

0.2

0.0

108.2

10.8

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

3

2,190

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

0.4

0.0

236.5

23.6

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171

0.08601

85%

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

-

-

G

14

9

3

20

60

0.86171
0.08601
Unpaved Roads

85%

-

-

-

-

tons

tons

Special Note: Daily maximums do not include importing equipment from other areas in state (local emissions only)

lbs/day

lbs/day

Reach 4

6.4

0.6

1.3

0.1

Reach 5

6.5

0.6

0.6

0.1

Reach 6

6.5

0.6

2.7

0.3

Reach 7a

6.5

0.6

0.8

0.1

Reach 7b

6.4

0.6

1.3

0.1
0.2

Reach 8 - NRCS

6.5

0.6

2.0

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

6.5

0.6

2.0

0.2

Reach 8 - Tunnel

6.9

0.7

2.1

0.2

Reach 14

6.4

0.6

0.9

0.1

Reach 6 - Bypass

6.8

0.7

2.1

0.2

K-57

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project
Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Paved Road Dust

Vehicle
Category

Activity

Required Variables

Pk. Daily

Project

EET

Moist (M)

VMT

VMT

code

percent

Uncontrolled

Silt (sL) Weight (W) Speed (S) Precip (P)
g/m

2

tons

mph

days/yr

Controlled Emissions

PM10

PM2.5

Control

PM10

PM2.5

PM10

PM2.5

lb/VMT

lb/VMT

%

lb/day

lb/day

lbs

lbs

Reach 4
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

17,892

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

254.6

62.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

994

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

14.1

3.5

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

49,203

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

181.8

44.6

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

198

98,406

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.3

0.1

133.7

32.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 5

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

36

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

8,028

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

114.2

28.0

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

446

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

6.3

1.6

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

22,077

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

81.6

20.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

66,231

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

90.0

22.1

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

297,891

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 7a

onroad LD

-

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

36,108

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

2

2,006

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

28.5

7.0

99

99,297

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

366.9

90.1

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

404.8

99.4

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

36

-

-

513.8

126.1

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

10,440

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

148.5

36.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

580

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

8.3

2.0

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

28,710

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

106.1

26.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

86,130

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

117.0

28.7

36

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Reach 7b
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

17,856

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

254.1

62.4

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

992

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

14.1

3.5

-

K-58

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project
Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

49,104

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

181.5

44.5

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

198

98,208

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.3

0.1

133.4

32.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Reach 8 - NRCS
Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

26,460

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

1,470

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

20.9

5.1

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

72,765

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

268.9

66.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

218,295

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

296.6

72.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

36

376.5

92.4

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

26,460

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

376.5

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

1,470

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

20.9

92.4
5.1

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

72,765

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

268.9

66.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

218,295

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

296.6

72.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 8 - Tunnel

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

99

72,765

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

1.5

0.4

1,035.3

254.1

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

26,460

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

376.5

92.4

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

1,470

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

20.9

5.1

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

72,765

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

268.9

66.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

396

291,060

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.6

0.1

395.5

97.1

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 14

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

12,420

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

176.7

43.4

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

690

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

9.8

2.4

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

34,155

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

126.2

31.0

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

198

68,310

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.3

0.1

92.8

22.8

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)
Reach 6 - Bypass

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (materials/hauling)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

-

-

-

-

Tractor Trailer (equipment/supplies)

onroad HHD

-

-

H

--

0.015

30

--

60

0.00155

0.00038

--

-

-

-

-

Cement Truck (concrete/pumping)

onroad HHD

72,270

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

1.5

0.4

99

1,028.3

252.4

K-59

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
Dump Truck (soil/sand/gravel transport)

onroad HHD

36

26,280

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.5

0.1

373.9

Water Truck (dust control)

onroad HHD

2

1,460

H

--

0.18

30

--

60

0.01484

0.00364

--

0.0

0.0

20.8

5.1

Work Truck (all trades)

onroad MD

99

72,270

H

--

0.18

8

--

60

0.00385

0.00095

--

0.4

0.1

267.1

65.6

Pickup/SUV (managers/engineers)

onroad LD

297

216,810

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

0.4

0.1

294.6

72.3

Pickup/SUV (supervisors/foremen)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (operators/drivers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142

0.00035

--

-

-

-

-

Pickup/SUV (tradesmen/laborers)

onroad LD

-

-

H

--

0.18

3

--

60

0.00142
0.00035
Paved Roads

--

-

-

-

-

tons

tons

Special Note: Daily maximums do not include importing equipment from other areas in state (local emissions only)

Years

EET Code G

tons/yr

tons/yr

lbs/day

lbs/day

91.8

Reach 4

1.2

0.3

0.3

0.1

Reach 5

1.4

0.3

0.1

0.0

Reach 6

1.4

0.3

0.7

0.2

Reach 7a

1.4

0.3

0.2

0.0

Reach 7b

1.2

0.3

0.3

0.1

Reach 8 - NRCS

1.4

0.3

0.5

0.1

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

1.4

0.3

0.5

0.1

Reach 8 - Tunnel

3.0

0.7

1.0

0.3

Reach 14

1.2

0.3

0.2

0.0

Reach 6 - Bypass

2.8

0.7

1.0

0.2

Offroad + Unpaved + Paved

lbs/day

lbs/day

tons

tons

Unpaved Road Dust (AP-42 Section 13.2.2):

3

0.8

0.1

Reach 4

10.3

1.4

2.3

E = [1.5 *(s/12)0.9 * (W/3)0.45 ] * P C * (1-CE) for PM10

2

0.5

0.1

Reach 5

10.4

1.4

1.0

0.1

E = [1.8 *(s/12)1.0 * (S/30)0.5 / (M/0.5)0.2 - 0.00047 ] * P C * (1-CE) for PM10

5

0.9

0.1

Reach 6

10.3

1.4

4.6

0.6

E = [0.15 *(s/12)0.9 * (W/3)0.45 ] * P C * (1-CE) for PM2.5

2

0.7

0.1

Reach 7a

10.4

1.4

1.3

0.2

E = [0.18 *(s/12)1.0 * (S/30)0.5 / (M/0.5)0.2 - 0.00036 ] * P C * (1-CE) for PM2.5

3

0.7

0.1

Reach 7b

10.1

1.3

2.2

0.3

Equation pairs calculated for average factoring of both vehicle weight and speed

4

0.8

0.1

Reach 8 - NRCS

10.4

1.4

3.4

0.5

s = silt content, percent

4

0.8

0.1

Reach 8 - Culvert/Channel

10.4

1.4

3.4

0.5

W = average vehicle weight (see below)

4

1.0

0.2

Reach 8 - Tunnel

12.4

1.8

4.1

0.6

M = moisture content, percent

2

0.8

0.1

Reach 14

10.1

1.3

1.6

0.2

S = mean vehicle speed = 5-10 mph for watering trucks

4

1.0

0.1

Reach 6 - Bypass

12.1

1.8

4.0

0.6

0.3

S = mean vehicle speed = 15 mph for haul roads (general mitigation measure)
S = mean vehicle speed = 20 mph for graded dirt/gravel roads

TOTALS

tons

tons

E = lb/VMT fugitive
PC = (365-P)/365

basic

16.5

2.2

tunnel

17.2

2.4

P = Number of wet days over 0.01 in precipitation for averaging period (from AP-42 Figure 13.2.1-2)
Note: precipitation correction not used (PC = 1) for worst case day calculations

bypass

14.8

2.1

tun + by

15.5

2.2

CE = control efficiency for watering (moisture content)
Light Duty = 3 tons average (loaded)
Medium Duty = 8 tons average (loaded)
Heavy Heavy Duty = 30 tons average (loaded 40 tons, unloaded 20 tons)

Reach
4

Project Year
1

2

3

X

X

X

4

5

6

X

5

X

X

EET Code H

6

X

X

X

X

Paved Road Dust (New AP-42 Section 13.2.1):

7a

E = 0.0022 * (sL)0.91 * (W)1.02 * P C for PM10

7b

X

X

X

0.91

1.02

X

X

8 NRCS

X

X

X

X

E = lb/VMT fugitive

8 culvert

X

X

X

X

sL = Silt Loading from Table 13.2.1-2

8 tunnel

X

X

X

X

14

X

X

6 bypass

X

X

X

X

E = 0.00054 * (sL)

* (W)

* P C for PM2.5

W = Average weight of vehicles in tons (below)
PC = (1-P/4N)
P = Number of wet days over 0.01 in precipitation for averaging period (from AP-42 Figure 13.2.1-2)

K-60

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
N = days of period = 365 days (4N = 1460)
Note: precipitation correction not used (PC = 1) for worst case day calculations

For basic project (no options)
lbs/day
lbs/day

Light Duty = 3 tons average (loaded)

Year 1

20.7

2.8

1.4

0.2

Medium Duty = 8 tons average (loaded)

Year 2

61.9

8.3

4.5

0.6

Heavy Heavy Duty = 30 tons average (loaded 40 tons, unloaded 20 tons)

Year 3

61.6

8.2

4.6

0.6

Year 4

30.8

4.1

2.5

0.3

Year 5

20.7

2.8

1.8

0.2

Year 6

10.3

1.4

0.9

0.1

MAX

61.9

8.3

4.6

0.6

For tunnel option project
lbs/day
lbs/day

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

20.7

2.8

1.4

0.2

Year 2

63.9

8.7

4.7

0.7

Year 3

63.6

8.6

4.7

0.7

Year 4

32.8

4.5

2.7

0.4

Year 5

22.7

3.2

1.9

0.3

Year 6

10.3

1.4

0.9

0.1

MAX

63.9

8.7

4.7

0.7

For bypass option project
lbs/day
lbs/day

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

20.7

2.8

1.4

0.2

Year 2

53.3

7.3

4.1

0.6

Year 3

53.0

7.2

4.1

0.6

Year 4

22.2

3.1

2.1

0.3

Year 5

12.1

1.8

1.3

0.2

Year 6

10.3

1.4

0.9

0.1

MAX

53.3

7.3

4.1

0.6

For tunnel + bypass option project
lbs/day
lbs/day tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

20.7

2.8

1.4

0.2

Year 2

55.3

7.7

4.2

0.6

Year 3

55.0

7.6

4.3

0.6

Year 4

24.2

3.5

2.2

0.3

Year 5

14.1

2.2

1.5

0.2

Year 6

10.3

1.4

0.9

0.1

MAX

55.3

7.7

4.3

0.6

Option

lbs/day

lbs/day

5

10.4

1.4

0.5

0.1

6

10.3

1.4

0.9

0.1

6 bypass

12.1

1.8

1.0

0.1

delta 6

-8.6

-1.0

-0.4

0.0

8 NRCS

10.4

1.4

0.8

0.1

8 culvert

10.4

1.4

0.8

0.1

8 tunnel

12.4

1.8

1.0

0.2

2.0

0.4

0.2

0.0

delta 8

tons/yr

tons/yr

K-61

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-j Onroad Dust

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Estimated Onroad Fugitive Dust Emissions
AP-42 Figure 13.2.1-2 (California)
Values for Precipitation (P)

AP-42 Figure 13.2.2-2
Moisture (M)

days/yr

Control

Low Deserts

20

High Deserts & Inland SoCal

30

0

0.00

0.00%

South/Central Coast/Valley & Mountains

40

1

0.25

0.00%

Mid/Northern Central Valley

50

2

0.50

0.00%

Bay & Delta Areas

60

3

0.75

0.00%

90

4

1.00

0.00%

120

5

1.25

18.75%

6

1.50

37.50%

7

1.75

56.25%

8

2.00

75.00%

9

2.25

76.67%

Wine Country & Sierras
North Coast

AP-42 Table 13.2.1-2 (US)
Values for Silt Loading (sL)

g/m3

percent

ratio

%

< 500 average daily traffic (ADT) count

0.6

10

2.50

78.33%

500 - 5,000 ADT

0.2

11

2.75

80.00%

5,000 - 10,000 ADT

0.06

12

3.00

81.67%

> 10,000 ADT (surface streets)

0.03

13

3.25

83.33%

> 10,000 ADT (limited access)

0.015

14

3.50

85.00%

0.4

15

3.75

86.67%

Average Rural
Average Mid-Range
Average Urban
Average for All Roads

0.13

16

4.00

88.34%

0.023

17

4.25

90.00%

0.18

18

4.50

91.67%

19

4.75

93.34%

20

5.00

95.00%

21

5.25

96.67%

22

5.50

98.34%

23

5.75

100.00%

120.00%
100.00%
80.00%
60.00%

Series1

40.00%
20.00%
0.00%
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

K-62

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

3.11-k Point Source

AERSCREEN INPUT DATA

UNITS

VALUES

VALUES

VALUES

Title of modeling run

alpha

Reach_7a

Reach_7b

Reach_8

Input units, English or metric (E/M)

alpha

M

M

M

Source type (Point, Volume, Area, Circle, Flare, Shielded, Horizontal)

alpha

P

P

P

Emission rate

grams/sec

2.76E-03

1.84E-03

2.76E-03

Stack height

meters

1.5

1.5

1.5

Stack diameter

meters

0.15

0.15

0.15

Stack exit temperature

°K

700

700

700

Stack exit velocity (option 1, m/s)

meters/sec

38

38

38

Rural/Urban (R/U)

alpha

U

U

U

Initial Information

Source Information

Population of urban area

integer

38000

38000

38000

Minimum distance to ambient air

meters

default

default

default

Option for modeling NO2 chemistry (1, 2, 3)

option #

1

1

1

In-stack NO2 to NOX ratio for options 2 or 3

ratio

0.1

0.1

0.1

Ozone concentration (ambient) for options 2 or 3

ppmv

1) No chemistry or pollutant is not NO 2 (worst case unitary)
2) Use ozone limiting method
3) Use plume volume molar ratio method

Building Downwash Information
Include building downwash (Y/N)

alpha

N

N

N

Use existing BPIPPRM input file (Y/N)

alpha

N

N

N

Building height

meters

Maximum horizontal dimension

meters

Minimum horizontal dimension

meters

Orientation of maximum building dimension to true North (0-179)

degrees

Direction of stack from true North axis (0-359)

degrees

Distance from stack to building center axis

meters

Terrain Height Information
Include terrain heights (Y/N)

alpha

N

N

N

Maximum distance to probe (2 km radius of vicinity)

meters

500

500

500

Include up to 10 discrete receptors (Y/N)

alpha

Y

Y

Y

Filename of discrete receptors (*.txt)

.txt

receptorA.txt

receptorA.txt

receptorA.txt

Use flagpole receptors (Y/N)

alpha

Y

Y

Y

Flagpole receptor height

meters

1.5

1.5

1.5

Source base elevation above mean sea level (land parcel)

meters

100

100

100

Minimum temperature (35 °F)

°K

275

275

275

Maximum temperature (107 °F)

°K

305

305

305

Minimum wind speed (2.2 mph)

meters/sec

1

1

1

Anemometer height

meters

10

10

10

Source of surface characteristics (1-user spec, 2-AERMET, 3-ext file)

option #

2

2

2

Dominant surface profile (land use: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)

option #

7

7

7

Dominant climate profile (1-average, 2-wet, 3-dry)

option #

3

3

3

.out

Reach_7a

Reach_7b

Reach_8

Meteorology Information for MAKEMET

Output File
Use non-default name (*.out)

Reach

7a

7b

8

miles

1.74

1.31

1.13

meters

2800

2108

1819

days

290

496

735

m/day

9.7

4.3

2.5

m

50

50

50

days

5

12

20

K-63

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment
Aerial Lifts

Aerial Lifts Composite
Air Compressors

Air Compressors Composite
Bore/Drill Rigs

Bore/Drill Rigs Composite
Cement and Mortar Mixers
Cement and Mortar Mixers Composite

SC

MaxHP
10
15
25
50
80
120
500
750
800
15
25
50
80
120
175
250
500
750
1000
15
25
50
60
120
175
250
500
750
1000
15
25

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.00671
0.01007
0.01463
0.03817
0.03759
0.03682
0.08905
0.16472
0.17570
0.03580
0.01005
0.02124
0.05907
0.05786
0.05624
0.07516
0.07911
0.13214
0.20568
0.31274
0.06411
0.01204
0.01929
0.02100
0.02266
0.03264
0.05189
0.05798
0.09552
0.18908
0.30161
0.05776
0.00736
0.02372
0.00871

(lb/hr)
CO
0.03522
0.05283
0.04734
0.15475
0.18855
0.23362
0.39831
0.71998
0.76798
0.17681
0.04581
0.06543
0.22091
0.26003
0.31220
0.49984
0.26918
0.45980
0.71061
1.07393
0.31653
0.06317
0.06583
0.22153
0.25656
0.46671
0.75410
0.34256
0.55113
1.08901
1.64571
0.50129
0.03859
0.07620
0.04170

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.04205
0.06308
0.08734
0.15797
0.20971
0.27870
0.98906
1.84446
1.96742
0.23101
0.06239
0.12049
0.19135
0.26680
0.36741
0.57004
0.73883
1.13631
1.81415
3.95056
0.43179
0.07542
0.12189
0.19920
0.21306
0.29622
0.35886
0.31238
0.50351
1.00179
4.39725
0.46916
0.04610
0.14109
0.05394

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00009
0.00013
0.00014
0.00025
0.00034
0.00045
0.00209
0.00387
0.00413
0.00040
0.00011
0.00018
0.00029
0.00040
0.00055
0.00100
0.00148
0.00227
0.00360
0.00489
0.00071
0.00016
0.00020
0.00040
0.00047
0.00090
0.00159
0.00212
0.00306
0.00618
0.00933
0.00175
0.00010
0.00022
0.00011

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.00165
0.00247
0.00409
0.01042
0.01425
0.01937
0.02986
0.05489
0.05855
0.01340
0.00350
0.00624
0.01475
0.02101
0.02935
0.03059
0.02302
0.03815
0.06003
0.10481
0.02816
0.00295
0.00457
0.00441
0.00514
0.00954
0.01211
0.00882
0.01447
0.02866
0.08548
0.01259
0.00184
0.00669
0.00224

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.00152
5.8
0.00228
8.7
0.00377
11.0
0.00958
19.6
0.01311
27.5
0.01782
38.1
0.02747
212.9
0.05050
384.8
0.05386
410.4
0.01233
34.7
0.00322
7.2
0.00574
14.4
0.01357
22.3
0.01933
32.8
0.02700
47.0
0.02814
88.5
0.02118
131.2
0.03510
231.7
0.05523
358.1
0.09642
486.4
0.02591
63.6
0.00271
10.3
0.00421
16.0
0.00406
31.0
0.00473
37.6
0.00878
77.1
0.01114
141.1
0.00812
188.1
0.01331
311.3
0.02637
615.1
0.07864
928.3
0.01158
164.9
0.00169
6.3
0.00615
17.6
0.00206
7.2

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00061
0.00091
0.00132
0.00344
0.00339
0.00332
0.00803
0.01486
0.01585
0.00323
0.00091
0.00192
0.00533
0.00522
0.00507
0.00678
0.00714
0.01192
0.01856
0.02822
0.00578
0.00109
0.00174
0.00189
0.00204
0.00295
0.00468
0.00523
0.00862
0.01706
0.02721
0.00521
0.00066
0.00214
0.00079

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00027
5.86
0.00040
8.80
0.00059
11.17
0.00153
20.16
0.00151
28.06
0.00148
38.60
0.00357
214.13
0.00661
387.12
0.00705
412.92
0.00144
35.23
0.00040
7.37
0.00085
14.75
0.00237
23.12
0.00232
33.68
0.00226
47.76
0.00301
89.56
0.00317
132.35
0.00530
233.63
0.00825
361.09
0.01254
490.84
0.00257
64.53
0.00048
10.52
0.00077
16.26
0.00084
31.34
0.00091
37.95
0.00131
77.59
0.00208
141.82
0.00233
188.93
0.00383
312.68
0.00758
617.80
0.01209
932.60
0.00232
165.72
0.00030
6.43
0.00095
17.90
0.00035
7.37

K-64

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment
Concrete/Industrial Saws

Concrete/Industrial Saws Composite
Cranes

Cranes Composite
Crawler Tractors

Crawler Tractors Composite
Crushing/Proc. Equipment

Crushing/Proc. Equipment Composite
Dumpers/Tenders
Dumpers/Tenders Composite
Excavators

SC

MaxHP
25
50
120
175
50
120
175
250
270
500
750
1000
50
120
175
240
250
500
750
1000
50
120
175
250
500
750
1000
25
25
50
120

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.01988
0.06246
0.07276
0.11156
0.06787
0.07095
0.06901
0.08067
0.08300
0.08646
0.12620
0.21372
0.78229
0.10733
0.08762
0.10076
0.13472
0.14041
0.14128
0.20692
0.37261
0.56717
0.12580
0.10858
0.09478
0.13798
0.14663
0.21347
0.33474
0.87024
0.12186
0.00923
0.00923
0.01983
0.05213
0.07598

(lb/hr)
CO
0.06785
0.26019
0.46911
0.86631
0.38921
0.25878
0.35088
0.47739
0.25720
0.27056
0.42426
0.71321
2.53432
0.41525
0.29471
0.47074
0.73425
0.47127
0.43081
0.75307
1.34748
2.11858
0.54636
0.43554
0.55470
0.95267
0.49934
0.73571
1.15489
2.83102
0.63879
0.03139
0.03139
0.06769
0.25680
0.50422

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.12562
0.24733
0.53312
0.93487
0.42671
0.20872
0.41553
0.55495
0.68322
0.70619
0.97036
1.68905
8.28271
0.86248
0.23119
0.59715
0.92929
1.11186
1.13995
1.59874
2.94021
6.02449
0.86167
0.37389
0.62098
1.01554
1.28541
1.71086
2.76412
10.17982
0.81135
0.05852
0.05852
0.12533
0.20816
0.48400

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00021
0.00039
0.00087
0.00180
0.00070
0.00030
0.00059
0.00090
0.00126
0.00130
0.00177
0.00305
0.00976
0.00138
0.00032
0.00077
0.00136
0.00180
0.00187
0.00254
0.00467
0.00662
0.00126
0.00057
0.00098
0.00188
0.00275
0.00367
0.00592
0.01315
0.00146
0.00010
0.00010
0.00021
0.00032
0.00086

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.00468
0.01666
0.03847
0.04665
0.02980
0.01676
0.03414
0.03140
0.02348
0.02441
0.03510
0.06017
0.23442
0.03522
0.01973
0.04893
0.05222
0.04384
0.04255
0.06094
0.11065
0.17934
0.05002
0.02745
0.04837
0.05451
0.04045
0.05823
0.09202
0.26928
0.04729
0.00231
0.00231
0.00468
0.01281
0.03399

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.00431
16.5
0.01533
30.2
0.03539
74.1
0.04292
160.2
0.02742
58.5
0.01542
23.2
0.03141
50.1
0.02889
80.3
0.02160
112.2
0.02245
117.6
0.03229
180.1
0.05536
303.0
0.21567
970.6
0.03240
128.6
0.01815
24.9
0.04501
65.8
0.04804
121.2
0.04033
160.1
0.03915
166.1
0.05607
259.2
0.10180
464.7
0.16499
658.1
0.04602
114.0
0.02525
44.0
0.04450
83.1
0.05015
167.3
0.03722
244.5
0.05357
373.6
0.08465
588.8
0.24774
1307.8
0.04351
132.3
0.00212
7.6
0.00212
7.6
0.00431
16.4
0.01179
25.0
0.03127
73.6

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00179
0.00564
0.00657
0.01007
0.00612
0.00640
0.00623
0.00728
0.00749
0.00780
0.01139
0.01928
0.07058
0.00968
0.00791
0.00909
0.01216
0.01267
0.01275
0.01867
0.03362
0.05117
0.01135
0.00980
0.00855
0.01245
0.01323
0.01926
0.03020
0.07852
0.01100
0.00083
0.00083
0.00179
0.00470
0.00686

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00080
16.76
0.00250
31.10
0.00292
75.19
0.00447
161.80
0.00272
59.44
0.00285
24.20
0.00277
51.14
0.00324
81.50
0.00333
113.35
0.00347
118.83
0.00506
181.91
0.00857
306.11
0.03137
981.81
0.00430
130.17
0.00351
26.13
0.00404
67.25
0.00540
123.12
0.00563
162.15
0.00567
168.16
0.00830
262.19
0.01494
470.02
0.02274
666.23
0.00504
115.82
0.00435
45.57
0.00380
84.50
0.00553
169.24
0.00588
246.63
0.00856
376.70
0.01342
593.63
0.03490
1320.23
0.00489
134.05
0.00037
7.76
0.00037
7.76
0.00080
16.72
0.00209
25.76
0.00305
74.71

K-65

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment

Excavators Composite
Forklifts

Forklifts Composite
Generator Sets

Generator Sets Composite
Graders

Graders Composite
Off-Highway Tractors

Off-Highway Tractors Composite

SC

MaxHP
175
190
250
500
750
50
120
175
250
500
15
25
50
120
175
250
500
750
1000
50
120
140
175
250
500
750
120
175
250
750
1000

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.08958
0.09151
0.09922
0.14153
0.23559
0.09157
0.02537
0.02874
0.04245
0.04670
0.06591
0.03991
0.01262
0.02359
0.05588
0.07248
0.09023
0.09263
0.13426
0.22238
0.56218
0.05269
0.07430
0.09285
0.10037
0.11354
0.11799
0.14967
0.31871
0.11210
0.17119
0.16968
0.13443
0.54339
0.82195
0.17158

(lb/hr)
CO
0.66439
0.59859
0.33538
0.47617
0.78899
0.51840
0.14629
0.21254
0.33221
0.15643
0.21389
0.21811
0.06474
0.07985
0.23263
0.47284
0.73279
0.39885
0.62365
1.00678
2.15700
0.28209
0.29319
0.51656
0.59422
0.73014
0.38476
0.53441
1.13030
0.58438
0.69313
0.81222
0.40015
2.21702
3.47382
0.69061

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.57833
0.60023
0.68783
0.89880
1.53590
0.58578
0.12284
0.19258
0.26851
0.30568
0.39374
0.24927
0.08743
0.14706
0.24426
0.56285
0.84395
1.10034
1.54642
2.57457
7.97781
0.40525
0.23875
0.57530
0.64906
0.77814
0.93829
1.11386
2.43229
0.80079
0.99729
1.19874
1.10033
4.43095
8.43785
1.31772

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00126
0.00137
0.00179
0.00229
0.00390
0.00132
0.00019
0.00037
0.00063
0.00087
0.00109
0.00060
0.00016
0.00022
0.00040
0.00091
0.00160
0.00239
0.00331
0.00547
0.01054
0.00070
0.00036
0.00088
0.00107
0.00139
0.00194
0.00225
0.00488
0.00150
0.00110
0.00147
0.00147
0.00571
0.00819
0.00167

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.03075
0.02922
0.02308
0.03228
0.05437
0.02888
0.00685
0.01277
0.01457
0.01032
0.01447
0.01186
0.00453
0.00730
0.01559
0.03810
0.03832
0.03070
0.04594
0.07540
0.19394
0.02155
0.01760
0.04472
0.04407
0.04294
0.03211
0.04005
0.08624
0.03966
0.08345
0.06768
0.04458
0.17651
0.26961
0.06234

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.02829
112.2
0.02688
121.5
0.02123
158.7
0.02970
233.7
0.05002
387.4
0.02657
119.6
0.00630
14.7
0.01175
31.2
0.01341
56.1
0.00949
77.1
0.01331
111.0
0.01091
54.4
0.00417
10.2
0.00672
17.6
0.01435
30.6
0.03505
77.9
0.03526
142.0
0.02824
212.5
0.04226
336.9
0.06936
543.8
0.17843
1048.6
0.01983
61.0
0.01619
27.5
0.04114
75.0
0.04055
92.8
0.03950
123.9
0.02954
172.1
0.03685
229.5
0.07934
485.7
0.03648
132.7
0.07677
93.7
0.06227
130.4
0.04101
130.4
0.16239
568.1
0.24804
814.3
0.05735
151.4

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00808
0.00826
0.00895
0.01277
0.02126
0.00826
0.00229
0.00259
0.00383
0.00421
0.00595
0.00360
0.00114
0.00213
0.00504
0.00654
0.00814
0.00836
0.01211
0.02007
0.05072
0.00475
0.00670
0.00838
0.00906
0.01024
0.01065
0.01350
0.02876
0.01011
0.01545
0.01531
0.01213
0.04903
0.07416
0.01548

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00359
113.50
0.00367
122.82
0.00398
160.10
0.00568
235.76
0.00945
390.79
0.00367
120.89
0.00102
15.04
0.00115
31.64
0.00170
56.66
0.00187
77.79
0.00264
111.92
0.00160
54.97
0.00051
10.39
0.00095
17.97
0.00224
31.42
0.00291
78.99
0.00362
143.27
0.00371
213.83
0.00538
338.78
0.00892
546.98
0.02254
1056.66
0.00211
61.75
0.00298
28.60
0.00372
76.30
0.00403
94.21
0.00455
125.55
0.00473
173.80
0.00600
231.63
0.01278
490.31
0.00450
134.35
0.00687
96.19
0.00680
132.85
0.00539
132.34
0.02179
575.92
0.03296
826.07
0.00688
153.87

K-66

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment
Off-Highway Trucks

Off-Highway Trucks Composite
Other Construction Equipment

Other Construction Equipment Composite
Other General Industrial Equipmen

Other General Industrial Equipmen Composite
Other Material Handling Equipment

Other Material Handling Equipment Composite

SC

MaxHP
175
250
500
750
1000
15
25
50
90
120
175
280
500
15
25
30
50
100
120
175
250
500
750
1000
50
120
175
250
500
1000

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.10715
0.11088
0.17532
0.28563
0.43079
0.17123
0.01177
0.01595
0.04678
0.05841
0.06714
0.06652
0.08318
0.11808
0.06746
0.00663
0.01852
0.02723
0.06208
0.07565
0.08108
0.09108
0.09356
0.17453
0.28937
0.40682
0.11872
0.08600
0.07860
0.11462
0.09880
0.12432
0.56209
0.11230

(lb/hr)
CO
0.75465
0.36084
0.56763
0.92035
1.36598
0.57217
0.06171
0.05442
0.23917
0.39630
0.51415
0.58598
0.55163
0.47964
0.35683
0.03905
0.06320
0.09811
0.23774
0.37558
0.43072
0.56646
0.29002
0.54426
0.89705
1.27392
0.46495
0.32822
0.41920
0.71726
0.30875
0.39152
1.68211
0.45436

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.67644
0.76252
1.10340
1.84756
4.60135
1.18513
0.07368
0.10076
0.21851
0.38013
0.50134
0.51327
0.64262
0.91364
0.50445
0.04662
0.11701
0.13230
0.19346
0.40931
0.49564
0.63069
0.77777
1.32575
2.25697
4.64029
0.91382
0.26891
0.48395
0.80136
0.83094
0.95596
6.13721
0.89481

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00141
0.00187
0.00267
0.00444
0.00628
0.00266
0.00016
0.00017
0.00036
0.00070
0.00095
0.00120
0.00162
0.00250
0.00127
0.00010
0.00019
0.00021
0.00028
0.00060
0.00073
0.00108
0.00153
0.00261
0.00440
0.00563
0.00160
0.00039
0.00071
0.00137
0.00163
0.00188
0.00728
0.00154

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.03631
0.02564
0.03970
0.06548
0.12293
0.04067
0.00288
0.00378
0.01248
0.02417
0.03294
0.02524
0.02713
0.03108
0.02062
0.00182
0.00437
0.00654
0.01520
0.03318
0.04037
0.03507
0.02494
0.04590
0.07699
0.12742
0.03792
0.02113
0.03939
0.04445
0.02661
0.03305
0.16807
0.03665

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.03341
125.1
0.02359
166.5
0.03652
272.3
0.06024
441.7
0.11310
624.7
0.03742
260.1
0.00265
10.1
0.00348
13.2
0.01148
28.0
0.02224
58.2
0.03030
80.9
0.02322
106.5
0.02496
154.2
0.02860
254.2
0.01897
122.5
0.00168
6.4
0.00402
15.3
0.00601
16.6
0.01399
21.7
0.03053
50.5
0.03714
62.0
0.03227
95.9
0.02295
135.6
0.04223
265.4
0.07083
437.4
0.11722
559.6
0.03488
152.2
0.01944
30.3
0.03624
60.7
0.04090
122.1
0.02448
145.0
0.03040
191.6
0.15462
741.3
0.03372
141.2

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00967
0.01000
0.01582
0.02577
0.03887
0.01545
0.00106
0.00144
0.00422
0.00527
0.00606
0.00600
0.00751
0.01065
0.00609
0.00060
0.00167
0.00246
0.00560
0.00683
0.00732
0.00822
0.00844
0.01575
0.02611
0.03671
0.01071
0.00776
0.00709
0.01034
0.00891
0.01122
0.05072
0.01013

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00430
126.62
0.00445
168.13
0.00703
274.85
0.01145
445.83
0.01728
630.90
0.00687
262.51
0.00047
10.28
0.00064
13.45
0.00188
28.66
0.00234
59.04
0.00269
81.82
0.00267
107.47
0.00334
155.43
0.00474
255.93
0.00271
123.51
0.00027
6.49
0.00074
15.61
0.00109
17.02
0.00249
22.63
0.00303
51.61
0.00325
63.20
0.00365
97.24
0.00375
136.92
0.00700
267.91
0.01160
441.60
0.01631
565.43
0.00476
153.94
0.00345
31.57
0.00315
61.80
0.00460
123.72
0.00396
146.43
0.00499
193.41
0.02254
749.40
0.00450
142.80

K-67

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment
Pavers

Pavers Composite
Paving Equipment

Paving Equipment Composite
Plate Compactors
Plate Compactors Composite
Pressure Washers

Pressure Washers Composite
Pumps

Pumps Composite
Rollers

SC

MaxHP
25
50
120
175
250
500
25
50
120
175
250
15
15
25
50
120
15
25
50
80
120
160
175
250
500
750
1000
15
25
50
100

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.02277
0.10404
0.10951
0.14432
0.16637
0.18582
0.11932
0.01523
0.08853
0.08576
0.11244
0.10176
0.09096
0.00502
0.00502
0.00605
0.00956
0.01949
0.01912
0.01110
0.01033
0.02865
0.06797
0.07143
0.07603
0.08910
0.09400
0.09320
0.14684
0.24812
0.75480
0.05081
0.00736
0.01610
0.07285
0.07342

(lb/hr)
CO
0.07710
0.32616
0.48945
0.76533
0.51743
0.72392
0.50734
0.05200
0.27605
0.38343
0.59869
0.31777
0.41654
0.02634
0.02634
0.03102
0.03237
0.09179
0.13927
0.05702
0.04709
0.08826
0.27439
0.36260
0.48021
0.66491
0.73417
0.38414
0.64778
1.07092
2.82734
0.27513
0.03859
0.05494
0.26114
0.35631

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.14399
0.26149
0.66060
1.04374
1.42903
1.54153
0.66721
0.09627
0.22296
0.51875
0.81962
0.89494
0.59652
0.03145
0.03145
0.04189
0.05962
0.10979
0.16591
0.07325
0.06412
0.16254
0.27729
0.40337
0.57149
0.77125
0.84616
1.06009
1.60535
2.73769
10.42951
0.35605
0.04607
0.10172
0.22449
0.40339

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00024
0.00036
0.00081
0.00144
0.00219
0.00229
0.00089
0.00016
0.00031
0.00064
0.00114
0.00138
0.00079
0.00007
0.00007
0.00008
0.00009
0.00018
0.00028
0.00013
0.00012
0.00025
0.00044
0.00065
0.00091
0.00140
0.00158
0.00227
0.00339
0.00574
0.01362
0.00059
0.00010
0.00017
0.00034
0.00059

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.00580
0.02342
0.05480
0.05822
0.05370
0.05881
0.04533
0.00361
0.02003
0.04334
0.04576
0.03290
0.04044
0.00123
0.00123
0.00217
0.00296
0.00611
0.00999
0.00402
0.00360
0.00842
0.01843
0.02768
0.04003
0.03983
0.03975
0.03032
0.04893
0.08226
0.25686
0.02138
0.00180
0.00381
0.01745
0.03199

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.00533
18.7
0.02155
28.0
0.05042
69.2
0.05356
128.3
0.04941
194.4
0.05410
233.2
0.04170
77.9
0.00332
12.6
0.01843
23.9
0.03988
54.5
0.04210
101.0
0.03026
122.3
0.03720
68.9
0.00113
4.3
0.00113
4.3
0.00200
4.9
0.00272
7.1
0.00562
14.3
0.00919
24.1
0.00370
9.4
0.00331
7.4
0.00774
19.5
0.01695
34.3
0.02547
53.0
0.03683
77.9
0.03664
123.2
0.03657
140.1
0.02790
201.4
0.04502
345.2
0.07568
570.7
0.23631
1354.8
0.01967
49.6
0.00166
6.3
0.00351
13.3
0.01605
26.0
0.02943
49.6

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00205
0.00939
0.00988
0.01302
0.01501
0.01677
0.01077
0.00137
0.00799
0.00774
0.01015
0.00918
0.00821
0.00045
0.00045
0.00055
0.00086
0.00176
0.00173
0.00100
0.00093
0.00258
0.00613
0.00644
0.00686
0.00804
0.00848
0.00841
0.01325
0.02239
0.06810
0.00458
0.00066
0.00145
0.00657
0.00662

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00091
18.99
0.00417
29.48
0.00439
70.77
0.00579
130.35
0.00667
196.76
0.00745
235.91
0.00479
79.64
0.00061
12.85
0.00355
25.19
0.00344
55.73
0.00451
102.63
0.00408
123.75
0.00365
70.24
0.00020
4.39
0.00020
4.39
0.00024
4.98
0.00038
7.28
0.00078
14.57
0.00077
24.35
0.00044
9.57
0.00041
7.57
0.00115
19.90
0.00273
35.31
0.00286
54.05
0.00305
79.04
0.00357
124.44
0.00377
141.47
0.00374
202.70
0.00589
347.31
0.00995
574.26
0.03027
1365.65
0.00204
50.33
0.00030
6.43
0.00065
13.57
0.00292
27.03
0.00294
50.61

K-68

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment

Rollers Composite
Rough Terrain Forklifts

Rough Terrain Forklifts Composite
Rubber Tired Dozers

Rubber Tired Dozers Composite
Rubber Tired Loaders

Rubber Tired Loaders Composite
Scrapers

Scrapers Composite

SC

MaxHP
120
130
175
250
500
50
120
175
250
500
175
250
500
750
1000
25
50
120
175
200
250
350
500
750
1000
120
175
250
500
750

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.07364
0.07777
0.09637
0.09850
0.13233
0.07360
0.07431
0.06598
0.09929
0.10467
0.15143
0.07039
0.17629
0.19924
0.26601
0.40155
0.62758
0.24650
0.02042
0.08179
0.07141
0.09535
0.09689
0.09995
0.12053
0.15140
0.31207
0.41489
0.09198
0.14714
0.16733
0.18054
0.25944
0.45024
0.22565

(lb/hr)
CO
0.39438
0.43431
0.61403
0.33755
0.50913
0.39130
0.33727
0.42034
0.72327
0.35439
0.51043
0.45224
0.82324
0.58446
1.09723
1.64685
2.66064
0.93004
0.06971
0.32695
0.40381
0.62338
0.52527
0.32905
0.41386
0.54108
1.10767
1.48219
0.45097
0.67285
0.89748
0.54954
0.96023
1.65573
0.87132

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.47495
0.52038
0.72484
0.90348
1.14635
0.48665
0.28464
0.43409
0.68993
0.80975
1.07071
0.46452
1.22394
1.59537
2.08932
3.20706
6.26645
1.95084
0.12906
0.26839
0.44595
0.65712
0.70422
0.79842
0.93056
1.12876
2.38764
4.71455
0.64463
0.87122
1.16378
1.47826
2.03752
3.61013
1.74832

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00069
0.00079
0.00122
0.00172
0.00215
0.00077
0.00044
0.00073
0.00141
0.00192
0.00252
0.00082
0.00146
0.00206
0.00260
0.00401
0.00595
0.00245
0.00021
0.00040
0.00069
0.00120
0.00136
0.00168
0.00194
0.00233
0.00488
0.00597
0.00120
0.00110
0.00167
0.00236
0.00315
0.00558
0.00269

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.03781
0.03809
0.03933
0.03020
0.04015
0.03216
0.01902
0.03195
0.03706
0.02687
0.03827
0.03227
0.06918
0.06545
0.08491
0.12889
0.20338
0.07960
0.00481
0.01955
0.03456
0.03618
0.03318
0.02717
0.03248
0.04046
0.08437
0.13025
0.03362
0.07195
0.06551
0.05523
0.07767
0.13588
0.07162

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.03478
59.0
0.03504
67.9
0.03618
108.1
0.02778
153.1
0.03694
219.1
0.02959
67.0
0.01750
33.9
0.02939
62.4
0.03409
124.9
0.02472
170.8
0.03521
256.6
0.02969
70.3
0.06365
129.5
0.06021
183.5
0.07812
264.9
0.11858
398.8
0.18711
591.9
0.07323
239.1
0.00443
16.9
0.01798
31.1
0.03180
58.9
0.03329
106.3
0.03052
120.5
0.02499
149.0
0.02989
184.2
0.03722
237.0
0.07762
485.5
0.11983
593.9
0.03093
108.6
0.06619
93.9
0.06027
148.1
0.05081
209.5
0.07146
321.4
0.12501
555.3
0.06589
262.5

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00664
0.00702
0.00870
0.00889
0.01194
0.00664
0.00671
0.00595
0.00896
0.00944
0.01366
0.00635
0.01591
0.01798
0.02400
0.03623
0.05663
0.02224
0.00184
0.00738
0.00644
0.00860
0.00874
0.00902
0.01088
0.01366
0.02816
0.03744
0.00830
0.01328
0.01510
0.01629
0.02341
0.04062
0.02036

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00295
60.04
0.00312
69.04
0.00386
109.53
0.00395
154.50
0.00531
221.00
0.00295
68.10
0.00298
34.92
0.00265
63.40
0.00398
126.32
0.00420
172.30
0.00607
258.74
0.00282
71.29
0.00707
132.00
0.00799
186.34
0.01067
268.68
0.01610
404.54
0.02517
600.88
0.00988
242.62
0.00082
17.22
0.00328
32.32
0.00286
59.94
0.00382
107.68
0.00389
121.92
0.00401
150.41
0.00483
185.92
0.00607
239.18
0.01251
490.00
0.01664
599.82
0.00369
109.93
0.00590
96.01
0.00671
150.47
0.00724
212.06
0.01040
325.15
0.01806
561.73
0.00905
265.72

K-69

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment
Signal Boards

Signal Boards Composite
Skid Steer Loaders

Skid Steer Loaders Composite
Surfacing Equipment

Surfacing Equipment Composite
Sweepers/Scrubbers

Sweepers/Scrubbers Composite
Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes

Tractors/Loaders/Backhoes Composite
Trenchers

SC

MaxHP
15
50
120
175
250
25
50
120
50
120
175
250
500
750
15
25
50
120
175
250
25
50
120
175
250
500
750
15
25
50
120

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.00718
0.07379
0.07810
0.10572
0.12302
0.01512
0.01794
0.02876
0.02680
0.02741
0.03456
0.07221
0.06846
0.07799
0.11860
0.18875
0.09807
0.01238
0.02366
0.05812
0.07012
0.10286
0.09356
0.07372
0.01916
0.05552
0.04771
0.07261
0.09684
0.18857
0.28422
0.05589
0.00985
0.03971
0.12220
0.10178

(lb/hr)
CO
0.03767
0.30474
0.50332
0.82797
0.49193
0.09184
0.05877
0.20566
0.26860
0.21613
0.12700
0.40962
0.46854
0.29267
0.52479
0.82239
0.43334
0.07289
0.08076
0.30191
0.49958
0.80175
0.32324
0.49620
0.06532
0.28893
0.34418
0.58469
0.35064
0.68588
1.02862
0.36663
0.05168
0.13554
0.37283
0.45292

(lb/hr)
NOX
0.04498
0.29231
0.57287
0.89883
1.28336
0.10981
0.10904
0.18651
0.21722
0.19123
0.11780
0.49952
0.55888
0.77323
1.13920
1.84082
0.88546
0.08703
0.14952
0.26267
0.48550
0.70990
0.69698
0.47264
0.12131
0.24354
0.32159
0.48856
0.68873
1.23147
1.90401
0.36806
0.06170
0.25094
0.30514
0.62661

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00010
0.00047
0.00094
0.00174
0.00287
0.00021
0.00018
0.00033
0.00050
0.00037
0.00018
0.00075
0.00097
0.00152
0.00217
0.00349
0.00167
0.00019
0.00025
0.00041
0.00088
0.00156
0.00182
0.00092
0.00020
0.00039
0.00061
0.00114
0.00193
0.00388
0.00582
0.00078
0.00013
0.00042
0.00043
0.00076

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.00176
0.01952
0.04102
0.04398
0.03788
0.00550
0.00504
0.00786
0.01143
0.00882
0.00849
0.03679
0.02818
0.02533
0.03854
0.06143
0.03206
0.00340
0.00557
0.01582
0.03362
0.03812
0.02297
0.02881
0.00471
0.01405
0.02166
0.02539
0.02291
0.04383
0.06683
0.02218
0.00241
0.00936
0.02737
0.05138

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.00162
6.2
0.01796
36.2
0.03774
80.2
0.04046
154.5
0.03485
255.3
0.00506
16.7
0.00464
13.8
0.00723
25.5
0.01052
42.8
0.00811
30.3
0.00781
14.1
0.03385
63.8
0.02593
85.8
0.02331
134.9
0.03546
221.2
0.05652
347.0
0.02949
166.0
0.00313
11.9
0.00513
19.6
0.01455
31.6
0.03093
75.0
0.03507
139.0
0.02114
162.0
0.02651
78.5
0.00433
15.9
0.01293
30.3
0.01992
51.7
0.02336
101.4
0.02108
171.7
0.04033
344.9
0.06148
517.3
0.02041
66.8
0.00222
8.5
0.00861
32.9
0.02518
32.9
0.04727
64.9

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.00065
0.00666
0.00705
0.00954
0.01110
0.00136
0.00162
0.00259
0.00242
0.00247
0.00312
0.00652
0.00618
0.00704
0.01070
0.01703
0.00885
0.00112
0.00213
0.00524
0.00633
0.00928
0.00844
0.00665
0.00173
0.00501
0.00430
0.00655
0.00874
0.01701
0.02564
0.00504
0.00089
0.00358
0.01103
0.00918

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00029
6.27
0.00296
37.25
0.00313
81.33
0.00424
156.06
0.00493
257.05
0.00061
16.91
0.00072
14.05
0.00115
25.93
0.00107
43.15
0.00110
30.67
0.00139
14.60
0.00290
64.80
0.00275
86.76
0.00313
135.99
0.00476
222.91
0.00757
349.75
0.00393
167.37
0.00050
12.12
0.00095
19.95
0.00233
32.38
0.00281
76.04
0.00412
140.47
0.00375
163.36
0.00296
79.60
0.00077
16.14
0.00223
31.14
0.00191
52.41
0.00291
102.43
0.00388
173.12
0.00756
347.55
0.01140
521.35
0.00224
67.60
0.00040
8.61
0.00159
33.49
0.00490
34.67
0.00408
66.35

K-70

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-l Offroad 2017
SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors (Diesel)
Extrapolation (down)
Interpolation
Extrapolation (up)

3.11-l Offroad 2017
Air Basin

Equipment

Trenchers Composite
Welders

Welders Composite

SC

MaxHP
175
180
250
500
750
15
25
50
120
175
250
500

(lb/hr)
ROG
0.15902
0.16097
0.18835
0.24330
0.46103
0.11291
0.00864
0.01659
0.06383
0.04443
0.07741
0.06568
0.08655
0.04337

(lb/hr)
CO
0.84637
0.83015
0.60308
1.00858
1.89711
0.44218
0.03937
0.05111
0.24084
0.25591
0.54039
0.23836
0.32632
0.19120

(lb/hr)
NOX
1.18930
1.22145
1.67150
2.10484
4.06161
0.54103
0.05362
0.09413
0.21834
0.30326
0.62144
0.65818
0.80959
0.20541

(lb/hr)
SOX
0.00162
0.00168
0.00251
0.00306
0.00590
0.00070
0.00010
0.00014
0.00034
0.00046
0.00110
0.00134
0.00165
0.00032

(lb/hr)
PM10
0.06529
0.06517
0.06348
0.08052
0.15352
0.04227
0.00301
0.00487
0.01620
0.02341
0.03215
0.01999
0.02640
0.01504

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
PM2.5
CO2
0.06007
143.9
0.05996
149.2
0.05841
222.9
0.07408
311.3
0.14124
586.9
0.03889
58.7
0.00277
6.2
0.00448
11.3
0.01490
26.0
0.02153
39.5
0.02958
98.2
0.01839
119.1
0.02429
167.6
0.01384
25.6

(lb/hr)
CH4
0.01435
0.01452
0.01699
0.02195
0.04160
0.01019
0.00078
0.00150
0.00576
0.00401
0.00698
0.00593
0.00781
0.00391

(lb/hr) (lb/hr)
N2O
CO2 e
0.00638
146.18
0.00646
151.47
0.00755
225.60
0.00976
314.79
0.01849
593.48
0.00453
60.33
0.00035
6.33
0.00067
11.52
0.00256
26.87
0.00178
40.14
0.00310
99.30
0.00263
120.01
0.00347
168.84
0.00174
26.22

Notes:
SCAQMD emission factors for 2017 (SCAQMD 2008)
Offroad diesel exhaust PM2.5 = 92% of PM10 per EMFAC 2007 version 2.3 (SCAQMD 2008)
N2O & CO2 eqv per Inventory of U.S. GHG Emissions & Sinks - Annex 3 (USEPA 2012)
Non-matching application-specific values interpolated or extrapolated for improved accuracy
USEPA GWPs for CO2 eqv (1, 21, 310)

K-71

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-m Onroad 2017

SCAB Fleet Average Emission Factors
3.11-m Onroad 2017
Air Basin

Vehicle Type
Light Duty (pickups/SUVs)
Medium Duty (work trucks)
Heavy Heavy Duty (tractor/trailers)

SC

Category
Onroad LD
Onroad MD
Onroad HHD

(lb/mi)
(lb/mi)
ROG
CO
0.000601 0.005379
0.001502 0.009981
0.001452 0.006505

(lb/mi)
NOX
0.000513
0.010700
0.016904

(lb/mi)
SOX
0.000011
0.000027
0.000040

(lb/mi)
PM10
0.000094
0.000431
0.000849

(lb/mi)
PM2.5
0.000062
0.000346
0.000697

(lb/mi)
CO2
1.106275
2.840050
4.208201

(lb/mi)
CH4
0.000053
0.000067
0.000067

(lb/mi)
N2O
0.000082
0.000063
0.000063

(lb/mi)
CO2 e
1.132948
2.860890
4.229226

Notes:
SCAQMD 2008
HHD includes tire & brake wear
N2O & CO2 eqv per Inventory of U.S. GHG Emissions & Sinks - Annex 3 (USEPA 2012)

K-72

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-n Onroad LD MD 2011-2026
Highest (Most Conservative) EMFAC2007 (version 2.3) Emission
Factors for On‐Road Passenger Vehicles & Delivery Trucks Projects
in the SCAQMD (Scenario Years 2011 ‐ 2026)
Derived from Peak Emissions Inventory (Winter, Annual, Summer)
Vehicle Class: Passenger Vehicles (<8500
pounds) & Delivery Trucks (>8500 pounds)
The following emission factors were compiled by running the California Air Resources Board's EMFAC2007
(version 2.3) Burden Model, taking the weighted average of vehicle types and simplifying into two categories:
Passenger Vehicles & Delivery Trucks.
These emission factors can be used to calculate on‐road mobile source emissions for the vehicle categories
listed in the tables below, by use of the following equation:
Emissions (pounds per day) = N x TL x EF
where N = number of trips, TL = trip length (miles/day), and EF = emission factor (pounds per mile)
This methodology replaces the old EMFAC emission factors in Tables A‐9‐5‐J‐1 through A‐9‐5‐L in
Appendix A9 of the current SCAQMD CEQA Handbook. All the emission factors account for the emissions
from start, running and idling exhaust. In addition, the ROG emission factors include diurnal, hot soak, running
and resting emissions, and the PM10 & PM2.5 emission factors include tire and brake wear.

K-73

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-n Onroad LD MD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2011
All model years in the range 1967 to 2011
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00826276
CO 0.01693242
NOx 0.00084460
NOx 0.01893366
ROG 0.00085233
ROG 0.00241868
SOx 0.00001077
SOx 0.00002728
PM10 0.00008879
PM10 0.00070097
PM2.5 0.00005653
PM2.5 0.00059682
CO2 1.10235154
CO2 2.75180822
CH4 0.00007678
CH4 0.00011655
N2O 0.00011943
N2O 0.00010970
CO2 eqv 1.14098746
CO2 eqv 2.78826189

Scenario Year: 2012
All model years in the range 1968 to 2012
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.01545741
CO 0.00765475
NOx 0.01732423
NOx 0.00077583
ROG 0.00223776
ROG 0.00079628
SOx 0.00002667
SOx 0.00001073
PM10 0.00064975
PM10 0.00008979
PM2.5 0.00054954
PM2.5 0.00005750
CO2 2.76628414
CO2 1.10152540
CH4 0.00010668
CH4 0.00007169
N2O 0.00010040
N2O 0.00011151
CO2 eqv 1.13760039 CO2 eqv 2.79964841

Scenario Year: 2013
All model years in the range 1969 to 2013
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00709228
CO 0.01407778
NOx 0.00071158
NOx 0.01577311
ROG 0.00074567
ROG 0.00206295
SOx 0.00001072
SOx 0.00002682
PM10 0.00009067
PM10 0.00059956
PM2.5 0.00005834
PM2.5 0.00050174
CO2 1.10087435
CO2 2.78163459
CH4 0.00006707
CH4 0.00009703
N2O 0.00010434
N2O 0.00009133
CO2 eqv 1.13462778
CO2 eqv 2.81198332

Scenario Year: 2014
All model years in the range 1970 to 2014
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.01284321
CO 0.00660353
NOx 0.01425162
NOx 0.00065484
ROG 0.00189649
ROG 0.00070227
SOx 0.00002754
SOx 0.00001069
PM10 0.00054929
PM10 0.00009185
PM2.5 0.00045519
PM2.5 0.00005939
CO2 2.79845465
CO2 1.10257205
CH4 0.00008798
CH4 0.00006312
N2O 0.00008280
N2O 0.00009818
CO2 eqv 1.13433310 CO2 eqv 2.82597096

Scenario Year: 2015
All model years in the range 1971 to 2015
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00614108
CO 0.01169445
NOx 0.00060188
NOx 0.01285026
ROG 0.00173890
ROG 0.00066355
SOx 0.00001070
SOx 0.00002741
PM10 0.00009259
PM10 0.00050307
PM2.5 0.00006015
PM2.5 0.00041268
CO2 1.10192837
CO2 2.81247685
CH4 0.00005923
CH4 0.00008076
N2O 0.00007601
N2O 0.00009213
CO2 eqv 1.13173218
CO2 eqv 2.83773531

Scenario Year: 2016
All model years in the range 1972 to 2016
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.01080542
CO 0.00575800
NOx 0.01172881
NOx 0.00055658
ROG 0.00161521
ROG 0.00063254
SOx 0.00002767
SOx 0.00001071
PM10 0.00046606
PM10 0.00009392
PM2.5 0.00037868
PM2.5 0.00006131
CO2 2.83134285
CO2 1.10677664
CH4 0.00007355
CH4 0.00005623
N2O 0.00006922
N2O 0.00008747
CO2 eqv 1.13507331 CO2 eqv 2.85434695

K-74

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-n Onroad LD MD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2017
All model years in the range 1973 to 2017
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00537891
CO 0.00998101
NOx 0.00051297
NOx 0.01070034
ROG 0.00060109
ROG 0.00150242
SOx 0.00001079
SOx 0.00002723
PM10 0.00009446
PM10 0.00043131
PM2.5 0.00006192
PM2.5 0.00034605
CO2 1.10627489
CO2 2.84005015
CH4 0.00005300
CH4 0.00006663
N2O 0.00008245
N2O 0.00006271
CO2 eqv 1.13294795
CO2 eqv 2.86088993

Scenario Year: 2018
All model years in the range 1974 to 2018
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00923234
CO 0.00502881
NOx 0.00979416
NOx 0.00047300
ROG 0.00139856
ROG 0.00057178
SOx 0.00002749
SOx 0.00001071
PM10 0.00040110
PM10 0.00009494
PM2.5 0.00031792
PM2.5 0.00006234
CO2 2.84646835
CO2 1.10562643
CH4 0.00006203
CH4 0.00005003
N2O 0.00005838
N2O 0.00007782
CO2 eqv 1.13080168 CO2 eqv 2.86587008

Scenario Year: 2019
All model years in the range 1975 to 2019
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00471820
CO 0.00857192
NOx 0.00043716
NOx 0.00900205
ROG 0.00054654
ROG 0.00130563
SOx 0.00001072
SOx 0.00002706
PM10 0.00009523
PM10 0.00037393
PM2.5 0.00006259
PM2.5 0.00029276
CO2 1.10496100
CO2 2.85060182
CH4 0.00004743
CH4 0.00005619
N2O 0.00007378
N2O 0.00005289
CO2 eqv 1.12882815
CO2 eqv 2.86817714

Scenario Year: 2020
All model years in the range 1976 to 2020
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00799617
CO 0.00444247
NOx 0.00831802
NOx 0.00040506
ROG 0.00122382
ROG 0.00052463
SOx 0.00002733
SOx 0.00001073
PM10 0.00035054
PM10 0.00009550
PM2.5 0.00027128
PM2.5 0.00006279
CO2 2.85148109
CO2 1.10456157
CH4 0.00005330
CH4 0.00004495
N2O 0.00005016
N2O 0.00006992
CO2 eqv 1.12718066 CO2 eqv 2.86815105

Scenario Year: 2021
All model years in the range 1977 to 2021
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00421218
CO 0.00748303
NOx 0.00037757
NOx 0.00773500
ROG 0.00115568
ROG 0.00050573
SOx 0.00001073
SOx 0.00002755
PM10 0.00009640
PM10 0.00033125
PM2.5 0.00006364
PM2.5 0.00025331
CO2 1.11009559
CO2 2.86434187
CH4 0.00004322
CH4 0.00004905
N2O 0.00004616
N2O 0.00006724
CO2 eqv 1.13184726
CO2 eqv 2.87968274

Scenario Year: 2022
All model years in the range 1978 to 2022
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00699290
CO 0.00397866
NOx 0.00722470
NOx 0.00035150
ROG 0.00108569
ROG 0.00048658
SOx 0.00002774
SOx 0.00001072
PM10 0.00031501
PM10 0.00009661
PM2.5 0.00023906
PM2.5 0.00006389
CO2 2.87006769
CO2 1.11019931
CH4 0.00004557
CH4 0.00004121
N2O 0.00004289
N2O 0.00006411
CO2 eqv 1.13093833 CO2 eqv 2.88431947

K-75

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-n Onroad LD MD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2023
All model years in the range 1979 to 2023
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00377527
CO 0.00658123
NOx 0.00032851
NOx 0.00679147
ROG 0.00046900
ROG 0.00102852
SOx 0.00001070
SOx 0.00002790
PM10 0.00009676
PM10 0.00030109
PM2.5 0.00006405
PM2.5 0.00022582
CO2 1.11023373
CO2 2.87466338
CH4 0.00003951
CH4 0.00004218
N2O 0.00006146
N2O 0.00003970
CO2 eqv 1.13011498
CO2 eqv 2.88785549

Scenario Year: 2024
All model years in the range 1980 to 2024
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00625076
CO 0.00358611
NOx 0.00647083
NOx 0.00030721
ROG 0.00096578
ROG 0.00045136
SOx 0.00002807
SOx 0.00001080
PM10 0.00029407
PM10 0.00009676
PM2.5 0.00021880
PM2.5 0.00006410
CO2 2.88010717
CO2 1.11061572
CH4 0.00004019
CH4 0.00003781
N2O 0.00003782
N2O 0.00005881
CO2 eqv 1.12964186 CO2 eqv 2.89267641

Scenario Year: 2025
All model years in the range 1981 to 2025
Passenger Vehicles
Delivery Trucks
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00342738
CO 0.00595363
NOx 0.00028846
NOx 0.00615945
ROG 0.00043545
ROG 0.00092178
SOx 0.00001070
SOx 0.00002761
PM10 0.00009679
PM10 0.00028425
PM2.5 0.00006418
PM2.5 0.00020958
CO2 1.11078571
CO2 2.88143570
CH4 0.00003641
CH4 0.00003765
N2O 0.00005663
N2O 0.00003543
CO2 eqv 1.12910559
CO2 eqv 2.89321111

Scenario Year: 2026
All model years in the range 1982 to 2026
Delivery Trucks
Passenger Vehicles
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO 0.00569435
CO 0.00328779
NOx 0.00589869
NOx 0.00027141
ROG 0.00088403
ROG 0.00042052
SOx 0.00002716
SOx 0.00001076
PM10 0.00027657
PM10 0.00009687
PM2.5 0.00020187
PM2.5 0.00006415
CO2 2.88298299
CO2 1.11105829
CH4 0.00003581
CH4 0.00003518
N2O 0.00003370
N2O 0.00005472
CO2 eqv 1.12876023 CO2 eqv 2.89418178

Notes:
SCAQMD 2008
HHD‐DSL composite includes tire & brake wear
N2O & CO2 eqv per Inventory of U.S. GHG Emissions & Sinks ‐ Annex 3 (USEPA 2012)

K-76

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-o Onroad HHD 2011-2026
Highest (Most Conservative) EMFAC2007 (version 2.3) Emission
Factors for On‐Road Heavy‐Heavy‐Duty Diesel Trucks Projects
in the SCAQMD (Scenario Years 2011 ‐ 2026)
Derived from Peak Emissions Inventory (Winter, Annual, Summer)
Vehicle Class: Heavy‐Heavy‐Duty Diesel Trucks (33,001 to
60,000 pounds)
The following emission factors were compiled by running the California Air Resources Board's EMFAC2007
(version 2.3) Burden Model and extracting the Heavy‐Heavy‐Duty Diesel Truck (HHDT) Emission Factors.
These emission factors can be used to calculate on‐road mobile source emissions for the vehicle/emission
categories listed in the tables below, by use of the following equation:
Emissions (pounds per day) = N x TL x EF
where N = number of trips, TL = trip length (miles/day), and EF = emission factor (pounds per mile)
The HHDT‐DSL vehicle/emission category accounts for all emissions from heavy‐heavy‐duty diesel trucks,
including start, running and idling exhaust. In addition, ROG emission factors account for diurnal, hot soak,
running and resting emissions, and the PM10 & PM2.5 emission factors account for tire and brake wear.
The HHDT‐DSL, Exh vehicle/emission category includes only the exhaust portion of PM10 & PM2.5 emissions
from heavy‐heavy‐duty diesel trucks.

K-77

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-o Onroad HHD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2011
All model years in the range 1967 to 2011
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.01112463
PM10
0.00151936
NOx
0.03455809
PM2.5
0.00139772
ROG
0.00279543
SOx
0.00003972
PM10
0.00166087
PM2.5
0.00144489
CO2
4.22045680
CH4
0.00012910
N2O
0.00012150
CO2 eqv 4.26083358

Scenario Year: 2012
All model years in the range 1968 to 2012
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00135537
CO
0.01021519
PM2.5
0.00124837
NOx
0.03092379
ROG
0.00252764
SOx
0.00004042
PM10
0.00149566
PM2.5
0.00129354
CO2
4.21590774
CH4
0.00011651
N2O
0.00010966
CO2 eqv 4.25234923

Scenario Year: 2013
All model years in the range 1969 to 2013
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00931790
PM10
0.00119623
NOx
0.02742935
PM2.5
0.00109863
ROG
0.00226308
SOx
0.00004086
PM10
0.00133697
PM2.5
0.00114629
CO2
4.21518556
CH4
0.00010441
N2O
0.00009827
CO2 eqv 4.24784287

Scenario Year: 2014
All model years in the range 1970 to 2014
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00104243
CO
0.00846435
PM2.5
0.00096059
NOx
0.02418049
ROG
0.00201594
SOx
0.00004092
PM10
0.00118458
PM2.5
0.00100582
CO2
4.21279345
CH4
0.00009261
N2O
0.00008716
CO2 eqv 4.24175938

Scenario Year: 2015
All model years in the range 1971 to 2015
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
HHDT‐DSL
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00766891
PM10
0.00090631
NOx
0.02122678
PM2.5
0.00083282
ROG
0.00178608
SOx
0.00004082
PM10
0.00104715
PM2.5
0.00087977
CO2
4.20902225
CH4
0.00008369
N2O
0.00007877
CO2 eqv 4.23519770

Scenario Year: 2016
All model years in the range 1972 to 2016
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00080419
CO
0.00704604
PM2.5
0.00073898
NOx
0.01887374
ROG
0.00161035
SOx
0.00003952
PM10
0.00094448
PM2.5
0.00078443
CO2
4.21063031
CH4
0.00007508
N2O
0.00007067
CO2 eqv 4.23411393

K-78

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-o Onroad HHD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2017
All model years in the range 1973 to 2017
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00650533
PM10
0.00070873
NOx
0.01690387
PM2.5
0.00065111
ROG
0.00145203
SOx
0.00004033
PM10
0.00084894
PM2.5
0.00069721
CO2
4.20820129
CH4
0.00006722
N2O
0.00006327
CO2 eqv 4.22922648

Scenario Year: 2018
All model years in the range 1974 to 2018
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00062758
CO
0.00604721
PM2.5
0.00057700
NOx
0.01526414
ROG
0.00131697
SOx
0.00003934
PM10
0.00076808
PM2.5
0.00062383
CO2
4.20756838
CH4
0.00006182
N2O
0.00005818
CO2 eqv 4.22690378

Scenario Year: 2019
All model years in the range 1975 to 2019
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00565433
PM10
0.00056085
NOx
0.01389113
PM2.5
0.00051320
ROG
0.00120235
SOx
0.00004032
PM10
0.00070198
PM2.5
0.00056085
CO2
4.20637830
CH4
0.00005499
N2O
0.00005175
CO2 eqv 4.22357577

Scenario Year: 2020
All model years in the range 1976 to 2020
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00050364
CO
0.00532242
PM2.5
0.00046227
NOx
0.01274755
ROG
0.00110621
SOx
0.00003957
PM10
0.00064574
PM2.5
0.00050904
CO2
4.20541416
CH4
0.00005216
N2O
0.00004909
CO2 eqv 4.22172889

Scenario Year: 2021
All model years in the range 1977 to 2021
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
HHDT‐DSL
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00503726
PM10
0.00045411
NOx
0.01179977
PM2.5
0.00041729
ROG
0.00103095
SOx
0.00004033
PM10
0.00059437
PM2.5
0.00046287
CO2
4.21495573
CH4
0.00004734
N2O
0.00004455
CO2 eqv 4.22976181

Scenario Year: 2022
All model years in the range 1978 to 2022
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00041399
CO
0.00478830
PM2.5
0.00037807
NOx
0.01098794
ROG
0.00096142
SOx
0.00004106
PM10
0.00055427
PM2.5
0.00042597
CO2
4.21520828
CH4
0.00004448
N2O
0.00004186
CO2 eqv 4.22911963

K-79

Appendix K
Air Quality Tables

Upper Llagas Creek Project

3.11-o Onroad HHD 2011-2026
Scenario Year: 2023
All model years in the range 1979 to 2023
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00457902
PM10
0.00037922
NOx
0.01031407
PM2.5
0.00034915
ROG
0.00090210
SOx
0.00004009
PM10
0.00052122
PM2.5
0.00039592
CO2
4.21483461
CH4
0.00004176
N2O
0.00003931
CO2 eqv 4.22789696

Scenario Year: 2024
All model years in the range 1980 to 2024
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00036682
CO
0.00444444
PM2.5
0.00033735
NOx
0.00974372
ROG
0.00084009
SOx
0.00003930
PM10
0.00050766
PM2.5
0.00038320
CO2
4.19552935
CH4
0.00003930
N2O
0.00003699
CO2 eqv 4.20782175

Scenario Year: 2025
All model years in the range 1981 to 2025
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
CO
0.00431086
PM10
0.00034397
NOx
0.00932573
PM2.5
0.00031664
ROG
0.00080206
SOx
0.00004018
PM10
0.00048541
PM2.5
0.00036326
CO2
4.19512979
CH4
0.00003697
N2O
0.00003479
CO2 eqv 4.20669226

Scenario Year: 2026
All model years in the range 1982 to 2026
HHDT‐DSL
HHDT‐DSL, Exh
(pounds/mile)
(pounds/mile)
PM10
0.00032670
CO
0.00420297
PM2.5
0.00029830
NOx
0.00898990
ROG
0.00077178
SOx
0.00003946
PM10
0.00046717
PM2.5
0.00034564
CO2
4.19349747
CH4
0.00003630
N2O
0.00003417
CO2 eqv 4.20485099

Notes:
SCAQMD 2008
HHD‐DSL composite includes tire & brake wear
N2O & CO2 eqv per Inventory of U.S. GHG Emissions & Sinks ‐ Annex 3 (USEPA 2012)

K-80

USACE

Appendix L

Upper Llagas Creek Baseline Noise Measurements

Technical Memorandum
Cardno ENTRIX

Date

February 20, 2012

To:

Chelsea Ayala, Senior Project Scientist
Cardno ENTRIX

cc:

Christie Robinson, Senior Consultant

From:

Adam O’Connor, Senior Staff Scientist

Phone
925 935 9920
Toll-free 800 368 7511
Fax
925 935 5368
www.cardno.com

RE:

Llagas Creek Noise Measurements

www.cardnoentrix.com

1.0

Introduction

This report summarizes background noise measurements recorded from November 15 to
December 22, 2011 for the Upper Llagas Creek Project (Figure 1). The purpose of the
baseline noise measurements is to identify the baseline noise levels which will be used to
prepare a Noise Control Plan which will identify, control and mitigate short-term noise
impacts during construction along the path of the creek. Baseline noise measurements
will also be used to determine impacts from construction and operation of the project.

2.0

Methods

A total of seven baseline noise measurements were recorded at locations along Upper
Llagas Creek in San Martin and Morgan Hill, California from November 15 to
December 22, 2011. Five long-term measurements (24 hours) and two-short term
measurements (1 hour) were made over the course of this study. Figures 2 through 7
depict the measurement locations. The following is a summary of the study locations:
1. 24-hour measurement near intersection of Amistad Lane and Church Avenue,
San Martin, Reach 14, semi-rural residential area some distance from industry
and airport.
2. 24 hour measurement near intersection of Spring Street and Llagas Avenue, San
Martin, Reach 6b, densest semi-rural residential area in San Martin but still some
distance from airport. Takeoffs and landings were recorded intermittently
throughout noise measurement duration.
3. 24 hour measurement along Watsonville Road near La Jolla Drive, Morgan Hill,
Reach 7a.

Australia • Belgium • Canada • Ecuador • Indonesia • Kenya • New Zealand • Papua New Guinea
Peru • United Arab Emirates • United Kingdom • United States • Operations in 70 countries

2300 Clayton Road
Suite 200
Concord, CA 94520
USA

2
February 20, 2012
Llagas Creek Noise Measurements

4. 24 hour measurement near intersection of Warren Avenue and Hale Avenue for baseline noise at
North Tunnel Portal location.
5. 24 hour measurement along Del Monte Avenue between Dunne Avenue and 5th Street for baseline
noise at South Tunnel Portal location.
6. 1-hour measurement near Rucker Avenue and Borges Court for Reach 4 near south end of project
and outside San Martin.
7. 1-hour measurement near Monterey Road and Spring Avenue for residential development in
Morgan Hill, Reach 7b.
Noise levels were gathered using a Quest Technologies Sound Pro SE/DL Sound Level Meter and
analyzed using QuestSuite Professional II software. The Sound Level Meters were calibrated before and
after each event, with no change in levels noted. The microphones were placed approximately 2 meters
from the ground surface and at least 1 meter from any surface that may reflect sound. The monitoring
equipment was set to record the following measurements over 5 second intervals for the duration of each
study:
Parameter

Description

Leq

True equivalent sound level measured over the run time. Functionally the same as the
average.

Lmin

Minimum (lowest) sound pressure level (SPL) recorded over the run time.

Lmax

Maximum (highest) sound pressure level SPL recorded over the run time.

Lpk

Peak SPL (highest) instantaneous sound level detected by the microphone during a study.
Lpk is affected by frequency response settings but not the time response.

TWA

Time weighted average. The constant SPL over and 8-hour interval that would produce the
same exposure to sound as an exposure measured over a run time sampling interval.

All measurements were taken over typical weekday periods on a Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday. Full
descriptions of the equipment setup and weather conditions can be found in Appendix A (Field Notes).
General weather conditions such as wind, air temperature and humidity were recorded using a Kestrel
3000 Pocket Weather Meter during equipment setup and removal. Weather at the sites was generally
sunny and clear. All measurements were made during periods when no rain or fog was present to interfere
with measurements. On a few occasions intermittent winds were gusting throughout the monitoring
period.

www.cardnoentrix.com

3
February 20, 2012
Llagas Creek Noise Measurements

3.0

Results and Discussion

The results of the Baseline Noise Study are summarized in Table 1. All the recorded data and field notes
are provided in Appendix A. The 24-hour long term measurements show a diurnal pattern in the noise
levels, with lowest decibel levels late in the evening between approximately 10pm and 2am. Automobile
traffic was the dominant noise source observed at all locations. Other sources of detectable noises
included: landscaping (lawn mowers, hedge trimmers and leaf cutters), pedestrian traffic and vegetation
blowing during gusts of wind.
The Lmin values were similar at all seven study locations with a minimum of 31.8 decibels (dB) and a max
of 47.2 dB. The two highest minimum noise levels were recorded during the 1-hour studies at Sites 6 and
7. The Lmin values recorded at Sites 1 through 5 ranged from 31.8 dB to 40.8 dB.
Measurements collected at Sites 1, 2 and 3 had the highest Lmax, Lpk and time weighted average (TWA)
values measured during this study. These values correspond to high volumes of observed automobile
traffic along Church Avenue at Site 1, Llagas Avenue at Site 2 and Watsonville Road at Site 3.
Measurements at Site 2 had the additional observed noise source associated with the airport, located
approximately 0.25 miles to the east, and the 101 freeway, located approximately 0.5 miles to the east.

www.cardnoentrix.com

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Tables

Table 1
Summary of Baseline Noise Sudy
Upper Llagas Creek
Morgan Hill and San Martin, California
Station ID
Duration of Study
Site 1
24‐hours
Site 2
24‐hours
Site 3
24‐hours
Site 4
24‐hours
Site 5
24‐hours
Site 6
1‐hour
Site 7
1‐hour
Notes:
All measurments in decibels (dB)

Start of Study
11/22/2011 11:30
11/30/2011 10:52
12/21/2011 11:47
11/15/2011 11:28
12/20/2011 11:16
11/17/2011 10:43
11/15/2011 12:30

Leq
63.6
55.4
63.3
49.5
53.5
60.1
62.1

Lmin
40.8
33.5
31.8
35.2
35.3
42.9
47.2

Lmax
98.3
95.3
94.3
82.3
84.8
80.1
85.7

Lpk
112.8
104.8
107.1
96.3
96
99.5
100.9

TWA
68.4
60.1
68.1
54.3
58.3
51
53.1

Figures

USACE

Appendix M

Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in
the Project Vicinity

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

M.1

Special-status Wildlife potentially Occurring Near Llagas Creek
Status**

Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

State

Federal

Hoary bat
(Lasiurus cinereus)

None

None

Prefers open habitats or habitat
mosaics, with access to trees for
cover and open areas or habitat
edges for feeding. Roosts in dense
foliage of medium to large trees.
Feeds primarily on moths and
requires water.

GI

Habitat within the Project area
provides low suitability for
reproduction, cover, and foraging for
this species. Higher foraging
suitability near perennial water.

Moderate

Pallid bat
(Antrozous pallidus)

CSC

None

Deserts, grasslands, scrublands,
woodlands and open forests. Most
common in open, dry habitats with
rocky areas for roosting.

GI, MH

May roost in hollow trees, buildings,
under bridges, and in tunnels.
Suitable foraging habitat present.
2 CNDDB occurrences within
10 miles of Project area.

Moderate

Yuma myotis
(Myotis yumanensis)

None

None

Optimal habitats are open forests and
woodlands with sources of water over
which to feed. Distribution is closely
tied to bodies of water. Maternity
colonies in caves, mines, buildings, or
crevices.

ST

May roost under bridges and in
tunnels. Suitable foraging habitat
present. 1 CNDDB occurrence within
10 miles of Project area.

Moderate

San Francisco duskyfooted woodrat
(Neotoma fuscipes
annectens)

CSC

None

Found among oak/bay woodland and
riparian areas around the San
Francisco Bay Area. May also be
found in rock outcrops and chaparral
habitat types.

MH

May nest in areas with high density
of woody vegetation. Sensitive to
disturbance. Dens have been
observed near the intersection of
Monterey Road and Watsonville
Road.

Moderate

CT

FE

Open, level, sandy ground preferred.
Often associated with annual
grasslands and small mammal burrow
complexes.

CH, GH, PP, WW

Occasionally occurs in agricultural
areas. Dominate Project area has
low to no suitability, except as a
potential migratory corridor.

Low

CSC

None

Herbaceous, shrub, and open stages
of most habitats with dry, friable soils.

CH, GI, MH

Prefers open grasslands with ground
squirrels. Dominate Project area has
low to no suitability, except as a
potential migratory corridor.

Low

Mammals

San Joaquin kit fox
(Vulpes macrotis
mutica)
American badger
(Taxidea taxus)

M-1

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name
State

Federal

CE

FE

CSC

None

Least Bell’s vireo
(Vireo bellii pusillus)

CE

Black swift
(Cypseloides niger)
Yellow warbler
(Dendroica petechial)

Salt marsh harvest
mouse
(Reithrodontomys
raviventris)

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

Restricted to salk and brackish marsh.
Critically dependent upon dense cover
and preferred habitat is pickleweed
(Salicornia virginica). Occurs in the
upper zone of marshes with salttolerant plants. May move in to
grasslands during highest winter tides.

SCC

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat within the Project area and
large distance from nearest known
occurrence.

None

Ground dweller of open country, golf
courses, airports, etc. Often
associated with California ground
squirrel burrow complexes.

CH, LO, MH, MM,
SF

Prefers open areas with ground
squirrels burrows. Will use manmade structures. Multiple CNDDB
occurrences within Project area.
Suitable burrowing and foraging
habitat in adjacent agricultural fields.

LowModerate

FE

Natural early successional riparian
and cottonwood-willow riparian areas,
young forests and woodlands, coastal
chaparral, and scrub oak ecosystems.

CH, SF, WE

Limited potential riparian nesting
habitat, but too narrow and no
historical or recent breeding records
within 2.5 miles of the Project area.

Low-None

CSC

None

Steep cliffs ledges and shallow caves
behind or near waterfalls. Forages in
forests and open montane habitat.

ST

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat. 1 CNDDB occurrence within
10 miles of Project Area.

None

CSC

None

(Nesting) Occurs widely in migration
and a summer resident from late
March early Oct. Breeding numbers
greatly declined in lowland areas west
of Cascade-Sierra Nevada and
Central Valley. Breeds locally in Santa
Clara County., San Mateo, Santa
Cruz, Monterey, and San Luis Obispo
County. Occupies riparian vegetation
in close proximity to water, along
streams and wet meadows. Found in
willow and cottonwood.

--

Limited riparian nesting habitat, but
too narrow and no historical or recent
breeding records. No known
occurrences within 10 miles of
Project area.

Low-None

Birds
Western burrowing owl
(Athene cunicularia
hypugaea)

M-2

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

State

Federal

CT

None

Lowland vertical or near vertical banks
with erodible soil near coasts, rivers,
streams, lakes, reservoirs, and
wetlands. Feeding sites are near
wetlands, open water, grasslands,
riparian woodlands, agricultural areas,
shrublands, and, occasionally, upland
woodlands.

CH

No suitable nesting habitat. Potential
feeding habitats (grassland and
agricultural areas) adjacent to
Project area.

Low

CSC

None

Open grasslands and pasturelands
associated with nesting cover (e.g.,
blackberry shrubs, wetland emergent
vegetation, etc.).

CH, ST

Potential feeding and nesting habitat
present in reaches with perennial
water. 2 CNDDB occurrences within
10 miles of Project area.

Low

White-tailed kite
(Elanus leucurus)

FP

None

Rolling foothills and valley margins
with scattered oaks and river
bottomlands or marshes next to
deciduous woodland. Forages in open
grasslands, meadows, or marshes,
close to isolated, dense-topped trees
for nesting and perching.

GI

Low habitat suitability for foraging and Low
nesting within the Project area,
however suitable foraging habitat is
present in adjacent agricultural fields.
1 CNDDB occurrence within 10 miles
of Project area.

Golden eagle
(Aquila chrysaetos)

FP

None

(Nesting & wintering) Rolling foothills,
mountain areas, sage-juniper flats and
desert. Cliff-walled canyons provide
nesting habitat in most parts of range;
also large trees in open areas.

ST

No suitable feeding or nesting
habitat. 1 CNDDB occurrence within
10 miles of Project area.

None

Great blue heron
(Ardea herodias)

None

None

(Nesting) Colonial nester in tall trees,
cliffsides, and sequestered spots on
marshes. Rookery sites in close
proximity to foraging areas–marshes,
lake margins, tide-flats, rivers and
streams, and wet meadows.

MH

Suitable feeding (fresh and saline
wetlands) habitat at perennial
reaches within Project area. Riparian
trees adjacent to creek provide
suitable nesting habitat.

Moderate

Marbled murrelet
(Brachyramphus
marmoratus)

CT

FT

(Nesting) Uses old-growth forest,
characterized by large trees, multiple
canopy layers and high canopy
closure. Prefers nesting along coastal
and in near-shore marine waters as
far south as northern Monterey Bay.

CH, WE, WW

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat and large distance from
nearest known occurrence.

None

Bank swallow
(Riparia riparia)

Tricolored blackbird
(Agelaius tricolor)

M-3

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

State

Federal

FP

FE

Occurs from Pacific coast from San
Francisco to Baja, Califronia.
Breeding colonies are located along
marine and estuarine shores,
abandoned salt ponds along estuarine
shores. Feeds in shallow, estuarine
waters.

SF, CH, PP, WE,
WW

Western snowy plover
(Charadrius
alexandrines nivosus)

CSC

FT

(Nesting) Breeds primarily on coastal
beaches from southern Washington to
southern Baja, California. Breeds
above high tide line on coastal
beaches, sand spits, dune-backed
beaches, sparsely-vegetated dunes,
beaches at creek and river mouths,
and salt pans. Less common nesting
habitat include river bars, dry salt
pond, salt pond levees.

SCC, WW

Western brown pelican
(Pelecanus
occidentails
californicus)

DE

FE

Range from Gulf of California to
southern British Columbia. Nests on
islands and rarely seen inland or far
out at sea.

California clapper rail
(Rallus longirostris
obsoletus)

CE

FE

Western pond turtle
(Actinemys
marmorata, formerly
Clemmys or Emmys
marmorata)

CSC

Black legless lizard
(Anniella pulchra
nigra)

CSC

California least tern
(Sternula antillarum
(=Sterna, =albifrons)
browni

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat and large distance from
nearest known occurrence.

None

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat and large distance from
nearest known occurrence.

None

SCC

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat and large distance from
nearest known occurrence.

None

Restricted almost entirely to marshes
of San Francisco estuary, where only
known breeding population occurs.
Distribution is patchy and
discontinuous.

SCC

No suitable nesting or foraging
habitat and large distance from
nearest known occurrence.

None

None

Aquatic turtle of ponds, lakes,
marshes, rivers, streams, and
irrigation ditches that typically have
rocky or muddy bottom, with aquatic
vegetation. Nests in uplands
associated with wetland habitat.

CH, GH, GI, LO,
LP, MC, MH, MM,
MS, PP, SE, ST,
WE

Dominate habitat within Project area,
especially areas with perennial
waters. Females move overland to
find suitable egg laying sites.

ModerateHigh

None

Loose soil and leaf litter within coastal
scrub types, coastal dunes, valley
foothills, and chaparral. Isolated
population within the desert in
Riverside County.

WW

No suitable habitat and large
distance from nearest known habitat.
Nearest CNDDB occurrence is
9.5 miles.

None

1

Reptiles

M-4

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

State

Federal

CSC

None

Open country, especially sandy areas,
washes, flood plains and wind-blown
deposits in a wide variety of habitats.
Common in lowlands along sandy
washes where scattered low shrubs
provide cover. Requires friable soils.

GH, ST

Possible in sandier portions of
reaches. Nearest CDDB occurrence
is 7.3 miles from Project area.

Low-None

Blunt-nosed leopard
lizard
(Gambelia
(=Crotaphytus) sila)

CE

FE

Found only in the San Joaquin Valley
and adjacent foothills, Carrizo Plain
and Cuyama Valley. Inhabits open,
sparely vegetated low relief areas on
the valley floor and surrounding
foothill. Also inhabits alkali playa and
valley saltbrush scrub. Generally
absent from dense vegetation or
areas subject to seasonal flooding.

SCC

No suitable habitat within Project
area and large distance from nearest
known occurrence.

None

Alameda whipsnake
(Masticophis lateralis
euryxanthus)

CT

FT

Inhabits inner coast range in Contra
Costa., Alameda, San Joaquin, and
Santa Clara counties. Found in
chaparral-northern coastal sage scrub
and coastal sage. Will occur up to
500 feet into adjacent habitats,
including grassland, oak savanna, and
occasionally oak-bay woodland. Lays
eggs in grassland communities
adjacent to chaparral community.

SCC

No suitable habitat within Project
area and large distance from nearest
known occurrence.

None

CT,
CSC

FT

Quiet water of ponds, reservoirs,
lakes, vernal pools, streams, and
stock ponds within annual grasslands,
oak savannah, oak woodland and
open chaparral.

CH, GH, GI, IV,
LO, MH, MM, MS,
PP, SF, ST, WW

Suitable habitat exists but
fragmented by development. The
Project area is within a region where
the CTS has been presumed to be
extinct, but portions of the Project
area are within the migration range
of potential breeding habitat,
including designated critical habitat.
Multiple CNDDB occurrences within
10 miles of Project area.

Low

Coast horned lizard
(Phrynosoma blainvillii,
formerly P. coronatum
frontale)

Amphibians
California tiger
salamander
(Ambystoma
californiense)

M-5

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

State

Federal

California red-legged
frog
(Rana draytonii)

CSC

FT

Chiefly lakes, ponds, and streams in
coastal forest, inland woodlands, and
valley grasslands where cattails,
bulrush, or other plants provide dense
cover. Aquatic sites need not be
permanent.

CH, GH, GI, LO,
LP, MC, MH, MM,
MS, PP, SF, ST,
WE, WW

Pooled waters in some reaches, but
surveys in the Project area and
vicinity indicate that CRLF no longer
occurs in the lowlands of the valley.
The Project area is within a region in
which the CRLF is presumed to be
extinct. However, multiple CNDDB
occurrences are within 10mi of
Project area.

Low-None

Foothill yellow-legged
frog
(Rana boylii)

CSC

None

Closely associated with permanent
water courses including streams or
rivers in woodland, chaparral, and
forest. Often found in riffles with rocks
and sunny banks.

GH, MC, MH, MS,
ST

In areas with perennial waters.

Low-None

Conservancy fairy
shrimp
(Branchinecta
conservation)

None

FE

Inhabits large, cool-water vernal pools
with moderately turbid water. Pools
generally last until June. Eight
recorded populations, none of which
are in Santa Clara County.

SCC

No vernal pools within Project area.

None

Vernal pool fairy
shrimp
(Branchinecta lynchi)

None

FT

Aquatic species that inhabits a variety
of different vernal pools habitats, from
small, clear sandstone rock pools to
large, turbid, alkaline valley floor
pools. Tends to occur in smaller
pools. Occurs in a wide range of
vernal pools in southern and Central
Valley, California.

SCC

No vernal pools within Project area.

None

Valley elderberry
longhorn beetle
(Desmocerus
californicus
dimorphus)

None

FT

Found on or close to its host plant,
elderberry (Sambucus spp.). Shrubs
must have steams 1” or greater in
diameter at ground level. Occurs from
southern Shasta County to Fresno
County.

SCC

The Project area is not within VELB
habitat range.

None

Invertebrates

M-6

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

State

Federal

Opler’s longhorn moth
(Adela oplerella)

None

FC

Almost completely restricted to native
grasslands on outcrops of serpentine
soil in the vicinity of San Francisco
Bay where its host plant, Platystemon
californicus, is known to occur.

MH, MM, ST

Multiple CNDDB occurrences with
closest occurrence at 0.7 mile from
Project area. Potentially suitable
habitat present if the host plant is
present within the Project area.
Botanical survey of annual native
plant food should be conducted.

Low- None

Monarch butterfly
(Danaus plexippus)

None

None

Can be found in a wide range of
habitats, such as fields, meadows,
prairie remnants, urban and suburban
parks, gardens, trees, and roadsides.
It overwinters in cypress groves, but
will also use Eucalyptus.

WW

Roosting groves are not present
within the Project area. May migrate
through the Project area to more
suitable areas. 1 CNDDB occurrence
within 10 miles of Project area.

Low

Jung’s micro-blind
harvestman
(Microcina jungi)

None

None

Known only to occur beneath
serpentine rocks in grasslands
habitats in the San Francisco Bay
region.

LO

1 CNDDB occurrence within 10 miles
of Project area.

None

Bay checkerspot
butterfly
(Euphydryas editha
bayensis)

None

FT

Inhabits grasslands and open
woodlands, especially on serpentine,
near growths of its primary larval food
plant, native plantain (Plantago
erecta) an annual herb, or one of two
species of their secondary larval food
plant, owl’s clover (Castilleja
densiflorus and C. exerta). Plantago
erecta occurs at 0 to 2,500 feet
elevation.

GI, LO, MH, MM,
ST, WE

Potentially suitable habitat present if
the host plant is present within the
Project area. Spring botanical survey
of annual native food plants should
be conducted. CNDDB occurrences
within 2.5 miles of Project area. May
migrate through the Project area to
more suitable areas; critical habitat
for the species is within 2.5 miles
and is located north, west, and east
of the Project area.

Moderate

M-7

Appendix M
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project

Status**
Name
State

Federal

General Habitat Description

Species Occurs
in USGS Quad*

Project Area Habitat Suitability

Potential for
Occurrence

Legend:
* Location Codes: CH – Chittenden, GH – Gilroy Hot Springs, GI – Gilroy, IV – Isabel Valley, LO – Lick Observatory, LP – Loma Prieta, MC – Mississippi Creek, MH – Morgan Hill,
MM – Mt. Madonna, MS – Mt. Sizer, PP – Pacheco Peak, SF – San Felipe, ST – Santa Teresa Hills, WE – Watsonville East, WW – Watsonville West
SCC – Santa Clara County
-- Species is show up on quad or county list but is included at the request of CDFW Scoping Comments Nov. 9, 2012.
** Special status codes
None = no special status granted or recognized by named party
FC = Federal Candidate; USFWS has enough information on biological vulnerability and threats to support a proposal to list as endangered or threatened.
FE = Federally Endangered; listed by USFWS as in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
FT = Federally Threatened; listed by USFWS as likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
CCE = California Candidate for Endangered Status under the CESA.
CCT = California Candidate for Threatened Status under the CESA.
CSC = California Species of Special Concern.
CE = California Endangered under the CESA.
CT = California Threatened under the CESA.
FP = Fully Protected under California Fish and Game Code (Sections 3511, 4700, 5050, and 5515)
DE = Delisted/Recovered
a = Based on 7.5-minute USGS quad lists from query of California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) search, accessed December 2012.
1= Critical habitat in WW, but no species occurrences.
Sources: CNDDB 2013, USFWS, Santa Clara County List

M-8

Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project
DRAFT Environmental Impact Statement

SAN FRANCISCO DISTRICT
DECEMBER 2015

UPPER LLAGAS CREEK PROJECT
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
Responsible Agency: The lead agency is the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE),
San Francisco District
Abstract: The Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) as the Applicant proposes to
construct the Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project located in southern Santa Clara
County, approximately 25 miles southeast of San Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San
Martin, and Gilroy for the purpose of providing flood risk management and protection for
residents, businesses, and infrastructure in those communities. This Draft Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) evaluates the potential effects of authorizing, via Department of the
Army permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Part 1344), the
discharge of dredged or fill material into Waters of the United States necessary to construct the
project. Considered alternatives include: the NRCS Alternative, the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action), Culvert/Channel Alternative, the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative,
and the No Action Alternative. As proposed, the Project would result in 44.82 acres of
temporary and 3.81 acres of permanent impacts to waters of the United States.
Upper Llagas Creek has flooded the San Martin and Morgan Hill communities repeatedly, as
documented between 1937 and 2009. This flooding has caused damage to private and public
property, resulting in economic losses in the inundated urban areas. The original Llagas Creek
Flood Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP), developed in the late 1960’s by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly
known as the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), included both the upper reaches of the
watershed and a set of lower reaches along the West Branch of Llagas Creek in Gilroy and
mainstem Llagas Creek below Buena Vista Avenue. The lower reaches were constructed
beginning in the 1970s, and are not part of the analysis presented in this EIS. The Project
consists of the upper seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little
Llagas Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek above Buena Vista Avenue.
This Draft EIS is prepared in compliance with NEPA, the Council on Environmental
Quality’s Regulations for Implementing NEPA, and USACE NEPA Regulations.
Consistent with NEPA requirements, this Draft EIS evaluates the direct, indirect, and
cumulative impacts on the environment that would result from the Proposed Action and
the previously mentioned alternatives.
THE OFFICIAL CLOSING DATE FOR
RECEIPT OF COMMENTS IS 45 DAYS
FROM THE DATE ON WHICH THE NOTICE
OF AVAILABILITY OF THIS DRAFT EIS
APPEARS IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

If you require further information on this
document contact:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
San Francisco District
1455 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94103-1398
Contact: James Mazza
Phone: (415) 503-6775
Email: james.c.mazza@usace.army.mil

December 2015

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Santa Clara County, California
A.

BACKGROUND
The Project Applicant is the Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) who is
requesting regulatory authorization from the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), in the form of a Department of the Army (DA) permit pursuant to Section 404
of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1344) (CWA),, to construct a flood protection project
with Llagas Creek, within southern Santa Clara County.
The flood protection project has a lengthy history as the project was first conceived as
part of the Llagas Creek Flood Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP), which was developed
in 1968 by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resource
Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly known as the Soil Conservation Service (SCS),
and included both the upper reaches of the watershed and a set of lower reaches along
the West Branch of Llagas Creek in Gilroy and mainstem Llagas Creek below Buena
Vista Avenue. The LCWPP was revised by the NRCS, local sponsors, and citizen
groups several times over for a period of nearly a decade before a joint Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was completed in 1982 on
the revised LCWPP. The NRCS, the lead federal agency for the project at the time,
completed about half of the authorized lower LCWPP, from the confluence with the
Pajaro River to Buena Vista Avenue between 1973 and 1994. Due to lack of funding, the
NRCS did not complete the remaining portion of the project. The upper reaches of
Llagas Creek are now proposed for completion and presented in this Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).
The upper reaches of Llagas Creek are located approximately 25 miles southeast of San
Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy. The total length of the
action area is approximately 13.9 miles and consists of seven reaches (4,5,6,7a,7b,8,14)
of Llagas Creek, East and West Little Llagas Creeks. To the north, the physical limits of
the project are at the creeks intersection with Llagas Road on West Little Llagas Creek
in Morgan Hill; and in the south, approximately 1000 feet downstream of the creeks
intersection with Buena Vista Avenue in Gilroy.
The USACE anticipates a decision on the proposed activities would constitute a Major
Federal Action in accordance with 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section
1501.8 and has prepared this Draft EIS to comply with requirements of the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 [42 United States Code (USC) §§ 4321 et
seq.].
The decision to prepare an EIS was based on the potentially positive and negative
effects, both individually and cumulatively, of the Applicant’s Proposed Action (Upper
Llagas Creek Project-Tunnel Alternative) on the quality of the human environment. The
Applicant is requesting approval for placement of dredge and fill materials into waters of
the United States (US) under Section 404. This EIS is necessary to inform any final
decision on the permit application.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-1

Executive Summary
B.

NEED FOR PROPOSED ACTION
The Applicant’s stated purpose of the anticipated action is to provide for public safety to
manage flood risk in Upper Llagas Creek Watershed. The project has been designed to
contain the 1-percent flood exceedance (i.e. 100-year flood) on West Little Llagas Creek
which encompasses the urban center of downtown Morgan Hill. For the rural sections of
Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy the project assures no additional flooding induced on
Llagas Creek by the upstream improvements along the reaches from Morgan Hill and
provide a 10 percent flood exceedance capacity (10 year flood) on East Little Llagas
Creek, Reach 14.
The Applicant deems the proposed action is necessary as flooding is frequent and
pervasive in Morgan Hill, San Martin and Gilroy with documented floods which damaged
residents and businesses resulting in economic loss in inundated areas in 1937, 1955,
1958, 1962, 1963, 1969, 1982, 1986, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2002, 2008, 2009 and 2011.
The largest recorded flood, estimated to be a 33-year event, occurred in December
1955.
In addition to managing public safety, additional project objectives developed by the
Applicant include;


Completion of the Project in accordance with the NRCS watershed plan for
Llagas Creek;



Design a horizontally and vertically stable channel that will neither widen or
narrow, down-cut or aggrade, on a large scale over the long-term;



Provide for adequate maintenance access throughout the Project, while
minimizing maintenance needs of the Project, especially due to sedimentation;
and,



Preserve and enhance desirable vegetation, fish, and wildlife habitat present in
Llagas Creek and connected water bodies.

The USACE has determined that the Proposed Action is water dependent. The basic
project purpose is to construct flood control management features to provide flood
protection. Therefore, the USACE finds that the basic project purpose is water
dependent.
The overall project purpose as defined by the USACE is to construct flood control
management features in the Upper Llagas Creek Watershed to provide flood protection
generally to the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy. Specifically, the
project purpose is to provide a 1-percent flood (100-year flood) exceedance capacity on
West Little Llagas Creek through the community of Morgan Hill and a 10-percent flood
(10-year flood) exceedance capacity on East Little Llagas Creek.
.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-2

Executive Summary
C.

SCOPE OF ANALYSIS
The USACE determined the scope for the Draft EIS includes the project area where
construction activities associated with the Proposed Action occur.is action on the project
site. The action area identified in this Draft EIS includes 6.1 miles of the mainstem of
Llagas, 2.8 miles along West Little Llagas Creek; and, 3.4 miles along a tributary of
Llagas Creek, known as East Little Llagas Creek. An additional 1.6 miles of new channel
would also be constructed along West Little Llagas Creek to Llagas Creek. Additionally,
wetland creation and stream restoration also requires construction in waters of the US
and includes filling an abandoned quarry pit, Lake Silveira to create wetlands and
restablishing flows in 2000 linear of feet of Llagas Creek.
Construction activities for the Proposed Action would include channel modifications (e.g.
widening and deepening), installation/replacement grade control structures, constructing
or replacing culverts, installing maintenance roads and access ramps, upgrading bridge
crossings and construction of a diversion channel.

D.

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED
This Draft EIS evaluates construction of the Applicant’s Proposed Action as well as a
range of alternatives to determine if the Applicant’s Proposed Action is the least
environmentally damaging practicable alternative (LEDPA), and is not contrary to the
public’s interest. The range of alternatives considered in this EIS include the No Action
Alternative, the Applicant’s Proposed Action Tunnel Alternative, NRCS Alternative,
Culvert/Channel Alternative, and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. The NRCS Alternative is
not preferred by the Applicant as it results in 12 residences that would need to be
purchased in order to implement the project. The Culvert/Channel Alternative would
require the purchase of seven residences. Both of these alternatives have a greater
impacts on utilities and public services as well as impacts to waters United States and
botanical resources. The Reach 6 Bypass and Tunnel Alternatives would only require
the purchase of three residences. Although the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would have
the smallest impact to waters of the United States, it would impact Highway 101 and
would not provide a geomorphically stable channel, with ongoing incision and bank
erosion resulting in water quality and aquatic habitat degradation in Reach 5 and 6 on
the mainstem of Llagas Creek. Therefore, the Tunnel Alternative is the Applicant’s
Preferred Alternatives as it would require the purchase of three residences, has the least
impacts to public services and utilities and includes less impacts to waters of the United
States and botantical resources then the NRCS and Culvert/Channel Alternatives.
To offset losses to biological functions and values within the Llagas Watershed as result
of the Proposed Action, the Lake Silveria compensatory mitigation element was
developed by the SCVWD in coordination with the USACE and resource agencies and is
common to all alternatives analyzed in the EIS except for the No Action Alternative.
Common Features and Channel Modifications for all Action Alternatives
There are project features and channel modifications which are common to all of
the action alternatives described in the EIS. Most of the differences between the
action alternatives are focused on the project alignment for flood routing and the
type of flood management features used in areas in Reach 8. All of the action

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-3

Executive Summary
alternatives provide flood management for a 1-percent flood in Morgan Hill
(Reaches 8, 7B, and 7A); 10-percent flood management for the semi-urban area
around East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14); and avoid induced flooding
elsewhere on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to upstream modifications.
All of the action alternatives reduce the flood extent for the 1-percent exceedance
from approximately 3,074 acres to approximately 1,365 acres.
The channel modifications for all the action alternatives in Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B,
and 14 would consist of widening and deepening, and would result in a cross
section with a low-flow channel, bankfull channel, benches, and engineered
banks that are 3H:1V slope. The channel would be properly sized for sediment
transport, geomorphic stability and to allow for unimpeded fish passage. A low
flow channel conveying approximately 2 cfs, would meander along the channel
bottom within the bankfull channel. Channel benches would typically be located
on at least one side and sometimes both sides of the channel, ranging from 9 to
21 feet wide. The channel bench is set at approximately the 2-year-flow event
elevation. The total width of the new channels in the action alternatives for these
reaches would be approximately 125 feet which is approximately 30-60 feet
wider than the No Action Alternative. Channel depths would range up to
approximately 14 feet, which is typically about 4 to 5 feet deeper than the No
Action Alternative.
All of the action alternatives depend on a newly constructed 1.25-mile-long
channel segment in Reach 7A that will direct flow from West Little Llagas Creek
at Watsonville Road to Llagas Creek just downstream from Lake Silveira. Most of
the flood management features that would be implemented in Reaches 7A, 7B,
4, 5, 6, parts of Reach 8, and 14 are the same in each of the alternatives, except
the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would not require channel widening, deepening
or other flow capacity improvements in Reaches 5 and most of 6. The common
flood management features and activities for all of the action alternatives include:


Permanent access roads at top of both banks in all reaches, (except for
some areas in Reach 8);



Aquatic habitat enhancements Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A (except for
Bypass Alternative in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6, which have no
planned enhancements);



Grade control structures constructed of natural boulders, in all reaches;



Culverts at two tributary drainages where they confluence with Reach 6
and three drainages in Reach 14 to provide for maintenance access;



Exhume buried bridge crossings in Reach 7A at Watsonville Road and
West Middle Avenue;



Replacing and/or modifying culverts at four road crossing locations in
Reach 7B;



Replacing culverts in Reach 8 (culvert replacement locations vary by
alternative);

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-4

Executive Summary


Removal of a cinder block/brick wall that constricts flows at the Llagas
Road culvert; cleaning of rocks, dirt and debris for all culverts and under
the Hillwood Lane bridge in Reach 8;



Relocation/replacement of some homes and other structures within the
Project right of way (ROW);



Replacement of the existing pedestrian footbridge on the private property
at the corner of Llagas Creek Drive and Marianna Court;



Installation of a stream gage upstream of the Church Avenue percolation
ponds in Reach 6;



Approximately 25 acres would be used in each of the actions alternatives
for staging during Project construction;



Relocation/replacement of utilities within the Project construction footprint;
and



Acquisition of fee title and easements of adjacent land needed for Project
construction and maintenance.

In addition to the common flood conveyance features listed above, all of the
action alternatives would require the same type and extent of vegetation and
sediment maintenance activities to provide the design flood capacity, as well as
maintenance of other features such as roads, culverts, and grade-control
structures.
E.

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES
No Action Alternative
The no action alternative which is used as benchmark for comparison of the
environmental effects of the other selected alternatives, would result from the
USACE not issuing a DA permit for discharge of dredged or fill material into in
waters of the US regulated pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential and
rural areas of Morgan Hill, San Martin and Gilroy would continue as the existing
1-percent exceedance flood inundates approximately 3,074 acres of lands
locally. Additionally, no habitat improvements would occur (i.e. stream
restoration, wetland creation) and channel maintenance, sediment removal,
stream bank protection and vegetation management would continue to occur
within the proposed action area under the SCVWD’s current Stream
Maintenance Program.
Upper Llagas Creek in its current state is incising 0.4 to 0.8 feet per decade.
Historic channel incision is evidenced by oversteepened stream banks and
opportunistic placement of hardscape (i.e. concrete rubble) to protect failing
banks and adjacent properties. Without the proposed action, the construction of a

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-5

Executive Summary
properly sized channel to allow for sediment transport and geomorphic stability,
the creek will continue to incise contributing to degradation of water quality and
aquatic habitat. Additionally, the no action alternative will generate the need for
increased maintenance activities in the future for bank protection and flood
control owing to the channels current instability.
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Applicant developed the Tunnel Alternative because there was an
opportunity to reduce the construction footprint associated with the NRCS
Alternative in Reach 8. The Tunnel Alternative would require a smaller ROW,
reduce the amount of vegetation to be removed and excavation needed along
the existing West Little Llagas channel in Reach 8, reduce the extent of utilities to
be relocated, reduce the culvert replacements required, which would result in
less construction related interference with the commercial and residential area of
Morgan Hill.
This Alternative has the same features as previously described for Reaches 4, 5,
6, 7B, and 14. The key feature of the Tunnel Alternative is the use an
underground concrete tunnel instead of channel widening and deepening
proposed through downtown Morgan Hill under the NRCS design. The main
components of the Tunnel Alternative would include:


A 250-foot-long sediment trap and an inlet weir (diversion) structure in the
600 feet of channel between Wright Avenue and Hillwood Lane. A new
18-foot-wide maintenance/access road would be installed along the
sediment detention basin at the top of the south bank of the channel
between Hillwood Lane and Wright Avenue.



A 36-inch-diameter reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) culvert would be
constructed paralleling Hale Avenue, stretching from the weir structure
2,400 feet downstream and discharging into the existing West Little
Llagas Creek channel south of West Main Avenue. The 2,400-foot-long
earthen channel section of West Little Llagas Creek between Wright Ave
and West Main Ave would be replaced with the RCP culvert. The RCP
culvert would maintain low flows up to 50 cfs in the existing creek through
the downtown area without exceeding the channel capacity.



Two high flow bypass culverts would be constructed. One would be 10
feet by 8 feet in size, while the other would be 10 feet by 9 feet in size.
Both culverts would extend from the weir structure parallel to Hale
Avenue and stretch 2,750 feet to Warren Avenue where they would
convey high flows to the tunnel.



A 2,100-foot-long tunnel would be constructed, extending under Nob Hill
between Warren Avenue and Del Monte Avenue, continuing under Nob
Hill Terrace. This modification also includes using open cut box culverts
for transition to and from the tunnel, and construction of a tunnel portal at
the upstream end.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-6

Executive Summary
There would be no change to the existing culverts at 5th Street, 4th
Street/Monterey Highway, 3rd Street, 2nd Street / Del Monte Avenue, and
Warren Avenue, nor would the channel be widened and deepened in this section
of Reach 8 as proposed under the NRCS Alternative described below. The
channel would be deepened and widened downstream from the bridge to the
inlet of the sediment detention basin near Hillwood Lane.
Also as part of this alternative, Reach 7B would be modified as follows:


Double box culverts would be constructed; one 10 feet by 8 feet in size,
and the other 10 feet by 9 feet in size, from the tunnel outlet at West
Dunne Avenue to downstream of Ciolino Avenue. The Tunnel Alternative
differs from the proposed NRCS design, which would replace the existing
culvert along the current alignment of West Little Llagas Creek.

NRCS Alternative
The NRCS Alternative was originally conceived and evaluated as Alternative F in
the 1982 EIS/EIR. Subsequent modifications to the NRCS Alternative have been
considered and incorporated since the 1982 EIS/EIR, in response to the
changing physical environment, and to changes in environmental regulations.
The NRCS Alternative evaluated in this EIS is based on all subsequent
modifications to Alternative F.
The current NRCS alternative has the same features as previously described for
Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B, and 14. The key difference with this action alternative is the
proposed channel modifications through the urbanized City of Morgan Hill in
Reach 8 beginning at Llagas Road and extending downstream to West Dunne
Avenue. The features designed for Reach 8 under this alternative would include
the following modifications:


The channel will be deepened and widened along a 2,500-foot section of
channel downstream from the Llagas Road bridge to Hillwood Lane.



Widen and deepen approximately 600 feet of channel between Wright
Avenue and Hillwood Lane with an 8-foot-deep trapezoidal channel, with
a 20-foot bottom width and 70-foot top width. This channel would be
designed to pass the 1-percent flow.



Widen and deepen approximately 3,000 feet of channel between West
Dunne Avenue and Main Avenue to form a trapezoidal vegetated
channel, a channel with two vertical walls, or a hybrid section (SCVWD
2014, Draft EIR Figures 2.4-3, 2.4-4, and 2.4-5, respectively), as
appropriate depending upon the ROW available.



Replace approximately 2,200 feet of the existing creek between Main
Avenue and Wright Avenue with two 10-foot wide by 7- to 8-foot-deep
reinforced concrete box culverts following the existing stream alignment,
but under Hale Avenue. Replace culverts at West Main Avenue and
Wright Avenue. There would be no changes to the culverts at Llagas
Creek Drive or at Hillwood Lane.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-7

Executive Summary


Replace five additional existing undersized culverts with new culverts, 10
feet wide by 9 feet deep, at the following locations: 5th Street, 4th
Street/Monterey Highway, 3rd Street, 2nd Street/Del Monte Avenue, and
Warren Avenue.



Maintenance roads would be constructed downstream from Llagas Road
to Hillwood Road. There would be no maintenance roads in the downtown
area of Morgan Hill.

Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Applicant developed the Culvert/Channel Alternative to reduce the
construction footprint associated with the NRCS Alternative in Reach 8. This
alternative would require a smaller ROW, reduce the amount of vegetation to be
removed along the existing West Little Llagas channel, reduce the extent of
utilities to be relocated, reduce the culvert replacements required which would
result in less construction related interference with the commercial and
residential area of Morgan Hill.
All reaches would have the same constructed features as described for the
NRCS and Tunnel alternatives, with a few differences in Reach 8. The key
feature of the Culvert/Channel Alternative is elimination of the need for channel
deepening and widening through residential properties, and fewer culvert
replacements, as proposed for the NRCS Alternative between West Main
Avenue and West 2nd Street in Reach 8. The main components of the
Culvert/Channel Alternative that are different from those previously described for
the NRCS Alternative include the following (all focused in Reach 8):


Realign an 800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box culverts that,
in the NRCS design, would be parallel to Hale Avenue through the Britton
School athletic fields up to Del Monte Avenue;



Continue the double box culvert under Del Monte Avenue approximately
900 feet to West 2nd Street; and



From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue perform the same channel
widening and deepening, along with culvert replacements at 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
and 5th Streets as described for the NRCS Alternative for Reach 8.

The upstream most portion of the Culvert/Channel Alternative from Llagas Road
to Hillwood Lane, thence along Hale Avenue up to the Britton School athletic field
would remain the same as the NRCS Alternative.
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high flow bypass channel
between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. The
bypass would be designed so that no flood capacity improvements would be
needed along the remaining section of Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas Creek
downstream of the proposed bypass. Flood conveyance improvements for the
upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B and for the downstream Reach 4 would
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-8

Executive Summary
remain the same as described for the Tunnel Alternative. Reach 14 would be
designed similar to the Tunnel Alternative, except that the channel dimensions
will be larger to accommodate the additional high flow routed from the upstream
reaches (8, 7B, and 7A) through the Reach 6 bypass, so as not to cause induced
flooding.
Under existing conditions, Reach 6 of Llagas Creek has capacity to carry up to
approximately the 10-year flow. Flows larger than the 10-percent exceedance
flow overtop the channel banks and flood the surrounding areas. The bypass
would convey the future extra flow (i.e., new capacity) from Reach 8, 7A, and 7B
directly to Reach 14. East Little Llagas Creek downstream of the bypass (Reach
14) would be designed to carry the extra flow from the upstream channel
capacity. The design flow for the Reach 6 high flow bypass segment would be
1,200 cfs. The existing flow capacity in Reach 6 downstream from the bypass
channel (2090 cfs, which is approximately a 10-percent exceedance flow) would
continue to be maintained. The existing flow capacity in Reach 5 would also
continue to be maintained. In Reach 14 the design flow would be 2,900 cfs at the
confluence with the high flow bypass, which would maintain a 10 percent flow
exceedance capacity in this reach.
The proposed high flow bypass would start near the top of Reach 6, about 0.5
mile downstream of Monterey Highway. The 0.5 mile section of Reach 6 between
Monterey Highway and the bypass would be widened and deepened as
proposed for all of the action alternatives; however, no construction would occur
downstream from the bypass channel, over a distance of approximately 2.7 miles
in Reach 6 and the entire 0.5 mile length of Reach 5. Consequently, there would
be no instream aquatic habitat enhancements as proposed for the other action
alternatives in Reach 6 downstream from the bypass channel or in Reach 5.
Construction in Reach 4 would be the same as previously described for all the
action alternatives. The bypass channel would run east through open fields,
continue under Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101, and connect to Reach 14. The
alignment of the bypass channel is situated near the upstream portion of Reach
6. The proposed high flow bypass would be approximately 1,660 feet long and
would provide a 1-percent exceedance flood protection through the bypass
segment. To accommodate the higher flows, Reach 14 would need to be
widened starting 500 feet upstream of the confluence with the bypass to 0.5 mile
downstream of East San Martin Avenue. A hydraulic control structure consisting
of trapezoidal-shaped weir and five 6-foot by 6-foot individual working sluice
gates would be installed at Reach 6 to redirect high flows into the bypass.
This alternative would also require the construction of three bridges at the
following locations: Murphy Avenue, U.S. 101 southbound, and U.S. 101
northbound. Temporary traffic control routes would need to be constructed to
accommodate local traffic on Murphy Avenue and two construction phases would
be needed to divert traffic through temporary traffic routes on U.S. 101
northbound and southbound for approximately 270 days.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-9

Executive Summary
F.

SUMMARY OF SOCIOECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS
The short-term and long-term effects of the alternatives on the human environment were
evaluated. Many of the environmental effects were similar between Action Alternatives.
However, changes to the affected environment are seen in Hydrology and Water Quality,
Botanical Resources, Aquatic Resources, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Land Use
and Planning, Traffic and Circulation, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, Noise, Utilities
and Public Service, Socioeconomic Resources, Hazards and Hazardous Material,
Environmental Justice, as a result of the Alternatives and discussed further in Chapter 4
of this EIS.

Summary of Socioeconomic and Environmental Effects
Resource Category

No Action
Alternative

Tunnel
Alternative

NRCS
Alternative

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6
Bypass
Alternative

Geology and Soils

NI

LTSM

LTSM (-)

LTSM (-)

LTSM (+)

Hydrology and Water Quality

SU

LTSM

LTS

LTS

SU

Mineral Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM (+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM (-)

Botanical Resources

NI

SU

SU(+)

SU(+)

SU(-)

Wildlife Resources

LTS

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Aquatic Resources

SU

LTSM

LTSM(=)

LTSM(=)

LTSM(+)

Agricultural and Forest
Resources

NI

SU

SU(=)

SU(=)

SU(-)

Land Use and Planning

SU

LTS

LTS(+)

LTS(+)

LTS(-)

Cultural Resource

NI

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Traffic and Circulation

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

SU

Air Quality and Greenhouse
Gases

LTS

SU

SU(-)

SU(-)

SU(-)

Noise

LTS

SU

SU(-)

SU(-)

SU(=)

Aesthetic Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

Utilities and Public Services

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Recreation Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM(=)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(=)

Population and Housing

NI

LTS

LTS(+)

LTS(+)

LTS(-)

Socioeconomic Resources

SU

LTS

LTS(=)

LTS(=)

LTS(-)

Hazards and Hazardous
Materials

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Environmental Justice

DAE

DAE

NDAE

NDAE

DAE(=)

NI: No Impact

(-): Level of impacts are less severe than the Tunnel Alternative

LTS: Less Than Significant

(=): Level of impacts are equal to the Tunnel Alternative

LTSM: Less Than Significant with Mitigation

(+): Level of impacts are more severe than the Tunnel Alternative

SU: Significant and Unavoidable
DAE: Disproportionate Adverse effect
NDAE: No disproportionate Adverse Effect

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-10

Executive Summary

Summary of Impacts to Jurisdictional Wetlands and other Waters of the US by
Alternative (acres)
Permanent Impacts

Temporary Impacts

Wetlands

Other Waters

Total
Permanent
Impacts

No Action

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Tunnel Alternative

1.03

2.2

3.23

5.03

32.1

37.13

NRCS Alternative

1.35

3.43

4.78

5.03

32.1

37.13

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

0.72

2.95

3.67

5.03

32.1

37.13

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative

1.0

2.05

3.05

4.29

25.68

29.97

Alternative

Wetlands

Other
Waters

Total
Temporary
Impacts

The evaluation of environmental impacts indicates that among the alternatives evaluated
the Reach 6 Bypass incurs fewer impacts to waters of the U.S. than the other action
alternative. However, the Reach 6 Bypass would minimize potential environmental
effects when compared to the other alternatives, particularly in relation to Biological
Resources, Cultural Resources, Agricultural Resources, Land Use and Planning, Utilities
and Public Services, Population and Housing, Socioeconomics, and Hazards and
Hazardous Materials. The severity of many of the impacts is less due to the elimination
of construction in Reaches 5 and 6; and particularly in Reach 6, which has a section of
perennial water that supports aquatic habitat. However, the Reach 6 Bypass is not the
Proposed Action, because it has significant impacts associated with traffic effects on
U.S. 101 and over the long term, without improvements to arrest incision in Reaches 5
and 6, the ecology of the stream will degrade significantly when compared to the Tunnel
Alternative, therefore, eventually requiring greater bank erosion control and
maintenance. Therefore, with the mitigation implemented to restore the riparian habitat
after construction, and the aquatic benefits of additional channel stability, the Proposed
Action (Tunnel Alternative) would be the Environmentally Superior Alternative.
G.

AREAS OF POTENTIAL CONTROVERSY
The Applicant has made refinements to the Proposed Action (Tunnel Alternative) based
on input from federal and state agencies, local agencies and the public. The Applicant
consulted with the USFWS, NMFS, EPA CDFW, CCRWQCB during design development
to address concerns regarding impacts such as wetlands, water quality, flood protection,
wildlife and habitat, and threatened and endangered species. Numerous meetings have
occurred with the various agencies and the public in the context of identifying areas of
potential controversy and resolving or mitigating for those concerns. At this time, an
area of potential controversy is how to address impacts for a federal threatened species,
the California tiger salamander since the Project is located in the same footprint as the
Valley Habitat Conservation Plan (VHP). The controversy lies with the fact that the
SCVWD does not want to compete for mitigation lands within the same geographically
areas as the VHP. Ideally, it would be best coordinate with the VHP and obtain
mitigation credit through that program if both USFWS and CDFW can agree upon this
course of action.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-11

Executive Summary
H.

LIST OF OTHER GOVERNMENT ACTIONS REQUIRED
The Applicant shall be responsible for obtaining federal, state and local permits, licenses
and meet other consultation requirements for the proposed project, as described in this
section and Chapter 8.
The USACE’s permitting decision is required to comply with many federal requirements
including the NEPA, CWA, Endangered Species Act (ESA), Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Act, and the National Historic Preservation Act. The USACE will consider
other relevant environmental laws and Executive Orders for protection of wetlands,
floodplain management, environmental justice, and invasive/exotic species as well as
public and agency comment on the Project’s effect on public interest in deciding if to
issue, issue with special conditions, or deny a permit for the Proposed Action.
State requirements that will need to be satisfied for this project include a Streambed
Alteration Agreement (CDFW), Incidental Take Permits for state-listed species (CDFW),
California Department of Transportation encroachment permit, Bay Area Air Quality
Management District (BAAQMD) permit, and Central Coast Regional Water Quality
Control Board (CCRWQCB) 401 Certification.

I.

UNRESOLVED ISSUES
The Applicant must complete the purchase of the required ROW required for the
Proposed Action. As of December 2015, approximately 50 parcels still remain to be
acquired, including the compensatory wetland mitigation site (Lake Silveria).
The Applicant continues to complete Phase 1 and Phase II Hazardous Substance
Liability Assessment (HSLA) Investigations. Phase II HSLA’s are only conducted when
the Phase 1 Investigation recommends a subsequent Phase II investigation because of
a known contamination/hazardous within the vicinity. In addition to completing these
HSLA investigations for the Proposed Action, the Applicant is completing an HSLA
investigation on each parcel required for the Project prior to acquisition. A portion of the
Project is located in the rural portions of the communities of Gilroy and San Martin that
has a history of farming orchards and row crops. Despite these HSLA investigations, the
Applicant will not know the complete extent of any soil contamination until the Project is
underway and the excavation of soils required for the Proposed Action is completed.
During construction, the contractor will be required to adhere to a Soil Management Plan
to stockpile and test materials for contaminates prior to the proper and legal disposal of
excess soils.
The Applicant must coordinate the relocation of many existing utilities in conflict with the
Applicant’s Proposed Action. Whenever possible to minimize possible delays during
construction and thereby reducing the duration of the construction impacts, the Applicant
desires to have the respective utility owner relocate their facility prior to construction. In
some cases, to reduce repetitive impacts, for instance to Traffic and Circulation, the
utility owner will complete the necessary relocation work in conjunction with the
construction of the project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-12

Executive Summary
J.

COMPENSATORY MITIGATION TO OFFSET THE LOSS OF WETLAND FUNCTION
AND VALUE
The Applicant’s proposed compensatory wetland mitigation plan (Lake Silveria) for the
Action Alternatives includes hydrologic, vegetation and geomorphic benefits contiguous
with the Project footprint. By creating wetlands in an abandoned quarry pit adjacent to
the creek and restoring 2000 linear feet of Llagas Creek, biological functions and values
will improved within the Llagas Watershed. Wetland seeps were historically abundant in
this watershed and now are considered rare due to land use changes in the last century.
Creating wetland habitat adjacent to a perennial stream will provide numerous benefits
to the species utilizing the watershed over existing conditions. The Applicant will assess
pre-post project conditions for wetlands and riverine corridor using the California Rapid
Assessment Methodology (CRAM) however it is anticipated that the biotic conditions
within the 52 acre site would improve from the current condition.
Concurrent with the EIS and as part of the evaluation of the DA permit application, the
USACE will determine if the Applicant’s proposed compensatory mitigation plan is
sufficient to offset unavoidable impacts to aquatic resources as a result of the Proposed
Action. Prior to issuance of any permit, the Applicant would be required to submit a final
mitigation plan determined by the USACE to meet the requirements of 33 C.F.R.
Part 332.

K.

COORDINATION
Throughout the evolution of project design alternatives, federal and state agencies,
county officials, and the public have been kept informed through a scoping meeting,
property acquisition meetings, compensatory mitigation meetings, website updates,
design update meetings, public mailers, and public notices designed to inform, gather
input, and respond to questions regarding the proposed project. The public, government
agencies and interested parties are afforded the opportunity to provide input regarding
this project by reviewing and commenting on the draft and final EIS. Project information,
schedules, documents, and presentations to the public are also kept updated and
available on the Applicants website: http://valleywater.org/Services/UpperLlagas.aspx

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-13

Executive Summary

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ES-14

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................... A-1
CHAPTER 1 PURPOSE AND NEED ...................................................................................... 1-1
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5

1.6

Introduction ......................................................................................................... 1-1
History ................................................................................................................ 1-1
Project Purpose, Need, and Objectives ............................................................. 1-2
1.3.1 Applicant’s Purpose and Need................................................................ 1-9
1.3.2 USACE Project Purpose ......................................................................... 1-9
Decision to be Made ......................................................................................... 1-10
Related Authorizations, Plans, and Projects .................................................... 1-13
1.5.1 Federal Reports and Authorizations ..................................................... 1-13
1.5.2 Regional Studies, Reports, and Other Documents ............................... 1-13
Public Scoping Process .................................................................................... 1-15
1.6.1 Previous Environmental Review ........................................................... 1-15
1.6.2 Prior Scoping Meeting .......................................................................... 1-15
1.6.3 Scoping for the Proposed Action .......................................................... 1-16

CHAPTER 2 DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES ................................................................ 2-1
2.1
2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6

2.7

Regulatory Setting for Alternatives Analysis....................................................... 2-1
Project Location .................................................................................................. 2-2
Alternatives Considered, Eliminated, and Brought Forward ............................. 2-23
2.3.1 1982 Environment Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental
Impact Report (EIR) Alternatives Evaluation ........................................ 2-23
2.3.2 West Little Llagas Instream Detention .................................................. 2-28
2.3.3 Raise Chesbro Dam ............................................................................. 2-39
2.3.4 Design Refinements Considered and Brought Forward ....................... 2-40
No Action Alternative ........................................................................................ 2-43
Project Elements Common to All Action Alternatives ....................................... 2-49
2.5.1 Channel Design Features Common to All Action Alternatives .............. 2-50
2.5.2 Easements and Land Requirements..................................................... 2-65
2.5.3 Construction .......................................................................................... 2-66
2.5.4 Utilities .................................................................................................. 2-79
2.5.5 Operations and Maintenance ................................................................ 2-79
2.5.6 Lake Silveira Mitigation Element ........................................................... 2-88
NRCS Alternative ............................................................................................. 2-88
2.6.1 NRCS Alternative Features................................................................... 2-89
2.6.2 NRCS Alternative Construction........................................................... 2-100
2.6.3 Easements and Land Requirements................................................... 2-100
2.6.4 Utilities ................................................................................................ 2-101
2.6.5 Operations and Maintenance .............................................................. 2-101
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action) .......................................... 2-101
2.7.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicants Proposed Action) Features ................ 2-101
2.7.2 Tunnel Alternative Construction .......................................................... 2-105
2.7.3 Easements and Land Requirements................................................... 2-116

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

i

Table of Contents

2.8

2.9

2.10

2.7.4 Utilities ................................................................................................ 2-116
2.7.5 Operations and Maintenance .............................................................. 2-116
Culvert/Channel Alternative ............................................................................ 2-117
2.8.1 Culvert/Channel Alternative Features ................................................. 2-117
2.8.2 Culvert/Channel Alternative Construction ........................................... 2-118
2.8.3 Easements and Land Requirements................................................... 2-121
2.8.4 Utilities ................................................................................................ 2-121
2.8.5 Operations and Maintenance .............................................................. 2-121
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ........................................................................... 2-121
2.9.1 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Features................................................. 2-122
2.9.2 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Construction........................................... 2-136
2.9.3 Easements and Land Requirements................................................... 2-137
2.9.4 Utilities ................................................................................................ 2-137
2.9.5 Operations and Maintenance .............................................................. 2-138
Summary of Project Alternatives .................................................................... 2-139

CHAPTER 3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT ............................................................................. 3-1
3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

3.8

Geology and Soils .............................................................................................. 3-7
3.1.1 Introduction ............................................................................................. 3-7
3.1.2 Project Area ............................................................................................ 3-8
3.1.3 Environmental Setting ............................................................................. 3-7
Hydrology and Water Quality............................................................................ 3-17
3.2.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 3-17
3.2.2 Project Area .......................................................................................... 3-17
3.2.3 Environmental Setting ........................................................................... 3-17
3.2.4 Groundwater ......................................................................................... 3-20
3.2.5 Water Quality ........................................................................................ 3-25
Mineral Resources ........................................................................................... 3-29
3.3.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 3-29
3.3.2 Project Area .......................................................................................... 3-29
3.3.3 Environmental Setting ........................................................................... 3-29
Botanical Resources ........................................................................................ 3-30
3.4.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 3-30
3.4.2 Project Area .......................................................................................... 3-31
3.4.3 Environmental Setting ........................................................................... 3-34
Wildlife Resources ............................................................................................ 3-52
3.5.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 3-52
3.5.2 Project Area .......................................................................................... 3-54
3.5.3 Environmental Setting ........................................................................... 3-57
Aquatic Resources ........................................................................................... 3-84
3.6.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 3-84
3.6.2 Project Area .......................................................................................... 3-85
3.6.3 Environmental Setting ........................................................................... 3-85
Agricultural and Forest Resources ................................................................. 3-101
3.7.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-101
3.7.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-101
3.7.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-102
Land Use and Planning .................................................................................. 3-113
3.8.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-113
3.8.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-113

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ii

Table of Contents

3.9

3.10

3.11

3.12

3.13

3.14

3.15

3.16

3.17

3.18

3.19

3.8.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-113
Cultural Resources ......................................................................................... 3-129
3.9.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-129
3.9.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-130
3.9.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-131
Traffic and Circulation..................................................................................... 3-136
3.10.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-136
3.10.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-136
3.10.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-136
Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases ................................................................ 3-147
3.11.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-147
3.11.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-147
3.11.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-147
Noise .............................................................................................................. 3-155
3.12.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-155
3.12.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-155
3.12.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-163
Aesthetic Resources ...................................................................................... 3-169
3.13.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-169
3.13.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-169
3.13.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-171
Utilities and Public Services ........................................................................... 3-191
3.14.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-191
3.14.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-192
3.14.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-192
Recreation Resources .................................................................................... 3-199
3.15.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-199
3.15.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-199
3.15.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-200
Population and Housing ................................................................................. 3-205
3.16.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-205
3.16.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-206
3.16.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-206
Socioeconomic Resources ............................................................................. 3-208
3.17.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-208
3.17.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-209
3.17.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-209
Hazards and Hazardous Materials ................................................................. 3-227
3.18.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-227
3.18.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-227
3.18.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-209
Environmental Justice .................................................................................... 3-237
3.19.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 3-237
3.19.2 Project Area ........................................................................................ 3-237
3.19.3 Environmental Setting ......................................................................... 3-237

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

iii

Table of Contents
CHAPTER 4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES............................................................. 4-1
4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

4.7

4.8

4.9

4.10

Geology and Soils .............................................................................................. 4-2
4.1.1 Introduction ............................................................................................. 4-2
4.1.2 No Action Alternative .............................................................................. 4-3
4.1.3 Action Alternatives .................................................................................. 4-3
4.1.4 Summary of Impacts to Geology and Soils ............................................. 4-6
Hydrology and Water Quality.............................................................................. 4-7
4.2.1 Introduction ............................................................................................. 4-7
4.2.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-10
4.2.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-11
4.2.4 Summary of Impacts to Hydrology and Water Quality .......................... 4-16
Mineral Resources ........................................................................................... 4-17
4.3.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-17
4.3.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-17
4.3.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-17
4.3.4 Summary of Impacts to Mineral Resources .......................................... 4-19
Botanical Resources ........................................................................................ 4-20
4.4.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-20
4.4.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-21
4.4.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-21
4.4.4 Summary of Impacts to Botanical Resources ....................................... 4-31
Wildlife Resources ............................................................................................ 4-33
4.5.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-33
4.5.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-35
4.5.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-37
4.5.4 Summary of Impacts to Wildlife Resources .......................................... 4-52
Aquatic Resources ........................................................................................... 4-52
4.6.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-52
4.6.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-52
4.6.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-53
4.6.4 Summary of Impacts to Aquatic Resources .......................................... 4-67
Agricultural and Forest Resources ................................................................... 4-68
4.7.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-68
4.7.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-69
4.7.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-69
4.7.4 Summary of Impacts to Agricultural and Forest Resources.................. 4-75
Land Use and Planning .................................................................................... 4-77
4.8.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-77
4.8.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-79
4.8.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-79
4.8.4 Summary of Impacts to Land Use and Planning................................... 4-84
Cultural Resources ........................................................................................... 4-84
4.9.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-84
4.9.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-86
4.9.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-86
4.9.4 Summary of Impacts to Cultural Resources ......................................... 4-90
Traffic and Circulation ...................................................................................... 4-90
4.10.1 Introduction ........................................................................................... 4-90
4.10.2 No Action Alternative ............................................................................ 4-96
4.10.3 Action Alternatives ................................................................................ 4-98

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

iv

Table of Contents

4.11

4.12

4.13

4.14

4.15

4.16

4.17

4.18

4.19

4.20

4.10.4 Summary of Impacts to Traffic and Circulation ................................... 4-119
Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases ................................................................ 4-121
4.11.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-121
4.11.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-128
4.11.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-128
4.11.4 Summary of Impacts to Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases .............. 4-134
Noise .............................................................................................................. 4-135
4.12.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-135
4.12.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-138
4.12.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-144
4.12.4 Summary of Impacts to Noise ............................................................. 4-162
Aesthetic Resources ...................................................................................... 4-162
4.13.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-162
4.13.2. No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-164
4.13.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-165
4.13.4 Summary of Aesthetic Resources....................................................... 4-165
Utilities and Public Services ........................................................................... 4-179
4.14.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-179
4.14.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-180
4.14.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-181
4.14.4 Summary of Impacts to Utilities and Public Services .......................... 4-184
Recreation Resources .................................................................................... 4-185
4.15.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-185
4.15.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-185
4.15.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-186
4.15.4 Summary of Impacts to Recreation Resources................................... 4-189
Population and Housing ................................................................................. 4-189
4.16.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-189
4.16.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-190
4.16.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-191
4.16.4 Summary of Impacts to Population and Housing ................................ 4-193
Socioeconomic Resources ............................................................................. 4-193
4.17.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-193
4.17.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-194
4.17.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-195
4.17.4 Summary of Impacts to Socioeconomic Resources............................ 4-208
Hazards and Hazardous Materials ................................................................. 4-208
4.18.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-208
4.18.2. No Project Alternative ......................................................................... 4-212
4.18.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-214
4.18.4 Summary of Impacts to Hazard and Hazardous Materials .................. 4-221
Environmental Justice .................................................................................... 4-223
4.19.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-223
4.19.2 No Action Alternative .......................................................................... 4-224
4.19.3 Action Alternatives .............................................................................. 4-226
4.19.4 Summary of Impacts to Environmental Justice ................................... 4-235
Cumulative Impacts ........................................................................................ 4-237
4.20.1 Introduction ......................................................................................... 4-237
4.20.2 Resources Analyzed for Cumulative Impacts ..................................... 4-239
4.20.3 Summary of Environmental Effects..................................................... 4-260
4.20.4 Summary ............................................................................................ 4-265

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

v

Table of Contents
CHAPTER 5 MITIGATION ...................................................................................................... 5-1
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7

Introduction ......................................................................................................... 5-1
Avoidance and Minimization ............................................................................... 5-1
Onsite Compensatory Mitigation ........................................................................ 5-3
Summary of Mitigation Measures for Alternatives .............................................. 5-7
Description of Mitigation Measures .................................................................. 5-43
5.5.1 Geology and Soils ................................................................................. 5-43
5.5.2 Hydrology and Water Quality ................................................................ 5-43
5.5.3 Mineral Resources ................................................................................ 5-43
5.5.4 Botanical Resources ............................................................................. 5-44
5.5.5 Wildlife Resources ................................................................................ 5-46
5.5.6 Aquatic Resources ................................................................................ 5-51
5.5.7 Agricultural and Forest Resources........................................................ 5-52
5.5.8 Land Use and Planning ........................................................................ 5-53
5.5.9 Cultural Resources ............................................................................... 5-53
5.5.10 Traffic and Circulation ........................................................................... 5-53
5.5.11 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases ...................................................... 5-55
5.5.12 Noise ..................................................................................................... 5-55
5.5.13 Aesthetic Resources ............................................................................. 5-57
5.5.14 Utilities and Public Services .................................................................. 5-57
5.5.15 Recreation Resources .......................................................................... 5-58
5.5.16 Population and Housing ........................................................................ 5-59
5.5.17 Socioeconomic Resources ................................................................... 5-59
5.5.18 Hazards and Hazardous Materials........................................................ 5-59
5.5.19 Environmental Justice ........................................................................... 5-62
Best Management Practices (BMPs)................................................................ 5-63
Summary .......................................................................................................... 5-63

CHAPTER 6 COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS ........................... 6-1
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
6.11
6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15
6.16

National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 ........................................................ 6-1
Endangered Species Act of 1973 ....................................................................... 6-1
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act of 1996 ......... 6-2
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (FWCA)........................................................ 6-2
Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) ...................................................................... 6-2
Clean Water Act of 1972 (CWA)......................................................................... 6-3
Clean Air Act of 1972 ......................................................................................... 6-4
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 ......................................................... 6-4
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act .................................. 6-5
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies
Act of 1970 ......................................................................................................... 6-5
Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management .............................................. 6-6
Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands................................................. 6-6
Executive Order 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental
Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations ............................ 6-6
Executive Order 13112, Invasive Species .......................................................... 6-7
Executive Order 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the
Cultural Environment .......................................................................................... 6-7
Executive Order 13007, Indian Sacred Sites...................................................... 6-7

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

vi

Table of Contents
6.17

Executive Order 13084, Consultation and Coordination with Indian
Tribal Governments ............................................................................................ 6-7

CHAPTER 7 AGENCY CONSULTATION AND PUBLIC OUTREACH .................................. 7-1
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5

Public Scoping Process ...................................................................................... 7-1
7.1.1 Public Involvement .................................................................................. 7-1
Summary of Scoping Comments ........................................................................ 7-2
Resource Agency Consultations ........................................................................ 7-4
State Historic Preservation Office....................................................................... 7-6
Resource Agency Coordination .......................................................................... 7-7

CHAPTER 8 LIST OF AGENCIES, ORGANIZATIONS, AND PERSONS TO WHOM
COPIES OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT ARE SENT .............................. 8-1
8.1
8.2
8.3

Paper Copy ........................................................................................................ 8-1
Compact Disc ..................................................................................................... 8-1
Letter Notification ............................................................................................... 8-2

CHAPTER 9 REFERENCES ................................................................................................... 9-1
CHAPTER 10 LIST OF PREPARERS .................................................................................... 10-1

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

vii

Table of Contents

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

viii

Table of Contents
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1-1
Figure 1.2-1
Figure 2.2-1
Figure 2.2-2
Figure 2.2-3
Figure 2.2-4
Figure 2.2-5
Figure 2.2-6
Figure 2.2-7
Figure 2.2-8
Figure 2.4-1
Figure 2.5-1
Figure 2.5-2
Figure 2.5-3
Figure 2.5-4
Figure 2.5-5
Figure 2.5-6
Figure 2.6-1
Figure 2.7-1
Figure 2.7-2
Figure 2.7-3
Figure 2.7-4
Figure 2.7-5
Figure 2.7-6
Figure 2.7-7
Figure 2.8-1
Figure 2.9-1
Figure 2.9-2
Figure 2.9-3
Figure 2.9-4
Figure 2.9-5
Figure 2.9-6
Figure 3.1-1
Figure 3.1-2
Figure 3.1-3
Figure 3.7-1a
Figure 3.7-1b
Figure 3.7-1c
Figure 3.8-1a

Regional Area Map ....................................................................................... 1-5
Llagas Creek Watershed Project From 1982 EIR/EIS .................................. 1-7
Upper Llagas Creek Poject Area Reaches ................................................... 2-7
Reach 8 ........................................................................................................ 2-9
Reach 7B .................................................................................................... 2-11
Reach 7A .................................................................................................... 2-13
Reach 6 ...................................................................................................... 2-15
Reach 5 ...................................................................................................... 2-17
Reach 4 ...................................................................................................... 2-19
Reach 14 .................................................................................................... 2-21
Existing 1-Percent Flooding Extents--No Action Alternative ....................... 2-47
All Alternatives Post-Project 1-Percent Flood Exceedance Extents ........... 2-53
Typical Channel Cross-Section with Bench on One Side ........................... 2-55
Reach 8 Trapezoidal Channel .................................................................... 2-59
Reach 8 Channel with Vertical Concrete Wall ............................................ 2-61
Reach 8 Hybrid Channel ............................................................................ 2-63
Staging Areas ............................................................................................. 2-75
NRCS Alternative Reach 8 ......................................................................... 2-95
Tunnel Alternative Reach 8 ...................................................................... 2-103
Typical Roadheader Used for Tunnel Excavation in Soft to Medium
Strength Rock ........................................................................................... 2-106
Roadheader Excavation with Steel Sets at the Face of a Tunnel ............ 2-106
Load, Haul, Dump (LHD) Unit ................................................................... 2-107
Drill Jumbo for Drilling Holes .................................................................... 2-108
a, b, and c—Photographs of Controlled Detonation Preparation ............. 2-108
Tunnel with Steel Rib and Wood Lagging Initial Support ......................... 2-109
Culvert/Channel Alternative Reach 8 ....................................................... 2-119
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ..................................................................... 2-125
Bypass Channel Typical Cross-Section Reach 6 ..................................... 2-127
Temporary Traffic Road at Murphy Avenue ............................................. 2-129
Phase 1 – Hwy 101 North Bound Bridge and Culvert Construction and
Temporary Traffice Control ....................................................................... 2-131
Phase 2 – Hwy 101 South Bound Bridge and Culvert Construction and
Tempoaray Traffic Control ........................................................................ 2-133
Reach 14 Typical Cross Section for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ...... 2-135
Geology in the Project Vicinity .................................................................... 3-11
Faults in the Project Vicinity ....................................................................... 3-13
Liquefaction Susceptibility in the Project Vicinity ........................................ 3-15
Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3 ........................................... 3-107
Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3 ........................................... 3-109
Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3 ........................................... 3-111
Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3 ............................................. 3-115

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

ix

Table of Contents
Figure 3.8-1b
Figure 3.8-1c
Figure 3.8-2a
Figure 3.8-2b
Figure 3.8-2c
Figure 3.10-1
Figure 3.12-1
Figure 3.13-1a
Figure 3.13-1b
Figure 3.13-1c
Figure 3.13-1d
Figure 3.13-1e
Figure 3.13-1f
Figure 3.13-1g
Figure 3.13-1h
Figure 3.14-1
Figure 3.15-1
Figure 3.17-1
Figure 3.17-1
Figure 3.19-1
Figure 5.4-1
Figure 5.4-2
Figure 5.4-3

Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3 ............................................. 3-117
Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3 ............................................. 3-119
Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3 ................................................. 3-121
Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3 ................................................. 3-123
Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3 ................................................. 3-125
Upper Llagas Creek Major Road Segments ............................................. 3-139
Noise Measurement Locations ................................................................. 3-167
Visual Simulations 1. Hale Avenue Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-175
Visual Simulations 2. Monterey Road Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-177
Visual Simulations 3. Spring Avenue Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-179
Visual Simulations: 4. La Crosse Drive Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-181
Visual Simulations: 5. La Jolla Drive Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-183
Visual Simulations 6: Highway 101 Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-185
Visual Simulations: 7. Rucker Avenue Existing View and
Visual Simulations .................................................................................... 3-187
Visual Simulations: 8. Church Avenue Existing View and
Visual Simulation ...................................................................................... 3-189
Wells Within 500 Feet of Upper Llagas Creek Project ............................. 3-197
Recreational Facilities in Close Proximity to Project Footprint ................. 3-203
Socioeconomic Resources Project Area .................................................. 3-211
Geography of the Socioeconomics Project Area ...................................... 3-225
Environmental Justice Project Area .......................................................... 3-239
Ortho-Rectified Aerial Photo of Lake Silveira Depicting Historic
Channel Alignment ....................................................................................... 5-9
Proposed Design for Lake Silveira ............................................................. 5-11
Map Depicting the Locations of Himalayan Blackberry Infestation at
Lake Silveira ............................................................................................... 5-13

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

x

Table of Contents

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.4-1
Table 2.2-1
Table 2.3-1
Table 2.3-2
Table 2.5-1
Table 2.5-2
Table 2.5-3
Table 2.5-4
Table 2.5-5
Table 2.5-6
Table 2.5-7
Table 2.5-8
Table 2.5-9
Table 2.6-1
Table 2.9-1
Table 2.9-2
Table 2.9-3
Table 2.10-1
Table 3.2-1
Table 3.2-2
Table 3.2-3
Table 3.2-4
Table 3.4-1
Table 3.4-2
Table 3.4-3
Table 3.5-1
Table 3.6-1
Table 3.7-1
Table 3.7-2
Table 3.7-3

Overview of Permits, Approvals, and Consultations Required for the
Upper Llagas Creek Project ....................................................................... 1-11
Existing Channel Crossings, Reaches 7A and 7B
(West Little Llagas Creek) ............................................................................ 2-4
Comparison of Alternatives Presented in the 1982 EIS/EIR ...................... 2-33
Flow Rate and Costs for Channel Detention Storage above Reach 8 ....... 2-37
Structures Located within Project Construction Footprint ........................... 2-66
Construction Periods and Duration by Reach ............................................ 2-67
Estimated Excavation, Fill, and Disposal Volumes ..................................... 2-70
Construction Duration, Crew Size and Equipment ..................................... 2-71
Target Composite Hydraulic Roughness Coefficients
(Manning’s n-value)for Maintenance .......................................................... 2-81
Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness
Reaches 4 and 5 ........................................................................................ 2-86
Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness
Reach 6 ...................................................................................................... 2-86
Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 14............................................................................. 2-87
Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target
Roughness Reach 8 ................................................................................... 2-87
Proposed and Existing Culverts for Reach 8 .............................................. 2-99
New Bridges Proposed for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative .......................... 2-127
Proposed Culvert Improvements .............................................................. 2-135
Summary of Additional Staging Areas for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ... 2-137
Summary of Project Alternatives .............................................................. 2-139
Existing and Proposed Project Design Flow Capacities ............................. 3-21
Selected Monitoring Well Water Levels for January 2012 .......................... 3-23
SCVWD Observational Well Elevations In Proximity to Llagas Creek,
West Little Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek .............................. 3-25
Suspended Sediment Total Maximum Daily Load Numeric Targets for
Llagas Creek (CRWQCB)........................................................................... 3-27
Vegetation Types and Habitats in the Project Area .................................... 3-36
Jurisdictional Waters in the Delineation Project Area ................................. 3-46
Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Area ..... 3-50
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Area .. 3-68
Threatened or Endangered Fish Species, and Associated Critical Habitat,
Potentially Occurring Within the Project Area ............................................. 3-96
Summary of Important Farmlands in Santa Clara County and Within
Project Footprint (2010) ............................................................................ 3-103
Important Farmlands Within Project Footprint by Reach .......................... 3-104
Williamson Act Lands Within Project Footprint by Reach ......................... 3-104

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xi

Table of Contents
Table 3.7-4
Table 3.8-1
Table 3.8-2
Table 3.8-3
Table 3.8-4
Table 3.10-1
Table 3.11-1
Table 3.12-1
Table 3.12-2
Table 3.12-3
Table 3.12-4
Table 3.14-1
Table 3.16-1
Table 3.16-2
Table 3.16-3
Table 3.17-1
Table 3.17-2
Table 3.17-3
Table 3.17-4
Table 3.17-5
Table 3.17-6
Table 3.17-7
Table 3.17-8
Table 3.17-9
Table 3.17-10
Table 3.18-1
Table 3.18-2
Table 4.4-1
Table 4.4-2
Table 4.7-5
Table 4.7-6
Table 4.8-5
Table 4.9-1
Table 4.10-2

Summary of Crops Grown in Project Footprint Subject to
Permanent Conversion (2013).................................................................. 3-106
Land Uses Within Project Footprint Subject to Permanent Conversion
by Reach in Acres .................................................................................... 3-127
Land Uses Within Project Footprint Subject to Temporary Conversion
by Reach in Acres .................................................................................... 3-127
Zoning within Project Footprint Subject to Permanent Conversion by
Reach in Acres ......................................................................................... 3-128
Zoning within Project Footprint Subject to Temporary Conversion by
Reach in Acres ......................................................................................... 3-129
Existing Daily Traffic Volumes on Project Area Roadways ....................... 3-142
Ambient Air Quality Standards.................................................................. 3-148
Typical Sound Level Characteristics......................................................... 3-157
Nearest Residential Sensitive Receptors ................................................. 3-162
Nearest Sensitive Receptors (Non-Residential) ....................................... 3-162
Baseline Noise Measurement Locations .................................................. 3-163
Summary of Utility and Public Service Providers ...................................... 3-193
Population Trends for Communities in the Vicinity of Project area 1, 2 ...... 3-206
Population Projections for Santa Clara County ........................................ 3-207
Population Projections for Communities in the Vicinity of Project area .... 3-207
Geography of the Socioeconomics Project Area ...................................... 3-210
Median Home Value, 2000 to 2009 .......................................................... 3-214
Land Use Within the Project Footprint ...................................................... 3-214
Labor Force and Unemployment, 2007–2011 .......................................... 3-215
Employment by Place of Residence ......................................................... 3-217
Employment by Place of Work.................................................................. 3-218
Income and Poverty, 2007–2011 .............................................................. 3-219
Earnings by Industry, Santa Clara County 2010....................................... 3-220
Total Industry Output, Santa Clara County 2010 ...................................... 3-221
Business Establishments in Downtown Morgan Hill ................................. 3-223
Summary of Sites Identified in Geotracker and Envirostor Databases ..... 3-231
Schools Within 0.25 mile of a Project Reach ............................................ 3-236
Permanent and Temporary Impacts to USACE Jurisdictional Habitats
for the Tunnel Alternative ........................................................................... 4-23
Impacts to Vegetation Types and Habitats Outside of USACE
Jurisdiction for the Tunnel Alternative ....................................................... 4-23
Number of Acres of Williamson Act and Important Farmlands
Subject to Conversion Under the Action Alternatives ................................. 4-68
Acres of Williamson Act and Important Agricultural Lands Flooded
Under 1-Percent Flood Scenario by Alternative ......................................... 4-69
Land Use Designations Flooded Under the Various Alternatives (Acres).. 4-78
Cultural Resources adjacent to the Project APE ......................................... 4-87
Tunnel Alternative Total Average Daily Construction-Related Trips ........... 4-92

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xii

Table of Contents
Table 4.10-3
Table 4.10-4
Table 4.10-5
Table 4.11-10
Table 4.11-11
Table 4.11-12
Table 4.11-13
Table 4.11-14
Table 4.11-15
Table 4.11-16
Table 4.11-17
Table 4.11-18
Table 4.11-19
Table 4.11-20
Table 4.11-21
Table 4.11-22
Table 4.12-7
Table 4.12-8
Table 4.12-9
Table 4.12-10
Table 4.12-11
Table 4.12-12
Table 4.12-13
Table 4.12-14
Table 4.12-15
Table 4.12-16

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Total Average Daily
Construction-Related Trips ......................................................................... 4-92
Average Daily Truck Trips by Year—Tunnel Alternative ............................ 4-93
Average Daily Truck Trips by Year—Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ............. 4-93
Significance Thresholds for Criteria Pollutants - BAAQMD (2010) ........... 4-122
Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with NRCS or
Culvert/Channel Alternatives .................................................................... 4-122
Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with
Tunnel Alternative..................................................................................... 4-123
Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 6
Bypass Alternative .................................................................................... 4-123
Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with NRCS or
Culvert/Channel Alternatives .................................................................... 4-124
Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with
Tunnel Alternative..................................................................................... 4-124
Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 6
Bypass Alternative .................................................................................... 4-125
Estimated Total Criteria Emissions for All Project Alternatives ................. 4-125
Estimated GHG Emissions for NRCS or Culvert/Channel Alternatives .... 4-125
Estimated GHG Emissions for Tunnel Alternative .................................... 4-126
Estimated GHG Emissions for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative ..................... 4-126
Estimated Total GHG Emissions for All Project Alternatives .................... 4-126
Screening Health Risk Assessment for Excavation Activity...................... 4-127
Typical Noise Levels for Proposed Construction Equipment
(at 50 feet) ................................................................................................ 4-136
Typical Vibration Levels for Proposed Construction Equipment
(at 25 feet) ................................................................................................ 4-137
Typical Noise Levels for Proposed Maintenance Equipment
(at 50 feet) ................................................................................................ 4-138
Typical Vibration Levels for Proposed Maintenance Equipment
(at 25 feet) ................................................................................................ 4-138
Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(No Action Alternative) ............................................................................. 4-141
Maintenance Noise at Nearest Non-Residential Receptors by Reach
(No Action Alternative).............................................................................. 4-141
Maintenance Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(No Action Alternative) .............................................................................. 4-143
Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(Tunnel Alternative) .................................................................................. 4-145
Operation and Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors
by Reach (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s Proposed Action) .................... 4-148
Construction Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(Tunnel Alternative) .................................................................................. 4-150

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xiii

Table of Contents
Table 4.12-17
Table 4.12-18

Table 4.12-19

Table 4.12-20
Table 4.12-21
Table 4.12-22
Table 4.12-23
Table 4.12-24
Table 4.12-25
Table 4.14-2
Table 4.16-4a
Table 4.16-4b
Table 4.17.11
Table 4.19-1
Table 4.20-2
Table 4.20-3
Table 4.20-4
Table 5.3-1
Table 7.1-1
Table 7.2-1
Table 7.3-1
Table 7.5-2

Maintenance Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(Tunnel Alternative) .................................................................................. 4-152
Estimated Noise Levels for Operation and Maintenance Activities
Compared with Existing Noise Levels (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s
Proposed Action) ...................................................................................... 4-153
Estimated Noise Levels for Construction Activities Compared with
Existing Noise Levels (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s Proposed
Action) ...................................................................................................... 4-154
Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(NRCS Alternative) ................................................................................... 4-156
Operation and Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors
by Reach (NRCS Alternative) ................................................................... 4-157
Construction Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(NRCS Action Alternative) ........................................................................ 4-157
Estimated Noise Levels for Operation and Maintenance Activities
Compared with Existing Noise Levels (NRCS Alternative) ....................... 4-158
Estimated Noise Levels for Construction Activities Compared with
Existing Noise Levels (NRCS Alternative) ................................................ 4-159
Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach
(Reach 6 Bypass Alternative) ................................................................... 4-161
Disposal Volumes by Alternative in Bank Cubic Yards (bcy) .................... 4-180
Project-related construction employment (Maximum/year)....................... 4-190
Residential Structures Located Within Project Footprint .......................... 4-190
Estimates of the Project Construction Labor Force in the Project
area and Nearby Population Centers ....................................................... 4-197
Summary of Project Area Demographic Characteristics .......................... 4-223
Defines Project Area of Each Resource Analyzed for
Cumulative Impacts .................................................................................. 4-239
List of Projects Evaluated for Cumulative Impacts in the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Control Project Vicinity ......................................................... 4-241
Alternatives Comparison with the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action) .................................................................. 4-261
Lake Silveira Approximate Restoration Areas .............................................. 5-7
Meeting Records .......................................................................................... 7-2
Comments Received During Public Scoping ................................................ 7-3
Agency Consultation Meeting Records ........................................................ 7-6
Resource Agency Coordination .................................................................... 7-7

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xiv

Table of Contents
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A:
APPENDIX B:

2012 Scoping Letters
2012-2022 Stream Maintenance Program Best Management
Practices
APPENDIX C: Comprehensive Best Management Practices
APPENDIX D: Resource Agency Coordination
APPENDIX E: Impacts to Vegetation Types for the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action)
APPENDIX F: Potential Jurisdictional Waters and California Sycamore Woodland
APPENDIX G: Special-Status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity
APPENDIX H: CNDDB Occurrences in the Project Vicinity
APPENDIX I: USFWS Listed Species in the Project Vicinity
APPENDIX J: In-Stream Aquatic Habitat Features for Action Alternatives
APPENDIX K: Air Quality Tables
APPENDIX L: Noise Measurements for Action Alternatives
APPENDIX M: Special-Status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xv

Table of Contents

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

xvi

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
°C
°F
µg/m3
11988
A.D.
AASHTO
AB
ACHP
ADT
AF
APE
ATCM
B.C.
B.P.
BA
BAAQMD
Basin Plan
bcy
BETX
bgs
BLS
BMPs
BMX
BO
BY
C2H3Cl
CAA
CAAQS
CAL FIRE
Cal/EPA
Cal/OSHA
Cal-IPC
Caltrans
CAR
CARB
cc
CC
CCR
CCRWQCB
CDFG
CDFW
CDMG
CDP
CEQ
CEQA

degrees Celsius
degrees Fahrenheit
micrograms per cubic meter
Executive Order (EO) 11988—Floodplain Management
Anno Domini
American Association of State and Highway Transportation
Officials
Assembly Bill
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
average daily traffic
acre-feet
Area of Potential Effects
Airborne Toxic Control Measure
Before Christ
before the present
biological assessment
Bay Area Air Quality Management District
Water Quality Control Plan for the Central Coast Region
bank cubic yards
benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes
below ground surface
Bureau of Labor Statistics
Best Management Practices
bicycle motorcross
biological opinion
Reach Bypass
vinyl chloride
Clean Air Act
California Ambient Air Quality Standards
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
California Environmental Protection Agency
California Occupational Safety and Health Administration
California Invasive Plant Council
California Department of Transportation
Coordination Act Report
California Air Resources Board
cubic centimeter
Culvert/Channel
California Code of Regulations
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board
California Department of Fish and Game
California Department of Fish and Wildlife
California Division of Mines and Geology
Census Designated Place
Council of Environmental Quality
California Environmental Quality Act

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-1

Acronyms and Abbreviations

CERCLA
CESA
CFR
cfs
CGP
CGS
CH4
CHHSLs
CMP
CNDDB
CNPS
CO
CO2
CRF
COCs
CPI
C-RC
CRHR
CRLF
CTS
CUPA
CWA
CY
DA
dB
dBA
dbh
DECS
DO
DOT
DPM
DSOD
DTSC
DWR
DPS
EFH
EIR
EIS
EO
EPA
ESA
ESAs
ESLs
ESU
FAA
FCWA
FEMA
FESA
FHWA
FIFRA

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act
California Endangered Species Act
Code of Federal Regulations
cubic feet per second
Construction General Permit
California Geological Survey
methane
California Human Health Screening Levels
Congestion Management Program
California Natural Diversity Data Base
California Native Plant Society
carbon monoxide
carbon dioxide
Code of Federal Regulations
Constituents of Concern
Consumer Price Index
C-Resource Code
California Register of Historical Resources
California red-legged frog
California tiger salamander
Certified Unified Program Agency
Clean Water Act
cubic yards
Department of the Army
decibels
decibel scale
diameter at breast height
Diesel Emission Control Strategy
dissolved oxygen
U.S. Department of Transportation
diesel particulate matter
Division of Safety of Dams
Department of Toxic Substances Control
California Department of Water Resources
Distinct Population Segment
essential fish habitat
Environmental Impact Report
Environmental Impact Statement
Executive Order
Environmental Protection Agency
Endangered Species Act
Environmental Site Assessments
Environmental Screening Levels
Evolutionary Significant Unit
Federal Highway Administration
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Endangered Species Act
Federal Highway Administration
Federal Insecticide, Rodenticide, and Fungicide Act

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-2

Acronyms and Abbreviations

FIRE
FMMP
FTA
FWCA
FYLF
GHGs
GRP
GWP
HAPs
HCP
HEC-RAS
HFCs
HIS
HMSO
HRA
HSC
HSLA
Hz
IMPLAN
IPCC
IPM
ISTEA
ITP
JTU
KOPs
LEDPA
L2
L10
L50 and L90
LAFCO
lbs
LCFS
LCWPP
LDN
LEQ
LEQ(24)
Lmax
LOP
LOS
LUST
LWD
M
MBTA
MCLs
MEI
mg/kg
mg/L
mmBTU

Finance, Insurance and Real Estate
Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program
Federal Transit Administration
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act
foothill yellow-legged frog
greenhouse gases
Gross Regional Product
Global Warming Potential
Hazardous Air Pollutants
Habitat Conservation Plan
Hydrologic Engineering Center—River Analysis System
hydrofluorocarbons
Habitat Suitability Index
Hazardous Materials Storage Ordinance
Health Risk Assessment
Health and Safety Code
Hazardous Substance Liability Assessment
hertz
Impact Analysis for Planning
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Control
Integrated Pest Management
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
Incidental Take Permit
Jackson Turbidity Units
key observation points
Least Environmental Damaging Practicable Alternative
a weighted sound level which happens 2 percent or more
of the time of the measurement
a weighted sound level which happens 10 percent or more
of the time of the measurement
measures represent 50 percent and 90 percent of the case
Local Agency Formation Commission
pounds
Low Carbon Fuel Standard
Llagas Creek Watershed Project Plan
day-night sound level
equivalent sound level
level of sound with the same energy as the time-varying
sound of interest, averaged over a 24-hour period
highest sound level measured during measurement of time
Local Oversight Program
level of service
Leaking Underground Storage Tank
large woody debris
magnitude
Migratory Bird Treaty Act
Maximum Contaminant Limit
Maximally Exposed Individual
milligram(s) per kilogram
milligram(s) per liter
million British Thermal Units

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-3

Acronyms and Abbreviations

MMRP
MMT
MND
MOA
MOU
mph
MRZs
MSA
MSATs
MT
MW
N2O
NA
NAAQS
NAHC
NAICS
NAVD
NEPA
NFIP
NHPA
NIDCD
NIHL
nm
NMFS
NO
NO2
NOA
NOAA
NOC
NOD
NOI
NOP
NOX
NPDES
NPPA
NPW
NRCS
NRHP
O&M
O3
OCC
OEHHA
OES
OHP
OHWM
Ordinance
OSHA
OSMRE
PAHs
Pb

Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
million metric tonnes
Mitigated Negative Declaration
Memorandum of Agreement
Memorandum of Understanding
miles per hour
mineral resource zones
Metropolitan Statistical Area
mobile source air toxics
metric tonnes
molecular weight, g/mole
nitrous oxide
No Action
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
Native American Heritage Commission
North American Industry Classification System
North Atlantic Vertical Datum
National Environment Policy Act
National Flood Insurance Program
National Historic Preservation Act
National Institute on Deafness and Communication
Disorder
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
nanometer
National Marine Fisheries Service
nitric oxide
nitrogen dioxide
naturally-occurring asbestos
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Notice of Completion
Notice of Determination
Notice of Intent
Notice of Preparation
Nitrogen oxides (NO2 and NO collectively)
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Native Plant Protection Act
Notice of Proposed Work
Natural Resources Conservation Service
National Register of Historic Places
Operations and Maintenance
ozone
Occupational Code
Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
Occupational Employment Statistics
Office of Historic Preservation
ordinary high water mark
Santa Clara County Geologic Ordinance
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
lead

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-4

Acronyms and Abbreviations

PCB
PCE
PEM
PERP
PFCs
PFO
PG&E
Phase I ESA
Phase II ESA
PL
PM10
PM2.5
ppb
PPE
ppm
ppt
PPV
PRC
Project
Proposition 65
psi
PSS
PTO
PTH
QC
RCB
RCP
RCRA
RHA
Rn
ROCs
ROGs
ROW
RPR
RPWs
RSL
RWQCB
RWQCB-SF
S-CCC ESU
SCAQMD
SCJAP
SCS
SCVCD
VHP
SCVWD
SEIR
SEIS
SF6
SFBAAB

polychlorinated biphenyl
perchloroethylene
Perennial Marsh
Portable Equipment Registration Program
perfluorocarbons
Riparian Forest
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Phase I Environmental Site Assessment
Phase II Environmental Site Assessment
Public Law
respirable particulate matter, 10 microns
fine particulate matter, 2.5 microns
parts per billion
personal protective equipment
parts per million
parts per trillion
peak particle velocity
Public Resources Code
Upper Llagas Creek Project
Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986
pound(s) per square inch
Riparian Scrub-shrub
permit to operate
protect human health
Quality Control
reinforced concrete box
reinforced concrete pipe
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
Rivers and Harbors Act
Radon
reactive organic compounds
reactive organic gases
right-of-way
Rare Plant Rank
relatively permanent waters
Regional Screening Levels
Regional Water Quality Control Board
California Regional Water Quality Control Board—San
Francisco Bay Region
South-Central California Coast Steelhead Evolutionarily
Significant Unit
South Coast Air Quality Management District
Santa Clara Joint Area Plan
Soils Conservation Service
Santa Clara Vector Control District
Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan
Santa Clara Valley Water District
Supplemental Environmental Impact Report
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
sulfur hexafluoride
San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-5

Acronyms and Abbreviations

SGMP
SHPO
SIP
SLE
SMARA
SMCWD
SMP
SO2
Society
SOI
SOx
SPCC
SPCP
SPL
SSC
SVOCs
SWPPP
SWRCB
T
TCMs
TNWs
TMDL
TMP
TOB
TOI
TPH
U.S. 101
UNFCCC
UPRR
URV
USA
USC
USACE
USBM
USDA
USEPA
USFWS
USGS
U/H
VdB
VOCs
VTA
WEE
Weiss
WNV
WPT
WRDA
YOY
ZBP

Soil and Groundwater Management Plan
State Historic Preservation Office
State Implementation Plan
St. Louis encephalitis virus
Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975
San Martin County Water District
Stream Maintenance Program
sulfur dioxide
American Meteorological Society
Sphere of Influence
sulfur oxides
Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure Plans
Spill Prevention Control Plan
Sound Pressure Level
suspended sediment concentration
Semi-volatile Organic Compounds
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
State Water Resources Control Board
tunnel
Transportation Control Measures
traditionally navigable waters
total maximum daily loads
Transportation Management Plan
Top of bank
Total Industry Output
Total petroleum hydrocarbons
United States Highway 101
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Union Pacific Railroad
Unit Risk Value
Urban Service Area
United States Code
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
U.S. Bureau of Mines
U.S. Department of Agriculture
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
United States Geological Survey
Upland Herbaceous
vibration decibels
volatile organic compounds
Valley Transportation Authority
western equine encephalomyelitis virus
Weiss Associates
West Nile Virus
western pond turtle
Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) of 1999
young of the year
ZIP Code Business Patterns

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

A-6

CHAPTER 1
1.1

PURPOSE AND NEED

INTRODUCTION
The Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) has submitted an application to the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, San Francisco District, Regulatory Division (USACE) for a
Department of the Army (DA) permit authorizing the discharge of dredge or fill material
into waters of the United States pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA)
for the construction of the Upper Llagas Creek Project. The project as proposed by the
SCVWD includes construction of flood conveyance features and deepening and
widening of Upper Llagas Creek as additional flood protection measures for the
communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy.
The USACE has determined that the proposed activities would constitute a Major
Federal Action in accordance with 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.)
Section 1501.8 and is preparing documentation to comply with requirements of the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 [42 United States Code (USC)
§§4321 et seq.]. NEPA is the “basic national charter for protection of the environment”
[40 C.F.R. §1500.1(a)] and requires federal agencies to be fully informed about the
environmental consequences of their decision to provide financial assistance, exercise
permit or regulatory authority, or to conduct an action that may significantly affect the
environment. In addition, NEPA mandates that the public be informed of the proposed
actions, the consequences of the actions, and the ultimate agency decision. Based on
the size of the project area, the current purpose for the site, and the potential positive
and negative environmental effects, both individually and cumulatively, of the anticipated
action (the Upper Llagas Creek Project), the USACE has determined that the project
would “significantly” affect the human environment. Therefore, an Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) is necessary to inform any final decision on the permit application. The
USACE’s decision will be to either issue, issue with modifications to the applicant’s
proposal, or deny a DA permit for the proposed action.
This document is an EIS that provides a comprehensive environmental analysis to aid in
the decision making process for the DA permit application for the Upper Llagas Creek
Flood Protection Project. The USACE has prepared this EIS in accordance with the
Council of Environmental Quality (CEQ) Regulations (40 C.F.R. Parts 1500-1508), 33
C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B “National Environmental Policy Act Implementation
Procedures for the Regulatory Program,” and 40 C.F.R. §230.10(a), which implement
the procedural provisions of the NEPA (42 USC §§4321 et seq.) for the USACE.

1.2

HISTORY
The Llagas Creek Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP) was originally proposed by the
SCVWD in 1968, and was approved by three local sponsoring agencies: Santa Clara
County, the City of Gilroy, and the City of Morgan Hill. The State of California and
Congress both approved the Project in 1969 and directed the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soils
Conservation Service (SCS) to construct the project under the Watershed Protection and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-1

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

Flood Prevention Act of 19541. The first construction work began in 1973 but stopped in
1974 to re-evaluate environmental impacts of the LCWPP under the newly authorized
NEPA of 1969 and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA of 1970). The
original LCWPP was revised by the NRCS, local sponsors, and citizen groups several
times over for a period of nearly a decade before a joint EIS/EIR was completed in 1982
on the revised LCWPP.
The revised LCWPP subdivided the entire project into 14 different reaches for the 1982
EIS/EIR analysis (Figure 1.2-1). The NRCS completed about half of the authorized
lower Project reaches, from Buena Vista Avenue to the confluence with the Pajaro River
(consisting of Reaches 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13) between 1973 and 1994. The
upper reaches, Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14, were not constructed by NRCS due
to funding constraints. The SCVWD and the project sponsors made a Congressional
request to transfer the remaining unconstructed, upper Project reaches to the USACE.
Through the Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) of 19992, Congress authorized
the USACE San Francisco District to complete the remaining project elements. In 2007,
USACE begin preparation of an EIS/EIR for the proposed federal project but due to
shortfalls of federal funding and because a Limited Reevaluation Report had not been
completed as called for in WRDA 2007, the USACE was unable to finalize the EIS/EIR
or provide continued support to SCVWD. In September 2013, the SCVWD decided to
pursue the project on their own without federal funding. The work requires a federal
permit from the USACE. However, to advance the project and meet CEQA
requirements, the SCVWD completed the EIR which was certified by SCVWD Board of
Directors June 10, 2014. On August 31, 2015, SCVWD submitted a DA permit
application for the proposed work.
1.3

PROJECT PURPOSE, NEED, AND OBJECTIVES
Under NEPA, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) requires that an EIS specify,
“the underlying purpose and need to which the Lead Agency is responding in proposing
the alternatives including the proposed action (PL 83-566)3.” This statement of purpose
and need is important because it explains why the federal agency and the project
proponent are undertaking the proposed action and what objectives they intend to
achieve.
The statement of purpose and need helps the lead agency select the range of
alternatives to be evaluated in an EIS. An EIS need only include those alternatives that
would achieve at least some of the federal agency’s objectives as set forth in the
statement of purpose and need.
Under NEPA (33 C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B) and under Section 404 of the CWA
pursuant to the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines (40 C.F.R. Part 230), there are three ways
that the USACE is to examine the underlying goals, or purpose, of a project: (1) the
Applicant’s stated purpose and need (i.e., SCVWD’s stated purpose and need), (2) a
“basic” project purpose defined by the USACE specifically for addressing a project’s
water dependency, and (3) an “overall” project purpose, which is defined by the USACE

1

PL 83-566, Stat. 666 authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to cooperate with state and local agencies in planning
and carrying out works of improvement for soil conservation and for other purposes.
2
PL 106-53
3
NEPA C.F.R. 40 1502.13—Purpose and Need
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-2

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

and is used for the alternatives analysis. Pursuant to 33 C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B,
when defining the purpose and need for a project, “while generally focusing on the
applicant’s statement, the USACE will in all cases, exercise independent judgment in
defining the purpose and need for the project from both from the applicant’s and the
public’s perspective.”
The Applicant’s stated purpose and need is an expression, typically in the Applicant’s
own words, of the underlying goals for the Applicant’s Proposed Action. The USACE
takes an applicant’s purpose and need into account when determining the overall
purpose and the project purpose and need. The Applicant’s purpose and need is
described in Section 1.3.1.
The USACE uses the basic project purpose to determine water dependency [40 C.F.R.
§230.10(a)(3)]. If a project is not water dependent, other alternatives that would not
result in impacts to special aquatic sites are presumed to be available. The Section
404(b)(1) Guidelines state that practicable alternatives to nonwater-dependent activities
are presumed to be available and to result in less environmental loss unless clearly
demonstrated otherwise by the applicant [40 C.F.R. §230.10 (a)(3)]. Section 1.3.2 below
defines the USACE’s basic project purpose as applied to the Applicant’s Proposed
Action.
The Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines are one of the substantive criteria that the USACE
uses to evaluate a permit. The Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines establish two rebuttable
presumptions: first, for a non-water-dependant project, the Guidelines presume that
practicable alternatives are available that do not involve the discharge of dredged or fill
material into a special aquatic site, such as wetlands. Second, the Guidelines presume
that such alternatives result in less adverse impact on the aquatic ecosystem than
wetland alternatives. These presumptions apply unless the applicant clearly
demonstrates otherwise. Application of these rebuttable presumptions results in the
identification of the least environmentally damaging practicable alternative (LEDPA).
The USACE will use the overall project purpose to identify alternatives for evaluation in
this EIS and to determine if the Applicant’s Proposed Action is the LEDPA under the
Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines. According to USACE guidance in its 2009 Standard
Operating Procedures, “The overall project purpose should be specific enough to define
the applicant’s needs, but not so restrictive as to constrain the range of alternatives that
must be considered under the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines. Defining the overall project
purpose is the USACE’s responsibility. However, the applicant’s needs and the type of
project being proposed should be considered.” The USACE’s overall project purpose
more specifically addresses the Applicant’s purpose and need than does the USACE
basic project purpose. The USACE’s overall project purpose, as applied to the
Applicant’s Proposed Action, is defined in Section 1.3.2.
Floods in 1937, 1955, 1958, 1962, 1963, 1969, 1982, 1986, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2002,
2008, 2009 and 2011 damaged existing homes and businesses. The largest recorded
flood, estimated to be a 33-year event, occurred in December 1955. The Applicant’s
Proposed Action is needed to manage flood risk within the Upper Llagas Creek
Watershed.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-3

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-4

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

Figure 1.1-1 Regional Area Map
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-5

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-6

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

Figure 1.2-1 Llagas Creek Watershed Project From 1982 EIR/EIS
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-7

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-8

Chapter 1

1.3.1

Purpose and Need

Applicant’s Purpose and Need
The Applicant’s stated purpose and need is a statement that defines the intent
and underlying goals for the Applicant’s Proposed Action. The Applicant’s stated
purpose and project specific objectives are as follows:
The purpose of the Applicant’s Proposed Action is to:


Contain the 1-percent flood exceedance4 (i.e., 100-year flood) on West
Little Llagas Creek through the community of Morgan Hill;



Assure that no additional flooding is induced on Llagas Creek by the
upstream improvements along the reaches downstream from Morgan Hill;
and



Provide a 10-percent flood exceedance5 capacity (10-year flood) on East
Little Llagas Creek.

Project-specific objectives include:

1.3.2



Improve public safety;



Completion of the Project in accordance with the NRCS watershed plan
for Llagas Creek;



Minimize Project footprint;



Design a horizontally and vertically stable channel that will neither widen
or narrow, down-cut or aggrade, on a large scale over the long-term;



Provide for adequate maintenance access throughout the Project, while
minimizing maintenance needs of the Project, especially due to
sedimentation; and,



Preserve and enhance desirable vegetation, fish, and wildlife habitat
present in Llagas Creek and connected water bodies.

USACE Project Purpose
As stated above the USACE defines the basic project purpose to determine
water dependency while the overall project purpose is used to identify and
evaluate alternatives, including the LEDPA.

4

The 1-percent flood is a flow event that statistically has a 1 percent chance of happening in any given year. It is
sometimes referred to as the “100-Year” flood. This is a flood that might occur once every one hundred years on
average over the long term.
5
The 10-percent flood is a flow event that statistically has a 10 percent chance of happening in any given year. It is
sometimes referred to as the “10-Year” flood. This is a flood that might occur once every ten years on average over
the long term.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-9

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

The basic project purpose is to construct flood control management features to
provide flood protection. Therefore, the USACE finds that the basic project
purpose is water dependent.
The overall project purpose as defined by the USACE is to construct flood control
management features in the Upper Llagas Creek Watershed to provide flood
protection generally to the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy.
Specifically, the project purpose is to provide a 1-percent flood (100-year flood)
exceedance capacity on West Little Llagas Creek through the community of
Morgan Hill and a 10-percent flood (10-year flood) exceedance capacity on East
Little Llagas Creek.
1.4

DECISION TO BE MADE
The Proposed Action would result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters
of the US, including wetlands, through filling, excavation, land clearing, and other
activities. Under Section 404 of the CWA (33 USC §1344), the USACE is responsible
for regulating the placement of fill and discharge of dredged material into the waters of
the US, including wetlands. Therefore, because the SCVWD (Applicant) is seeking
approval of a permit from the USACE, a federal agency, the project involves a federal
action. Because any environmental consequences of SCVWD’s Proposed Action are
essentially products of the USACE permit action, the scope of the federal permitting
action includes all of construction activities associated with this action on the project site.
Concurrent with this EIS, the USACE is circulating a public notice pursuant to 33 C.F.R.
Part 325 to solicit comments on the proposed activity for which a Department of Army
permit is sought and to evaluate the probable impact on public interest.
The Proposed Action, through the USACE permit review requires consultation under
Section 7 of the ESA andSection 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act. Other
authorizations required include a Water Quality Certification issued pursuant to Section
401 of the CWA through the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board.
Consultation and coordination, including public involvement, are included in Chapter 7 of
this EIS and the required permits, licenses and environmental laws are described both in
Chapter 6and Table 1.4-1.
Additionally, the Proposed Action would involve evaluation for compliance with the
Section 404 (b)(1) Guidelines of the CWA; Section 401 of the CWA, and the Clean Air
Act. After all the above actions have been completed and at least 30 days following a
Final EIS, the District Engineer of the San Francisco District will determine in
accordance with the record and applicable regulations if a permit should be issued.
Conformity with the Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines and the probable impact of the
Proposed Action on public interest will be provided in a Record of Decision (ROD) that
documents the DA permit decision. The ROD will document the USACE’s decision to
either issue, issue with conditions, or deny a permit for the Proposed Action.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-10

Chapter 1

Table 1.4-1

Purpose and Need

Overview of Permits, Approvals, and Consultations Required for the Upper
Llagas Creek Project

Jurisdiction
Federal Agencies
U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE)

National Marine
Fisheries Service
(NMFS)

Permits, Approvals & Consultations

National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
compliance
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA);
and, Section 404(b)(1) in particular

Section 7(a) of the Federal Endangered
Species Act (ESA)

Section 305(b)(4) of the Magnuson-Stevens
Act

U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service
(USFWS)

Section 7(a) of the Federal Endangered
Species Act (ESA)

Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA)

Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (FWCA)

State Agencies
California
Department of Fish
and Wildlife (CDFW)

Streambed Alteration Agreement (Fish and
Game Code Sections 1600-1616)

Incidental Take Permits for state-listed
species (Fish and Game Code
Section 2081)
California
Department of
Transportation
(Caltrans)

Encroachment permit is required for
construction within the Caltrans
Right-of-Way (ROW).
Transportation Permit.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Project Action Associated With the
Permit, Approval, or Consultations
Required for all federal actions
Discharge of fill or dredged material into
waters of the United States including
jurisdictional wetlands. Also known as the
“404 Permit Process.”
USACE must consult with NMFS regarding
potential impacts to federally listed species.
NMFS Issues a Letter of Concurrence or a
Biological Opinion (BO).
USACE is required to consult with NMFS
when federal action may adversely affect
Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) for federally
managed species. NMFS provides
conservation recommendations to minimize
adverse impacts.
USACE must consult with USFWS
regarding potential impacts to federally
listed species. USFWS issues a Letter of
Concurrence or a BO.
USFWS has responsibility for protecting
nearly all species of birds, their eggs, and
nests.
The FWCA provides authority for USFWS
involvement in evaluating impacts to fish
and wildlife from proposed water resource
development projects.
Required for channel improvements
including reconfiguration, deepening, and
widening. Issues agreement with
conditions to protect resources whenever a
bed or bank of a stream, lake, or reservoir
is altered.
CDFW may issue if specific criteria are met,
the species continued existence is not
jeopardized, and impacts of the authorized
take are minimized and fully mitigated.
Construction of reinforced concrete boxes
to pass floodwaters under a highway.
Delivery of materials and equipment to the
Project area. Required for transport of
oversized loads on state highways (This
permit is usually obtained by the
construction contractor or subcontractors).

December 2015

1-11

Chapter 1

Jurisdiction
State Historic
Preservation Office
(SHPO)

Regional Agencies
Bay Area Air Quality
Management District
(BAAQMD)

Central Coast
Regional Water
Quality Control
Board (CCRWQCB)

Local Agencies
Santa Clara Valley
Water District
(SCVWD)

Purpose and Need

Permits, Approvals & Consultations
Section 106, National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA).

As required by the California Clean Air Act
(CAA) and Amendments (Health and Safety
Code [HSC] Section 40910 et seq.) and the
Federal CAA and Amendments (42 U.S.C.
Section 7401 et seq. Responsible for air
monitoring, permitting, enforcement,
long-range air quality planning, regulatory
development, education, and public
information activities related to air pollution
encompassing Santa Clara County and the
Peninsula from the Santa Cruz Mountains
to South San Francisco.
Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act.
Overseen by the State Water Resources
Control Board (SWRCB), the CCRWQCB
issues certification or waiver for
construction-related degradation of water
quality.
401 Water Quality Certification (401
Certification) required for any project that
needs a Federal 404 Permit. The 401
Certification is a verification by the State
that the project will not violate water quality
standards
Construction General Permit for stormwater
discharges associated with construction
activity.

Possible permits for use of portable
generators during Project construction that
are not exempt from permit requirements
(RMC 2012).

California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) compliance

Evaluation of potentially significant impacts
is required for all projects, as defined by the
California Public Resources Code,
Section 21065.
Regulates the classification, construction,
and destruction of wells and other deep
excavations; requiring the destruction of
abandoned or unused wells; adopting water
contamination hazard standards.
The LOP is the Certified Unified Program
Agency (CUPA) for hazardous materials
plans and spill prevention plans if stored
hazardous materials are stored onsite.
The LOP oversees petroleum spill cleanup
through Spill Prevention, Control, and
Countermeasure Plans (SPCC).

SCVWD Well Ordinance 90-I

Santa Clara County
Department of
Environmental
Health Local
Oversight Program
(LOP)

Project Action Associated With the
Permit, Approval, or Consultations
USACE evaluates potential impacts to
cultural resources eligible or potential
eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP). USACE consults
with SHPO and federally recognized Tribes
and prepares a Memorandum of Agreement
(MOA) for adverse effects on resources
listed in, or eligible for listing NRHP.

The County of Santa Clara, in contract with
the SWRCB, oversees investigation and
cleanup of underground storage tanks.
Hazardous Materials Business Plan and
Spill Prevention Control and
Countermeasures Plan.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Triggers the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permitting for
channel improvements including
reconfiguration, deepening and widening.

Required for channel improvements
including reconfiguration, deepening and
widening

This applies to all construction projects that
would disturb one or more acres of soil.
Requires filing a Notice of Intent (NOI) as
well as preparation and implementation of a
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP).

December 2015

1-12

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need

Jurisdiction
County of Santa
Clara

City of Morgan Hill

Permits, Approvals & Consultations
Issues encroachment and grading permits
under the Santa Clara County Ordinance
No. 1203.109
Sell real estate or develop Land Use
Agreement
City encroachment permits

Tree Removal Permit

1.5

Project Action Associated With the
Permit, Approval, or Consultations
Triggered by the grading activities.

Restoration of Llagas Creek through Lake
Siveira owned by County Parks Department
An encroachment permit is required for
activities such as construction within the
public right-of-way (ROW).
Required for tree trunks with a
circumference of forty inches or more for
nonindigenous species and eighteen inches
or more for indigenous species measured
at 4.5 feet vertically above the ground or
immediately below the lowest branch,
whichever is lower. An indigenous tree
includes oaks (all types); California Bays,
Madrones, Sycamore, and Alder.

RELATED AUTHORIZATIONS, PLANS, AND PROJECTS
1.5.1

Federal Reports and Authorizations
The following reports and studies pertinent to the project have been prepared by
the USACE (San Francisco District). The reports are listed in chronological
order.

1.5.2

Regional Studies, Reports, and Other Documents
The following reports are for projects that are relevant to the Proposed Action
through location, or activity and are incorporated herein by reference.


Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report Santa Clara Valley
Water District Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012–2022. The
Stream Maintenance Program (SMP) is intended to support permitting for
the next 10-year planning period beginning in 2012 and ending in 2022.
SMP Update prioritizes and administers maintenance activities to achieve
the following objectives: (A) remove sediment to maintain the hydraulic,
safety, and habitat functions of the creek systems; (B) manage vegetation
to maintain the hydraulic, safety, and habitat functions of the creek
systems, and to allow for levee inspections and maintenance access;
(C) stabilize beds and banks of creeks and canals to protect existing
infrastructure, maintain public safety, reduce sediment loading, protect
water quality, and protect habitat values; and (D) avoid, minimize, or
mitigate impacts on the environment by incorporating stream stewardship
measures into maintenance activities. The SMP Update also seeks to
obtain and maintain multi-year programmatic permits to regulate
maintenance activities. Many of the Stream Maintenance Best
Management Practices (BMPs) would be utilized for maintenance related
activities for this Project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-13

Chapter 1

Purpose and Need


Pajaro River Project. The USACE is the lead agency for this joint
EIS/EIR mandated under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1966 (Public
Law 89-789). The Project area consists of the main stem of the Pajaro
River, from its mouth to U.S. 101, continuing from U.S. 101 to Murphy’s
Crossing and includes Salsipuedes Creek. The primary project objective
is to reduce the potential for flooding and associated damage along the
lower Pajaro River, Salsipuedes Creek and Corallitos Creek in the vicinity
of Santa Cruz and Monterey counties, as well as the city of Watsonville.



Lower Llagas Creek Capacity Restoration Project. The project area
runs from Highway 152 to Pajaro River, is a partially-funded (planning
phase only) project that plans, designs, and constructs improvements on
approximately 3.35 miles of Lower Llagas Creek to accomplish the
following objectives: restore flood capacity in Lower Llagas Creek;
coordinate with South County Wastewater Authority as a principal
stakeholder and water resource co-planner; and integrate flood protection
with habitat protection to satisfy Endangered Species Act regulations.
This project is funded by the SCVWD’s watershed and stream
stewardship fund. It was started in July 2008 and is scheduled to be
completed in December 2016 (SCVWD 2010a, b).



Butterfield Boulevard South Extension Project (City of Morgan Hill).
This project extended Butterfield Boulevard from Tennant Avenue to
Watsonville Road and include a grade separation over the Union Pacific
Railroad tracks. The extension impacted a short segment of West Little
Llagas Creek. The project included outlets to West Little Llagas Creek
from a detention pond located southeast of the new intersection that
would collect runoff from the area of the Butterfield Boulevard extension
between the UPRR tracks and Monterey Road. A Final EIR for the Sutter
Boulevard Extension & Flood Protection Facilities was completed for the
Project in 1992. Since that time, Sutter Boulevard was renamed
Butterfield Boulevard and project changes have required an addendum in
2005, an addendum in 2011, and an Initial Study/Mitigated Negative
Declaration in 2010 for shifting of Butterfield Boulevard alignment to the
south near Monterey Road and widening Watsonville Road further to the
southeast resulting in impacts to West Little Llagas Creek (City of Morgan
Hill 2011). The project is now complete.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-14

Chapter 1

1.6

Purpose and Need

PUBLIC SCOPING PROCESS
One of the objectives of NEPA is to encourage public involvement in project planning
and government decision making. Through the scoping and document comment
processes, the members of the public and responsible and interested agencies can
voice their concerns, request clarification, and make recommendations that can
ultimately alter the originally Applicant’s Proposed Action.
1.6.1

1.6.2

Previous Environmental Review


USDA Soil Conservation Service distributed the LCWPP Draft EIS for
public review in July 1979. A public hearing on the draft was held in
September 1979. The SCS developed a Finding of No Significant
Impact/Negative Declaration for impacts to geomorphology, visual
resources, aquatic resources, and wildlife habitat for the project (USDA
1982). During the public review period strong citizen opposition
developed along with objections from several public agencies. Therefore
the project sponsors agreed to restudy the Proposed Action.



Llagas Creek Watershed Draft Environmental Impact
Statement/Report prepared for the USDA NRCS was distributed for
public comment in September 1982. Local sponsoring agencies for the
draft report were the Loma Prieta Resource Conservation District, the
Gavilan Water District, and the SCVWD. The EIR was certified, permits
were obtained, and the lower reaches of Llagas Creek were constructed.



Notice of Intent and Notice of Preparation to Prepare a Joint
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (SEIS)/Supplemental
Environmental Impact Report (SEIR) for the Llagas Creek Flood
Control Project (Federal Register: August 7, 2001, and State
Clearinghouse No. 2001082034 August 8, 2001). This document was
started but not completed.

Prior Scoping Meeting
The Upper Llagas Creek Project Scoping Meeting was conducted on October 25,
2012 by the USACE and SCVWD. The meeting was held at the Morgan Hill
Community and Cultural Center, Morgan Hill, California. District officials and
staff provided a summary of the Project. Individuals spoke on behalf of
themselves or local government agency representatives and a total of 29 unique
project related questions were received related to project components,
alternatives and miscellaneous concerns regarding: eminent domain, project
funding, coordination with county roads and airports regarding maintenance, and
how the project boundaries were determined. SCVWD received five comment
letters from state and local agencies during the comment period, which are
included in Appendix A. A summary of environmental concerns raised by
agencies during the scoping period include:


Impacts to wastewater treatment systems and groundwater, and surface
water;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-15

Chapter 1

1.6.3

Purpose and Need


Potential impact to County parklands, park resources, recreational
facilities, public access, and county-wide trail routes;



Impacts to vegetation differentiating between native and nonnative
species;



Reduction of future maintenance;



Reduction of channel modifications;



Consider Project objectives that balance flood management needs with
environmental protection; and



Impacts to bridges, trestles, and culverts from upstream modifications.

Scoping for the Proposed Action
A notice of intent to prepare an EIS for the proposed action was circulated in the
Federal Register on September 28, 2015, for a 60-day comment period. One
comment letter was received and is included in Appendix A.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

1-16

CHAPTER 2

DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES

This chapter outlines the process used to determine the range of reasonable alternatives to the
proposed action and presents each alternative to be considered. Several alternatives to the
Applicant’s Proposed Action were evaluated for their ability to meet the overall project purpose
as presented in Chapter 1, including the feasibility, timeliness, and responsiveness to the issues
and concerns identified during public scoping. This chapter includes discussion regarding the
following sections:
Section 2.1 – Regulatory Setting for Alternatives Analysis;
Section 2.2 – Project Location;
Section 2.5 – Project Elements Common to All Action Alternatives; and
Section 2.3 – Alternatives Considered, Eliminated, and Brought Forward;Section 2.10 –
Summary of Project Alternatives
In addition, the evaluation process concluded with a range of reasonable project alternatives,
identified as follows:
Section 2.4 – No Action Alternative;
Section 2.6 – NRCS Alternative;
Section 2.7 – Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action);
Section 2.8 – Culvert/Channel Alternative; and
Section 2.9 – Reach 6 Bypass Alternative;
2.1

REGULATORY SETTING FOR ALTERNATIVES ANALYSIS
Both the Council of Environmental Quality’s (CEQ) National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) Implementation Procedures [40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) §1502.14]
and the United States Army Corps of Engineers’ (USACE) NEPA Implementation
Procedures (33 C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B) require consideration of a range of
reasonable alternatives for a proposed action. Defining a range of reasonable
alternatives is a key element for subsequent analyses in an Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS). The CEQ (1981) describes the alternatives as being the “heart of the
environmental impact statement,” and alternatives that are considered reasonable under
NEPA include those alternatives “that are practical or feasible from a technical and
economic standpoint and using common sense.” The USACE’s NEPA Implementation
Procedures define reasonable alternatives as “those that are feasible, and such
feasibility must focus on the accomplishment of the underlying purpose and need (of the
applicant or the public) that would be satisfied by the proposed Federal action (permit
issuance).” The USACE‘s regulations further provide that only reasonable alternatives
need to be considered in detail and that the reason for eliminating alternatives from
detailed study should briefly be discussed in the EIS [33 C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B,
sec. 9.a. (5) (a)]. NEPA regulations require that agencies consider a range of
reasonable alternatives to the proposed action, including consideration of a “No Action”
alternative; the regulations do not, however, require consideration of every conceivable
variation of an alternative (40 C.F.R. §1502.14). In addition, these regulations provide
that, while the USACE shall not prepare a cost benefit analysis of the alternatives, the
EIS should indicate any cost considerations that are likely to be relevant to a decision
[33 C.F.R. Part 325, Appendix B, sec. 9.a.(5)(d)].

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-1

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

The substantive criteria used by the USACE to evaluate a permit are the Section
404(b)(1) Guidelines (40 C.F.R. Part 230) promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). The guidelines require the evaluation of
“practicable alternatives,” and are used to identify the Least Environmentally Practicable
Alternative (LEDPA) to ensure that “no discharge of dredged or fill material shall be
permitted if there is a practicable alternative to the proposed discharge which would
have less adverse impact on the aquatic ecosystem, so long as the alternative does not
have other significant adverse environmental consequences.” The guidelines define an
alternative as practicable “if it is available and capable of being done after taking into
consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes”
(40 C.F.R. §230.10 [a][2]). The Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines indicate that the analysis of
alternatives for NEPA environmental documents will in most cases provide the
information required to evaluate the alternatives under the guidelines (40 C.F.R. §230.10
[a][4]).
The USACE evaluated and screened the alternatives mindful of both the NEPA
requirements and the 404(b)(1) Guideline requirements. As a result, the alternatives
analysis in this EIS also satisfies the requirement under both NEPA and the Section
404(b)(1) Guidelines. As described below, the USACE examined the full scope of
possible alternatives and components and systematically arrived at the range of
reasonable and practicable alternatives. Through this process, the USACE believes that
it has captured all of the alternatives and components necessary to determine whether
the Applicant’s Proposed Action is the LEDPA.
2.2

PROJECT LOCATION
The Project is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25 miles southeast
of San Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy (Figure 1.1-1,
Regional Area Map). The Project consists of the upper seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8
and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek above
Buena Vista Avenue (Figure 2.2-1).
The original Llagas Creek Flood Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP) was developed by
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soils Conservation Service (SCS)
in the late 1960s. The LCWPP addressed flooding on both the upper reaches of the
watershed, and a set of lower reaches along the West Branch of Llagas Creek in Gilroy
and mainstem Llagas Creek below Buena Vista Avenue. Flood control measures on the
lower reaches were constructed beginning in the 1970s. This EIS considers proposed
measures that address flooding in the upper reaches.
The total length of the Project area is approximately 13.9 miles; 6.2 miles of which are
along the main branch of Llagas Creek, 2.9 miles along West Little Llagas Creek; and,
3.4 miles along a tributary of Llagas Creek, known as East Little Llagas Creek. An
additional 1.4 miles of new channel would also be constructed along West Little Llagas
Creek to Llagas Creek. On the north, the physical limits of the Project are at the creek’s
intersection with Llagas Road on West Little Llagas Creek in Morgan Hill; and, in the
south, approximately 1,000 feet downstream of the creek’s intersection with Buena Vista
Avenue in Gilroy. A summary description of each of the seven Project reaches (from
upstream to downstream) identified in this EIS is provided below.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-2

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Project Reach 8 (West Little Llagas Creek)
Reach 8 is approximately 1.5 miles long and is located along West Little Llagas Creek in
downtown Morgan Hill between West Dunne Avenue in the south and just upstream of
Llagas Road in the north (Figure 2.2-2). The existing channel conveyance capacity is
less than a 10-percent flood event (<400 cubic feet per second [cfs] at Hillwood Lane).
Reach 8 is highly urbanized and constrained by development with homes or other
buildings built next to the channel. The existing creek consists of a trapezoidal earthen
channel with top widths varying between eight and 20 feet, and an average depth of 5
feet. Some sections of the channel are open concrete, and other sections are
underground passing through 10 single box culverts, eight of which are currently
undersized for the 1-percent exceedance flow1. The 10 culverts are located at: West 5th
Street; West 4th Street; West 3rd Street; the West 2nd Street/Del Monte Avenue
intersection; Warren Avenue; Main Street; the Wright Avenue/Hale Avenue intersection;
and Llagas Road, Llagas Creek Drive, and Hillwood Lane. The Llagas Road culvert has
a constricted opening that would be removed to pass the 1-percent exceedance flow.
Project Reach 7B
Reach 7B is a trapezoidal earthen channel, approximately 1.4 miles long, located along
West Little Llagas Creek in an urban, and residential suburban, area of Morgan Hill
between South La Crosse Drive in the south, and West Dunne Avenue in the north
(Figure 2.3-3). The existing creek passes through 18 reinforced concrete box (RCB)
culverts at seven locations (Table 2.2-1), three of which (Spring Avenue, Cosmo
Avenue, and Edes Street) are currently undersized for the 1-percent flow. Existing
culverts include: a quadruple box culvert at South La Crosse Drive; triple box culverts at
North La Crosse Drive; West Edmundson Avenue; Edes Street and Cosmo Avenue; and
a culvert at Spring Avenue. A 674-foot long single box culvert conveys flows under the
Morgan Hill Plaza Shopping Center from West Dunne Avenue to Ciolino Avenue. A
paved pedestrian/bike path meanders alongside approximately 2,000 feet of the south
side of the West Little Llagas Creek channel between Edes Court and South La Crosse
Drive.
Project Reach 7A
This reach extends approximately 1.5 miles from Reach 6 just above the Monterey Road
Bridge in the south, to South La Crosse Drive in the north. The majority of land adjacent
to Reach 7A is currently agricultural fields (Figure 2.2-4); there is no existing channel
here except for a short 0.3-mile length of trapezoidal shaped constructed channel at the
north end of the reach. Each of the alternatives would excavate a proposed earthen
diversion channel approximately 1.5 miles long through Reach 7A to divert flows from
West Little Llagas Creek upstream of Watsonville Road to Llagas Creek downstream of
Lake Silveira at Monterey Road (see Figure 2.2-4). Vegetation consists of row crops or
annual, non-native grassland on fallowed lands. There are two buried (and therefore
currently inoperable) bridges in this reach (Table 2.2-1) constructed by the SCVWD at
1

The 1-percent flood is a flow event that statistically has a 1-percent chance of happening in any given
year. It is sometimes referred to as the “100-Year” flood. This is a flood that might occur once every one
hundred years on average over the long term. Similarly a 10-percent flood is a flow event that statistically
has a 10-percent chance of happening in any given year, and is sometimes referred to as the “10-Year”
flood.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-3

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Watsonville Road and West Middle Avenue that would be exhumed when the diversion
channel is constructed.
Table 2.2-1

Existing Channel Crossings, Reaches 7A and 7B (West Little Llagas Creek)

Type of Crossing

Roadway
Width (ft)

Bridge (buried)
Bridge (buried)
RCB*

37
75
70

N. La Crosse

RCB

70

Edmundson Ave.
Edes Ct.

RCB
RCB

80
48

Cosmo Ave.

RCB

48

Spring Ave.
Ciolino/Dunne

RCB
RCB

58
674

Reach 7 Location
Middle Ave.
Watsonville Rd.
S. La Crosse

Existing Culverts
Culvert Size
W (ft) x H (ft)
--13 x 8
12 x 11
16.5 x 9
16.5 x 12
12 x 10
10 x 9
10 x 7
10 x 9
10 x 7
10 x 9
15 x 8

Number of
Culverts
--3
1
2
1
3
1
2
1
2
1
1

Existing
Bridges
Number of
Piers
2
2
------------

*RCB – Reinforced concrete box culvert.

Project Reach 6
Llagas Creek Reach 6 is a natural earthen channel, approximately 3.2 miles long from
700 feet upstream of U.S. Highway 101 (U.S. 101) in the south, to Monterey Road in the
north (Figure 2.2-5). Reach 6 meanders between Monterey Road and South County
Airport. The southern portion of this reach is adjacent to SCVWD percolation ponds
between Church Avenue and Murphy Avenue. Reach 6 is a perennially-flowing stream
segment over a 6,600-foot-long segment from below Lake Silveira to about San Martin
Avenue, with flow continuously supported by releases from Chesbro Reservoir, which is
located outside of the project area on Llagas Creek (see Figure 1.1-1). Downstream
from San Martin Avenue, Reach 6 is an intermittent channel as flow percolates through
the streambed to groundwater.
Land use adjacent to the creek varies from commercial and residential in the north to
agricultural in the south. There are five, existing bridge crossings: Monterey Road; the
Union Pacific Railroad tracks; Llagas Avenue; San Martin Avenue; and Church Avenue.
There is a mix of native and non-native vegetation along the stream banks. Patchy tree
canopy is provided both by native oaks, cottonwood (Populus fremontii), sycamore
(Platanus racemosa), and willows (Salix spp.), as well as by exotic eucalyptus,
particularly red gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-4

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Project Reach 5
Llagas Creek Reach 5 is a natural earthen channel approximately 0.5 mile long from the
Llagas Creek/ East Little Llagas Creek confluence in the east to 700 feet upstream of
U.S. 101 in the west Reach 5 is ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall months,
and, as a consequence, riparian vegetation is limited along this segment of Llagas Creek
(Figure 2.2-6). Where tree canopy is present, it consists of a combination of planted
exotic trees and native trees, particularly red gum and introduced Monterey pine (Pinus
radiata). Additionally, the stream channel bed supports riparian species such as mule fat
(Baccharis salicifolia). The banks and the undisturbed areas beyond the top of the banks
support annual grassland species.
Project Reach 4
Reach 4 is the downstream-most reach of the Project. It is a natural earthen channel,
extending approximately 2.4 miles along Llagas Creek from approximately 1,000 feet
downstream of Buena Vista Avenue in the south to the East Little Llagas Creek/Llagas
Creek confluence in the north (Figure 2.2-7). There are three existing bridge crossings at
Masten Avenue, Rucker Avenue, and Buena Vista Avenue. There is an existing fish
ladder and grouted concrete rock downstream of Buena Vista Avenue that would be
removed so as to not induce flooding due to upstream Project improvements.
Reach 4 contains sinuous bends, particularly near Masten and Buena Vista Avenues;
and, is ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall months and flowing only in the
winter months after rainfall generates sufficient runoff. The stream channel bed supports
sparse mature vegetation such as mule fat. The banks support a mixture of riparian and
non-riparian species. Tree canopy is patchy but it some locales tree cover is dense,
including extensive stands of red gum.
Project Reach 14
Reach 14 is a constructed channel that extends approximately 3.4 miles along East Little
Llagas Creek from the Llagas Creek confluence in the south, to just downstream of the
Corralitos Creek confluence in the north (Figure 2.2-8). It is an excavated earthen
channel that was straightened and realigned by Caltrans in the 1970s during the
construction of U.S. 101. Above the upstream boundary of Reach 14, between
Sycamore Avenue to about Middle Avenue, East Little Llagas Creek is parallel to U.S.
101 for approximately 5,400 feet. U.S. 101 in this area is located atop an embankment,
which also acts as the right bank of East Little Llagas Creek.
Agricultural and rural residential land uses, and commercial buildings are present in the
area surrounding Reach 14. Reach 14 is ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall
months, only flowing in the winter months after sufficient rainfall generates runoff. The
channel contains box culverts where the creek crosses East San Martin Avenue and
Church Avenue. The bottom of the channel banks contains a combination of annual
grassland species and bare ground. Vegetation on the stream banks is primarily annual
grassland with a few scattered trees (mostly native).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-5

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-6

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.2-1 Upper Llagas Creek Poject Area Reaches

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-7

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-8

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.2-2 Reach 8

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-9

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-10

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-3 Reach 7B

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-11

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-12

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-4 Reach 7A

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-13

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-14

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-5 Reach 6

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-15

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-16

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-6 Reach 5

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-17

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-18

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-7 Reach 4

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-19

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-20

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Figure 2.2-8 Reach 14

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-21

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-22

Chapter 2
2.3

Description of Alternatives

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED, ELIMINATED, AND BROUGHT FORWARD
2.3.1

1982 Environment Impact Statement (EIS)/Environmental Impact Report
(EIR) Alternatives Evaluation
The LCWPP was proposed by the SCVWD in 1968. In 1969, the proposed
project received federal and state approval, and as part of the Watershed
Protection and Flood Prevention Act of 1954. Congress authorized the NRCS,
formerly the SCS, to move forward with project construction, which commenced
in 1973. Project construction for the first phase was suspended in order to
evaluate potential impacts as required by the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) of 1969 which was signed into law in 1970. The LCWPP was revised
several times by the NRCS, local sponsors, and citizen groups over a period of
nearly a decade before a joint EIS/EIR was completed in 1982. The scope of the
1982 EIS/EIR considered a broad range of alternatives, including an assessment
of flood control measures in the entire Llagas Creek watershed. The alternatives
included: the No Action Alternative; a Nonstructural Plan Alternative that included
flood proofing individual buildings and elevating homes and other structures in
the floodplain and six different Structural Plan Alternatives identified below as
Alternatives A, B, C, D, E, and F.
The 1982 EIS/EIR determined that structural measures would be necessary to
reduce flooding in agricultural and urban areas in Santa Clara County. The six
alternatives evaluated in 1982 EIS/EIR considered Project reaches that were part
of the larger LCWPP (Figure 1.2-1) and included lower Llagas Creek and the
West Branch Llagas Creek through Gilroy (Reaches 1, 2, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and
15). Flood management facilities in these reaches were constructed by 1994
and, therefore, are not part of the Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project
addressed in this EIS.
All of the alternatives evaluated in the 1982 EIS/EIR included construction of a
new channel segment to bypass East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 7A), allowing
flow from West Little Llagas Creek in Morgan Hill to be redirected into the main
branch of Llagas Creek near the present-day location of Lake Silveira2. The
bypass channel would eliminate flooding along the section of West Little Llagas
Creek from La Crosse Drive to East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14). This design
avoids having to excavate the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel segment
to increase flow capacity, avoids construction of a bridge to accommodate an
enlarged channel where it crosses U.S. 101, and reduces the amount of
excavation needed to prevent induced flooding and would provide a 10-percent
exceedance flow capacity through Reach 14.
Other design features that were proposed which are common to all of the 1982
alternatives include: a rectangular concrete channel in Morgan Hill (Reach 8);
selective channel widening and deepening throughout the other reaches to
prevent induced flooding from the improvements in Morgan Hill; and protection
from the 1-percent flood event (100-year flood) on the upper urbanized reaches
of West Little Llagas Creek (Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8).

2

Lake Silveira was formed when an illegal levee breach was made separating a rock quarry pit from Llagas Creek
sometime in the 1980s.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-23

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Alternative A—Raise Chesbro Dam and Channel Modifications
As a key feature of this alternative, Chesbro Dam and the spillway would be
raised by at least 2 feet to add 550 acre feet of storage to the reservoir.
Operational agreements would require outflow to be limited to 2,900 cfs. In
combination with measures to excavate channels downstream of the dam to
increase flood capacity, the dam raise under this alternative would provide 1percent flood protection in all reaches. The flood management measures
included:


Raising Chesbro Dam and spillway;



Excavating 26 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 3, 4, 5, 7A, 7B, 8B,
9, 11A, 11B, 12, 13, 14, 15A, 15B, and 16);



Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A);



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 10, 12, 13, and 7A); and



Constructing 4.2 miles of levee on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6A and 6B).

Twenty-seven grade stabilization structures were proposed, to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes that would provide fish passage. Thirty-eight
existing bridges and 25 box culverts would be replaced. An 18-footwide
maintenance road would be constructed on either side of the channel. Alternative
A would have required purchase of 547 acres of right-of-way (ROW), and
removal of nine residences. Thirty-four acres of riparian habitat would be
removed for construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 3,020 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood. The
installation cost was $61.99 million, with an estimated $913,000 in annual
average damages avoided3.
Alternative B—Channel Modifications on Corralitos Creek and West Branch
Llagas Creek
This alternative would be similar to Alternative A, except that Chesbro Dam
would not be raised. Additionally, two reaches of channel modification work
would be added; one reach on Corralitos Creek (Reach 15C) from Tennant
Avenue to East Dunne Avenue, and one reach on West Branch Llagas Creek
(Reach 11C) from Fitzgerald Road to Highland Avenue, providing 1-percent flood
protection. This alternative would provide 1-percent flood protection in all
reaches. The flood management measures included:


Excavating 24.8 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 3, 4, 5, 7A, 7B, 8B,
9, 11A, 11B, 11C, 12, 13, 14, 15A, 15B, 15C, and 16);

3

All costs and estimated damages avoided for alternatives A, B, C, D, E, and F are referenced from the 1982
EIS/EIR.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-24

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives


Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A);



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 7A, 10, 12, and 13); and



Constructing 4.2 miles of levee on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6A and 6B).

Twenty-eight grade stabilization structures were proposed, to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes that would provide fish passage. Forty existing
bridges and 25 box culverts would be replaced. An 18-footwide maintenance
road would be constructed on both sides of the channel. Alternative B would
have required purchase of 573 acres of ROW, and removal of nine residences.
Thirty-eight acres of riparian habitat would be removed for construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 3,120 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood under
this alternative. The installation cost was $63.02 million, with an estimated
$916,000 in annual average damages avoided.
Alternative C—One-percent Flood Protection for Morgan Hill and Gilroy
Urban Areas and Llagas Creek below Urban Areas
Flood protection under this alternative would be similar to Alternative B, except
there would be no flood management improvements along East Little Llagas
(Reaches 14 and 16), Corralitos creeks (Reach 15), and West Branch Llagas
Creek between Highland Avenue and Fitzgerald (Reach 11C). The flood
management measures included:


Excavating 15.8 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 3, 4, 5, 7A, 7B, 8B,
9, 11A, 11B, 12, and 13);



Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A);



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 7A, 10, 12, and 13); and



Constructing 4.2 miles of levee on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6A and 6B).

Twenty-one grade stabilization structures were proposed, to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes that would provide fish passage. Thirty-six
existing bridges and 13 box culverts would be replaced. An 18-footwide
maintenance road would be constructed on either side of the channel. Alternative
C would have required purchase of 370 acres of ROW and removal of eight
residences. Thirty-two acres of riparian habitat would be removed for
construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 2,420 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood. The
installation cost was $51.95 million, with an estimated $889,000 in annual
average damages avoided.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-25

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Alternative D—One-percent Flood Protection for Morgan Hill and Gilroy
Urban Areas with 10- percent Protection in all Other Areas Described under
Alternative B
This alternative would provide 1-percent flood protection in Morgan Hill (Reaches
7 and 8), Gilroy and downstream (Reaches 2, 9, 10, 11A, 11B, 12, and 13). Tenpercent protection would be provided along Corralitos (Reach 15) and East Little
Llagas creeks (Reach 14), and downstream from Morgan Hill (Reaches 3, 4, 5,
and 6). The flood management measures included:


Excavating 29 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7A,
7B, 8B, 9, 11A, 11B, 11C, 12, 13, 14, 15A, 15B, 15C, and 16);



Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A); and



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 7A, 10, 12, and 13).

Twenty-eight grade stabilization structures were proposed, to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes that would provide fish passage. Thirty-eight
existing bridges and 24 box culverts would be replaced. An 18-footwide
maintenance road would be constructed on both sides of the channel. Alternative
D would have required purchase of 397 acres of ROW and removal of seven
residences. Thirty-eight acres of riparian habitat would be removed for
construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 1,810 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood. The
installation cost was $50.38 million, with an estimated $887,900 in annual
average damages avoided.
Alternative E—One-percent Flood protection for Morgan Hill with No
Induced Flooding
Downstream and 1-percent Protection in Gilroy and Downstream Reaches
This alternative would provide 1-percent flood protection in Morgan Hill (Reaches
7 and 8), with channel modifications downstream to prevent induced flooding
(Reaches 4, 5, and 6). One-percent flood protection would be provided in Gilroy
and downstream (Reaches 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13). No work would occur on
Corralitos or East Little Llagas creeks. The flood management measures
included:


Excavating 7.8 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 3, 4, 7A, 7B, 8B, 9,
10, 11A, 11B, 12, and 13);



Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A);



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 7A, 10, 12, and 13); and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-26

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives


Selective clearing of vegetation and debris removal on 5.2 miles of
stream (Reaches 4 and 6A).

Installation of 11 grade stabilization structures was proposed to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes to provide fish passage. Nineteen existing
bridges and 15 box culverts would be replaced. An 18-foot-wide maintenance
road would be constructed on both sides of the channel. Alternative E would
have required purchase of 335 acres of ROW and removal of four residences.
Nineteen acres of riparian habitat would be removed for construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 720 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood. The
installation cost was $24.1 million, with an estimated $842,400 in annual average
damages avoided.
Alternative F—Same Level of Protection as Alternative E with Similar Flood
Management Features in the Same Reaches, except no Work on West
Branch Llagas Creek in Reach 11B, Elimination of one Maintenance Road
and Levee in Reach 9 below Gilroy
This alternative would apply to the same reaches. Except there would be no work
on West Branch Llagas Creek in Reach 11B and one maintenance road and
levee in Reach 9 below Gilroy would be eliminated. It would provide 1-percent
flood protection in Morgan Hill (Reaches 7 and 8), with minor channel
modifications downstream to prevent induced flooding (Reaches 4, 5, and 6).
One-percent flood protection would be provided in Gilroy and downstream
(Reaches 2, 3, 9, 10, 11A, 12, and 13). No work would occur on Corralitos
(Reach 15) or East Little Llagas creeks (Reach 14). The flood management
measures included:


Excavating 5.5 miles of earthen channel (Reaches 2, 4, 7A, 7B, 8B, 9, 10,
11A, 12, and 13);



Constructing a rectangular concrete channel for 1.0 miles in Morgan Hill
(Reach 8A);



Constructing 4.1 miles of new channel (Reaches 7A, 10, 12, and 13);



Selective clearing of vegetation and debris removal on 5.2 miles of
stream (Reaches 4 and 6B); and



Constructing levee on 0.9 mile of West Branch Llagas Creek channel
(Reach 9).

Design differences from Alternative E to reduce Project costs would include
eliminating the maintenance road on one side of the channel to reduce the ROW
needed, and instead constructing access ramps to the channel bottom. A levee
would be constructed in Reach 9 instead of excavating a channel. Fencing would
also be eliminated along the concrete channel reach in Morgan Hill.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-27

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Installation of ten grade stabilization structures was proposed, to be designed as
concrete drops and rock chutes that would provide fish passage. Eighteen
existing bridges and 15 box culverts would be replaced. Alternative F would have
required purchase of 171 acres of ROW, and removal of two residences.
Nineteen acres of riparian habitat would be removed for construction.
Out of an estimated 3,300 acres of cropland susceptible to flooding at that time,
approximately 480 acres would be protected during the 1-percent flood. Flooding
from the 1-percent event would be eliminated on 946 acres of urban land. Five
hundred and fifty-six buildings would receive protection. The installation cost was
$21.97 million, with an estimated $834,300 in annual average damages avoided.
The 1982 EIS/EIR discussed the rationale for selection of Alternative F. The
economic, environmental, and social factors for the six alternatives are illustrated
in Table 2.3-1 (excerpted from the 1982 EIS/EIR). Only Alternatives E and F had
a net positive cost-benefit (1.1:1 and 1.2:1), and, of the six alternatives studied;
only Alternative F had a favorable cost-benefit specifically within the Morgan Hill
area. Comparison of the alternatives found that the footprint of Alternative F was
the smallest, requiring the least amount of land acquisition, fewest residential
relocations, smallest loss of riparian habitat, minimized adverse effects on
cultural resources, and had the least need for replacement of bridges and
culverts.
Due to past California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) channel
excavation for construction of U.S. 101, the Project sponsors and the NRCS
recommended that mitigation to manage for induced flooding along East Little
Llagas Creek (Reach 14), as well as to reduce erosion along the channel, be
incorporated with Alternative F. Reach 14 is an excavated channel that was
straightened and realigned by Caltrans in the 1970s while constructing U.S. 101.
Public workshops later provided consensus for selection of Alternative F with
mitigation along Reach 14.
Project measures on Reaches 2, 9, 10, 11A, 12, and 13 were subsequently
completed by the Project sponsors and the NRCS. In 1999, the USACE was
authorized to assume the Project and the objectives of protection from a 1percent flood event for the upstream urban reaches (Reaches 7 and 8) were
retained from Alternative F. As a result of the project’s authorization history,
Alternative F has been referred to as the “NRCS” Project design. Consequently,
the designation “NRCS” Alternative, instead of Alternative F, is carried forward
throughout the remainder of this EIS.

2.3.2

West Little Llagas Instream Detention
West Little Llagas instream detention was an alternative considered by the
USACE following authorization by Congress to lead the Project in 1999. This
alternative would involve construction of a detention facility upstream of the
Project reaches on West Little Llagas Creek. Detention storage of flood water
could potentially provide some flood peak reduction that would, in turn, reduce
the size of the channel modification needed in Reach 8 to carry the 1-percent
flood. In the 1990’s the City of Morgan Hill investigated a 15-acre detention pond
located on Llagas Avenue at Hale Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-28

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
The City investigation (MH Engineering, 1991) determined that the U-shaped
channel in Reach 8 would still have to be constructed, with only a slightly smaller
cross-sectional area, regardless of the detention storage basin. While the
detention pond could reduce the 1 percent flow just downstream from the pond at
Hale Avenue (from 626 to 290 cfs), its benefit diminished progressing
downstream as additional runoff from the watershed contributed to the discharge
in the flood channel (Table 2.3-2). Although an instream detention basin would
reduce the size of the flood conveyance channel needed through Reach 8, and
therefore a smaller ROW would be needed along the creek, the cost-benefit ratio
was determined to make the alternative infeasible. Even if this were not the case,
this property is no longer available for the construction of detention facilities.
The conclusion drawn from the study remains useful because it demonstrates
that more than 15 acres would be required in order to provide adequate flood
reduction benefit to make an instream detention basin upstream of Morgan Hill a
viable element in any of the alternatives. Even if detention storage is included in
the design, it would only benefit the uppermost reaches of the project.
Improvements would still be necessary further downstream in Morgan Hill.
Therefore, the concept of providing detention storage upstream of Morgan Hill
was subsequently dropped.
A West Little Llagas Creek Detention Pond Study (Study) and Flood Protection
Measure analysis and report was prepared in May 1997 by SCVWD staff
(SCVWD 1997). The Study evaluated the feasibility of a detention facility above
the upstream reach of the Project, near Llagas Road, approximately 500 feet
west of Hale Avenue. Two conceptual plan alternatives were developed to
determine the feasibility of upstream detention.


Case I, also known as a Shallow Pond alternative, maximized the offcreek detention storage at an elevation that could drain the floodwaters
by gravity flow into an existing adjacent channel invert, thus no channel
improvements. The maximum storage volume capacity for the shallow
pond was determined to be 42 acre-feet (AF) at its weir and spillway
elevation.



Case II, also known as a Deep Pond alternative, the detention facility was
to be excavated deeper such that it would drain by gravity, compatible
with the excavated channel design per the PL 83-566 proposed Project
improvements, a deeper and wider creek invert. This alternative would
not avoid PL 83-566 creek improvements, thus in-creek impacts would
still occur. Under Case II, the detention facility had a maximum capacity
to store a volume of 84.1 AF at its weir and spillway elevation. Case II
represented a detention facility that approximately doubled the Case I
storage capacity.

The Study concluded that the reduction in required channel improvements for
both Case I and Case II was greatest immediately downstream of the proposed
detention facilities, but diminished to insignificant at the proposed confluence with
Llagas Creek near Monterey Road. In summary, detention storage of the
upstream flows would not prevent downstream inflows from causing flooding.
The Study concluded that constructing a detention facility upstream of the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-29

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Proposed Project limits would not prevent downstream flooding. Downstream increek improvements would still need to be constructed to meet Project
objectives. Therefore, an upstream detention facility was eliminated as an
alternative because it could not avoid the need for creek improvements and
associated environmental impacts.
The concept of off-stream storage was recently re-examined (SCVWD 2013a).
SCVWD staff reviewed the inflow hydrograph for West Little Llagas Creek
downstream of Edmundson Avenue within the City of Morgan Hill. Based on this
hydrograph, the peak 1-percent exceedance flow expected for West Little Llagas
Creek downstream of Edmundson Avenue (i.e., Reaches 7B and 8) is 2,093 cfs.
West Little Llagas Creek has an existing capacity of approximately 80 cfs.
Therefore a detention facility would have to be designed to contain approximately
2,013 cfs to avoid flooding during a peak storm event along West Little Llagas
Creek with a detention storage capacity of approximately 1,170 AF. Assuming a
detention facility was designed with a depth of 8 feet, approximately 150 acres of
land would be needed.
A detention facility not adequately sized to store 1,170 AF would allow flooding
downstream. Constructing a smaller detention facility would therefore still require
channel modifications such as widening to prevent flooding. Widening the
channel a limited amount, for example 5 feet or so, would result in construction
related ground disturbance and likely environmental effects that would be similar
to widening the channel by a greater amount. The existing riparian vegetation
and existing top of bank vegetation would be similarly impacted. Therefore, a
detention facility of sufficient size to store the upstream peak flow is not
considered a feasible option that reduces environmental effects.
Additionally, there are several challenges to design and construct a detention
facility of this size and magnitude:


The detention facility inlet and outlet works would need to be properly
sized and designed to capture excess flows and later release this water to
West Little Llagas or Llagas Creek;



The effort and resources to maintain such a facility to efficiently function
long term may be significant;



The area is known to have a high groundwater table that could result in
standing water within the detention facility, thus further reducing capacity
of the detention facility;



Potential standing water could result in public concerns for West Nile
Virus and,



A total detention facility footprint of 150+ acres in size is not practical,
would face its own environmental issues, and would likely not receive
favorable public support.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-30

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
A supplemental analysis of instream detention storage (SCVWD 2013b) was
recently performed to adjust the analysis presented above using current flow
conditions (as of 2006) rather than using future build-out conditions (represented
by the year 2050). The analysis using the current flow conditions found that the
results differed insignificantly from the previous 2050 build-out results. Based on
this additional analysis for a detention facility constructed within Reach 7A, the
concept of off-stream storage is eliminated for the following reasons:


A detention facility lesser in size than needed to prevent the 1-percent
exceedance flood would result in the need for downstream channel
modifications, thus resulting in similar environmental impacts to the
recommended design;



A detention facility constructed to capture upstream flows to avoid
induced flooding in the downstream Reaches of 4, 5, and 6 would not
address the Project’s objective of providing a stable channel that will
neither widen or narrow, down-cut or aggrade, on a large scale over the
long-term;



A detention facility would result in additional impacts to natural resources,
such as taking agricultural lands out of production, loss of upland habitat
for California tiger salamander, and potential entrainment issues for
steelhead.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-31

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

2-32

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Table 2.3-1

Economic, Environmental, or
Social Factor
Preventing Induced Flooding
Federal Installation Cost ($)
Other Installation Cost ($)
Average Annual O&M Cost ($) 2
Additional Flood Prevention
Federal Installation Cost ($)
Other Installation Cost ($)
Average Annual Installation Cost ($)
Average Annual O&M Cost ($)
Total Average Annual Cost ($)
Percent Damage Reduction
Urban
Agricultural
Average Annual Benefits ($)
Net Benefits ($)
Benefit/Cost Ratio
Level of Protection
Number of Remaining Buildings
Flooded
Remaining Floodplain (1 %) (acres)
Additional ROW Needed (acres)
Residences Relocated
Riparian Habitat Removed (acres)
Riparian Habitat

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Comparison of Alternatives Presented in the 1982 EIS/EIR
A

B

C

D

E

(Selected Plan)
F

0
0
--

0
0
--

0
0
--

0
0
--

497,4001
1,340,0001
6,0001

497,4001
1,340,0001
6,0001

41,857,500
20,134,600
2,100,300
83,900
2,184,400

42,178,500
20,838,900
2,135,000
88,600
2,223,700

37,147,100
14,807,600
1,760,200
66,500
1,826,700

33,621,200
16,756,500
1,706,800
88,600
1,795,400

15,168,000
8,930,000
816,400
47,300
863,700

13,347,000
9,020,400
744,200
43,200
787,400

99.9
94.9
1,056,600
-1,125,500
0.5:1
1 % urban and
agricultural

99.9
99.9
1,062,900
-1,600,700
0.5:1
1 % urban and
agricultural

97.1
24.0
941,100
153,700
1.2:1
1 % urban

7

99.2
20.9
1,074,200
-781,200
0.6:1
1 % urban; 10 %
agricultural
93

97.5
33.5
965,400
101,700
1.1:1
1 % urban

7

97.8
97.1
1,027,700
-799,000
0.6:1
1 % urban; 1 %
main branch
65

139

152

200
547
9
34
Replace with
mitigation

180
573
9
38
Replace with
mitigation

860
370
8
32
Replace with
mitigation

1,490
357
7
38
Replace with
mitigation

2,500
335
4
19
Replace with
mitigation

2,020
171
2
19
Replace with
mitigation

December 2015

2-33

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-34

Chapter 2
Economic, Environmental, or
Social Factor
Steelhead Migration
Visual3
Cultural Resources Affected

Linear Park

Description of Alternatives

A
Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
CA-SCI-402
CA-SCI-452
Gilman Road
Bridge Chesbro
Reservoir sites
Possible

B

C

D

E

(Selected Plan) F

Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
CA-SCI-402
CA-SCI-452
Gilman Road
Bridge

Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
CA-SCI-402
CA-SCI-452
Gilman Road
Bridge

Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
Gilman Road
Bridge

Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
Gilman Road
Bridge

Maintain with
mitigation
Replace with
mitigation
Gilman Road
Bridge

Possible

Possible

Possible

Possible Morgan
Hill and Gilroy

Possible Morgan
Hill and Gilroy

1

Costs are charged to benefits accruing from work already installed.
No costs are provided in the USDA 1982 EIS/EIR.
3
Visual refers to loss of mature existing trees and shrubs along an enlarged, linear channel alignment that would increase channel visibility and cause visual
impact. Trees and shrubs would be replaced as mitigation for loss of visual/aesthetic resources.
Source: USDA Soil Conservation Service 1982.
2

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-35

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-36

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Table 2.3-2

Flow Rate and Costs for Channel Detention Storage above Reach 8

Channel Location

Length
(Feet)

Flow Rate without
Pond Q1001 (cfs)

Flow Rate with
Pond Q100 (cfs)

Llagas Rd.
Pond
Pond at Hale
Wright Ave.
W. Main Ave.
Dunne Ave.
Edmundson Ave.
Total

437
902
1,605
2,121
2,994
4,760
12,819
N/A

585
608
626
688
823
1,047

585
608
290
355
596
856
1,275
N/A

N/A

Cost without
Pond

Cost with Pond

$130,171
$282,7092
$382,808
$698,830
$876,793
$1,080,769

$130,171
$1,785,8273
$370,913
$599,025
$657,275
$825,397

$3,452,080

$4,368,608

Total Cost Savings
(cost without pond
– cos with pond)
$0
$ -1,503118
$11,895
$99,805
$219,518
$255,372
$ -916,528

1

Q100 is the 100-year discharge, same as the 1-percent exceedance flow, or 100-year flood, these are just different notations describing the same flood
frequency
2
Includes 1.40 acres In right-of-way (ROW) land cost
3
Includes 13.60 acres Land Cost
N/A = not applicable
Above costs include ROW at $2.50/sq.ft (square feet), 15-acre pond land acquisition cost at $100,000/acre, concrete box culverts and box channels and channel
excavations. Concrete structures were priced using $375/cubic yard complete and in place. Not included in above cost are removal of structures, houses,
temporary construction easements, and existing ROW, since these items would be a constant.
Source: adapted from MH Engineering report for City of Morgan Hill (Undated).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-37

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-38

Chapter 2
2.3.3

Description of Alternatives
Raise Chesbro Dam
To attenuate flows downstream of Chesbro Reservoir, Chesbro Dam could be
raised. The USACE considered raising Chesbro Dam, along with other dams in
the region, as a flood protection alternative (RMC 2003) in the larger Pajaro River
watershed. In this alternative, Chesbro Dam would be raised 15 feet in order to
store the 1-percent flood event. This would detain floodwater in the upper
watershed, thereby delaying the peak flood flows downstream. By delaying the
peak, this detention would attenuate flows from Llagas Creek into Reach 6.
However, Reach 7A would also be diverting flow from Reaches 8 and 7B in
Morgan Hill into Llagas Creek in Reach 6. The attenuation from raising Chesbro
Dam could reduce the needed channel size enlargements downstream of where
Llagas Creek crosses Monterey Highway (Reaches 4, 5, and 6), but some
improvements will still be necessary to convey flows4. This alternative would not
create a benefit for the Morgan Hill (Reaches 7B and 8) area, nor would it
provide any flood benefit in East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14), so the other
channel improvements associated with the NRCS Alternative would still be
necessary.
The existing reservoir surface area is about 236 acres. The newly expanded
reservoir behind a 15-foot higher dam would cover about 296 additional acres,
bringing the total lake surface to about 531 acres. The enlarged lake would flood
several thousand feet of Llagas, Tilton, and Heron creeks. A rerouting and
reconstruction of approximately 5.0 miles of roadways, including Oak Glen
Avenue and Willow Springs Road would most likely be required, as would a new
bridge over the enlarged reservoir embayment extending upstream on Llagas
Creek.
The reservoir would need to be empty or nearly so before a flood to maximize
protection from the 1-percent event. This could present a problem under existing
operational requirements of the reservoir, which include maintaining flow
releases for downstream fish habitat. The dam would be raised 15 feet in the
upstream direction to preserve the existing outlet facility. The raise would require
a new crest length of about 1,025 feet compared with the existing crest length of
about 690 feet. The new left (east) abutment would be located on the east side of
Oak Glen Avenue.
Raising the dam or constructing a new dam would require approval from the
State of California Department of Water Resources (DWR), Division of Safety of
Dams (DSOD). Due to the seismic activity of the area, the design and approval
process would be complex. Special engineering studies would be necessary to
determine the seismic vulnerability of the raised dam. In addition, removal of
sediment from the upstream area of the new dam raise would be a very
extensive project.
Expanding Chesbro Dam would have significant regulatory issues. Permits would
be required from USACE, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), the

4

The Alternative A Chesbro Dam raise of 2 feet described as part of the 1982 EIS/EIR (see Section 2.2.1) also
included flood conveyance features such as channel excavation and levees in Reaches 4, 5, 6 downstream from the
dam. As such, that alternative was configured differently than the 15-foot-high dam raise considered later by the
USACE.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-39

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), and potentially other agencies. In
addition, raising the dam opens up questions of water utility management that
are beyond the scope of the Project. Depending on the costs of acquisition of
land for the enlarged reservoir and for the realigned roads, the cost to raise the
dam was projected to approach $100 million in 2004 dollars (USACE 2010a).
The estimated construction cost for Reaches 4, 5, and 6 is conservatively $15
million (USACE 2010a). Even if the attenuation of flow was able to eliminate
construction in the downstream reaches, the savings is not more than the cost to
enlarge the reservoir.
The environmental costs of the project construction are likely to be significant,
even assuming that the dam could be raised without emptying the reservoir.
There is most likely an impact and consequently a mitigation cost from
conversion of creek habitat to open water habitat flooded by the dam raise. There
could be loss of the small steelhead gene pool that is currently found in the upper
watershed. This area is considered to have high-quality habitat for spawning and
rearing. Dewatering downstream of the dam would result in significant impacts to
existing steelhead populations5.
While raising the dam could be considered costly in terms of environmental
effects and dollars, it is feasible. However, the benefit in terms of flood protection
is not significant. The primary benefit would be that less excavation would be
required in Reaches 4, 5, and 6. Raising the dam would provide no benefit to
upstream areas including the City of Morgan Hill. Because the 7A reach would
deliver approximately 2,000 cfs to Reaches 4, 5, and 6 during the 1-percent
flood, additional channel capacity would still be needed in the downstream
reaches. Because of high cost, limited flood protection benefit, and the potential
cost of mitigation for loss of riparian and aquatic habitat, the dam raising
alternative was not further studied.

2.3.4

Design Refinements Considered and Brought Forward
Since 1999, refinements have been periodically incorporated into the (Alternative
F) NRCS design to address and better adapt the Project to increasing
urbanization, changes in runoff conditions, riparian habitat6, and to the federal
listing of steelhead and the California red-legged frog. The following design
objectives have been incorporated since 19997:


Provide for appropriate flood protection;



Provide a better balance between flood control and habitat;



Create a stable channel form (i.e., not aggrading or degrading) requiring
less maintenance;

5

Steelhead were listed as a threatened species in 1997 by NMFS. Llagas Creek was designated Critical Habitat for
the South Central California Coast steelhead trout by NMFS in 2005.
6
The re-operation of Chesbro Reservoir (in 2009) increased flow releases to Reach 6, thereby establishing a
perennial stream along the upstream portion of this reach, which also caused a change in the presence of riparian
vegetation.
7
Upper Llagas Creek Project - Alternative and Design History, Memorandum for Record (USACE 2010a)
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-40

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives


Allow only limited impact to mature riparian corridor trees;



Restore natural conditions to the extent feasible; and



Provide improved access for steelhead (federally threatened species) to
upstream spawning.

After the USACE assumed the Project, a design workshop was held in 20018,
and public meetings were held in 2001 and 20029, which resulted in several
modifications to the NRCS design. Changes in the Project features after the
workshop and public meetings include:


Setback levee between the right bank of Reach 7A (diversion channel)
and the left bank of Reach 6 where the two channels join near Lake
Silveira;



Giant Reed (Arundo donax) eradication in the upstream reaches to be
replaced with native riparian vegetation10,



Removal of six rock chute drop structures from the 1982 design to
provide free passage for steelhead migration.



Construction of two grade control structures in Reaches 7A and 14 to
prevent steelhead migration into reaches that do not provide adequate
habitat;



Reach 4 designed as a trapezoidal channel form instead of conducting
selective sediment and vegetation removal;



Reach 6 designed as a two-stage flood channel instead of selective
widening;



Reach 8 designed as a trapezoidal vegetated gabion instead of a
concrete channel; and



Minimize use of riprap to protect channel from erosion.

Based on comments received at these meetings, three design alternatives for
Reach 8 were considered, including using a vegetative gabion lining to simulate
8

Workshop held between USACE, USFWS, California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), NMFS, NRCS, and
the SCVWD on May 30, 2001 to discuss restoration and enhancement features that could be part of the new project
design.
9
Following the 2002 public meeting in Morgan Hill the USACE and SCVWD prepared a study to determine: the
extent of the flood control problem in Downtown Morgan Hill; the most feasible option for preventing further flooding
and loss of businesses and homes; and, if the plan would be acceptable to the citizens of the surrounding areas of
the creek. During this process, public, regulatory agency, and team meetings all played a part in narrowing down
alternatives to satisfy the needs for all parties (Office Report [USACE 2002 and 2003]).
10
This also was a mitigation obligation for the SCVWD’s Stream Maintenance Program (SMP), authorized by the
Biological Opinions from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisheries (July 31, 2002, 151422SWR-01-SR-408:ME) and USFWS (July 5, 2002, PN 22525S). In 2005, a giant reed (arundo donax) control program
was started on Upper Llagas Creek. As of 2009, about 8 acres of giant reed have been removed from the Project
area and treatment of regrowth was scheduled to continue through 2012 (Upper Llagas Creek Project - Alternative
and Design History, Memorandum for Record [USACE 2010a]).
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-41

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
a natural channel, a bypass channel to divert high flows constructed under the
existing roadways, and a reinforced concrete box culvert to enclose the existing
creek. The USACE and SCVWD recommended a hybrid of the vegetative gabion
lining and the reinforced concrete box culvert to be used in Reach 8.
The USACE and SCVWD continued to refine the Project design elements
between 2002 and 2010. In 2007 the USACE considered four additional options
for alignments of the Reach 7A diversion channel, and a final evaluation of these
alternatives was completed in 201011. The 2010 evaluation considered channel
stability and sediment transport criteria in the alignment, dimensions, and design
of the 7A diversion channel as well as all of the other Project reaches. A final
alignment of the Reach 7A diversion channel downstream from the Lake Silveira
outlet to connect with Llagas Creek immediately upstream from Monterey Road
was adopted from the 2010 analysis. The NRCS diversion alignment had Reach
7A entering Llagas Creek at Lake Silveira, approximately 2,250 feet upstream of
Monterey Road.
Since 2010, additional sediment transport and hydraulic studies have been
conducted by the SCVWD to assist with determining stable channel dimensions
and form that would not result in channel aggradation (i.e., sediment deposition),
or degradation (i.e., scour and incision), and that would reduce potential longterm maintenance and would continue to meet flood capacity objectives. Other
refinements to the channel design included: eliminating the setback levee along
the right bank of Reaches 7A and 6; eliminating the two grade control structures
to prevent steelhead migration; and replacing the vegetated gabion channel with
three other channel forms. These channel forms were a vegetated trapezoidal
channel; a vertical- walled concrete channel, or a hybrid trapezoidal channel with
vegetation on one bank; and concrete vertical wall on the other bank in Reach 8.
In late 2012, the SCVWD held a Public Scoping Meeting in Morgan Hill to
discuss the latest progress in the Proposed Project design and environmental
studies and to receive public input related to the Project. During this meeting,
several comments were made by attendees that upstream from the Project there
has been a persistent, long-term flooding problem at Llagas Road. The public
requested SCVWD to consider whether the flooding could be addressed under
the Proposed Project design. As a result of the meeting and the stated public
concerns, the SCVWD incorporated measures into the Project design to address
flooding at Llagas Road. The measures include removing a cinder block/plate
wall constriction at the existing Llagas Road culvert to allow maximum flow
capacity through the culvert and thereby eliminate backwater induced flooding.
Downstream from the Llagas Road culvert, the channel would be widened and
deepened to accommodate the new flow capacity through the bridge so as not to
induce flooding along the approximately 2,500-foot channel length between
Llagas Road and Hillwood Lane.
In 2003, the USFWS issued a Draft Coordination Act Report12 (CAR), which
USFWS is in the process of providing a letter of concurrence for the CAR and

11

Upper Llagas Creek Flood Control Project, Santa Clara County, California with Project Hydraulic Analysis (USACE
2010a).
12
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act Report, Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of Interior, and Llagas Creek
Flood Control Project, May 2003.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-42

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Project based on the updated Project design and technical studies. The CAR
provides federal input on potential mitigation measures to protect or conserve
fish and wildlife resources. The 2003 CAR recommended inclusion of 40
conservation and mitigation measures. Many of these measures are related to
providing instream aquatic habitat features and they have been incorporated by
the SCVWD into the current Project.
Section 2.6 summarizes the NRCS Alternative Project description and a set of
new alternatives developed by the SCVWD, which are analyzed in this EIS.

2.4

NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE
NEPA regulations require consideration of the No Action Alternative, which can be used
as a benchmark for comparison of the environmental effects of the various alternatives.
The No Action Alternative would result from the USACE not issuing a DA permit for
discharge of dredged or fill material into in waters of the US regulated pursuant to
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would
not be built, and no new land purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding
in the residential areas of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue. Figure 2.4-1
shows the extent of the 1-percent exceedance flood (100-year flood) under the No
Action Alternative. Currently, the West Little Llagas Creek channel through the City of
Morgan Hill has less than a 10-percent flood capacity (<400 cfs at Hillwood Lane and
<720 cfs at Spring Avenue).
There has been extensive historic engineering of the West Little Llagas Creek, East
Little Llagas Creek, and Llagas Creek channels, including construction of bridges,
culverts, and channelization in response to agricultural and urbanized land use changes
in past decades. Storm runoff would continue through these channelized reaches. The
proposed channel in Reach 7A would not be constructed under the No Action
Alternative. Historic rates of channel streambed incision13 of 0.4 to 0.8 feet per decade,
(Balance Hydrologics 2012a) and resultant channel bank erosion and widening would
likely continue. Under the No Action Alternative there would be no fish habitat
improvement features installed.
The SCVWD implemented the first SMP (stream management plan) in 2002. The SMP
established procedures for routine maintenance of stream channels involving ongoing
sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and associated minor
activities. The SMP incorporated a wetland and riparian mitigation program, a series of
resource protection policies, and Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce
environmental impacts from the aforementioned maintenance activities. In April 2011,
the SCVWD published a Draft EIR evaluating an update to the SMP (SCVWD 2011a)
and the Final EIR was certified in January 2012. The SMP Update addresses bank
stabilization, sediment removal, vegetation management, management of animal
conflicts, and minor maintenance. Under the No Action Alternative, maintenance of the
Upper Llagas Creek facilities would be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
established in the SMP Update. Implementation of the SMP renewal project began in

13

Causes of historic and ongoing channel incision are identified as the cumulative effects of decades of changes in
land use, the increase in impervious surfaces from urbanization, sediment supply loss associated with Chesbro
Reservoir, water diversions, hydrograph modifications, and past channelization (Balance Hydrologics 2012a; Schaaf
& Wheeler 2012).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-43

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

late 2012 and is reauthorized for the next 10 years (2012–2022). The SMP includes
various BMPs (Appendix B) that guide how maintenance work is performed to protect
biotic and other resources.
Work within the SMP can be divided into two general categories: regularly-scheduled
work (most vegetation management, trash pick-up) that occurs in the same place and
the same manner with a predictable frequency; and other routine work that is not
undertaken on a regular annual schedule, but is done as the need arises. This latter type
of work (e.g., sediment removal and bank protection) has a less predictable frequency
and location. Therefore, selection of BMPs are managed differently for these two types
of work. In the Project area, SCVWD maintenance staff conducts annual inspections of
fee-owned and easement areas. Once the inspection process is complete, SCVWD staff
evaluates what work should be conducted. Maintenance activities are performed in
accordance with the SCVWD established Maintenance Guidelines (1992) for Llagas
Creek as updated in 2012, which includes West and East Little Llagas Creeks.
Instream sediment removal and bank protection work is carried out from June 15 to
October 30, or the first significant rainfall (≥ 0.5 inch of rain in a 24-hour period) after
October 15, whichever occurs first. Typical maintenance activities include the following:


Channels—Remove trash and obstructions to flow that collect in the channels,
and removal of instream blockages (routine). Removal of large woody debris
(that meets minimum size criteria of 1-foot diameter and 6-feet length) in
anadromous streams requires mitigation.



Stream bank protection—Repair slopes damaged by scour and erosion (as
needed). Geomorphic studies have shown that historically the Llagas Creek
channels have been incising at the rate of 0.4-0.8 feet per decade and is ongoing
(see discussion Section 3.2, Hydrology and Water Quality). This channel incision
is likely to result in over-steepening of streambanks leading to instability and
erosion that will require bank protection and repair.



Sediment management—Routine sediment maintenance that is currently being
performed within the Project reaches under the SMP would continue. Sediment
removal has historically been conducted in a couple of areas on regular intervals.
Removal of sediment on Reach 14 to the confluence with Llagas Creek occurs
approximately every 5 years while sediment in front of the Church Ponds inlet
structure (Reach 6) occurs approximately every 4 years. Since Reaches 4 and 5
tend to go dry at the end of the summer season, sediment management would
be restricted in these two reaches to periods when there is no in-channel flow.
Reaches 7 and 8 have intermittent flow, tend to go dry in the summer, and
steelhead do not access these upstream reaches. As such, sediment
maintenance in Reaches 7 and 8 can be performed any time during low flows.
Reach 6 is supported by year-round flows due to releases at Chesbro Dam.
Reach 6 provides steelhead habitat during the entire year and, therefore, would
require a sediment maintenance approach that would continue to protect
steelhead habitat. Sediment maintenance in Reach 6 is limited to occur only
between June 15 and October 30 or the first significant rainfall after October 15,
whichever occurs first. No sediment removal has been performed in Reach 6 in
the past 10 years under the previous SMP. However if sediment removal is

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-44

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
needed, the appropriate BMPs to dewater the channel, protect anadromous fish,
and restore channel habitat features, would be implemented (Appendix B).



Vegetation management—Ongoing management of vegetation in and adjacent to
creeks is necessary to maintain the channel flood conveyance capacity. Most
channels require some type of periodic vegetation control. The SCVWD also
manages vegetation for other purposes including the protection of concrete
linings from plant roots; meeting local fire codes requiring the control of
combustible weeds and grasses; providing visual clearance to inspect the
condition of a facility; and providing access along maintenance roads. Removal
of vegetation occurs by the use of herbicide, hand pruning, hand removal,
mowing, or by discing. Removal of vegetation by hand can be undertaken
between July 1 and March 1. Vegetation control and removal in channels, on
stream banks, as well as maintenance roads is limited to that necessary for
facility inspection purposes, to meet regulatory requirements, required to comply
with fire codes, and that is required to meet capacity requirements per SMP
guidelines.

Removal of trees larger than 6-inch diameter at breast height (dbh) is not considered a
routine vegetation activity and is not included in the SMP. As such, no trees greater than
6-inch dbh would be removed from the flood conveyance channels except, if
substantially leaning, diseased, or dead, and their removal is needed to meet the
hydraulic characteristics of the channel with separate environmental review.
Specific vegetation activities performed within the Project reaches where the SCVWD
has fee or easement on the mainstem of Llagas Creek from Buena Vista to upstream of
Church Avenue (Reaches 4, 5, and a portion of 6) include pre- and post-emergent
herbicide application on roadways/firebreaks; mowing of slopes; and removal of
instream woody vegetation. The SCVWD has limited ROW on the rest of the Llagas
Creek mainstem; therefore, no work is conducted there.
For West Little Llagas (Reach 7) on the SCVWD ROW, vegetation management
activities include: pruning of overhanging growth for access into roadways and bridges,
removal of instream woody and aquatic vegetation, mowing of slopes and pre/post
emergent herbicide application on roadways/firebreaks. For East Little Llagas (Reach
14) the SCVWD maintains the ROW and conducts the following activities: removal of
stream woody vegetation, mowing of slopes, and pre/post emergent herbicide
application on roadways/firebreaks.


Minor maintenance activities are small in size that results in removing less than
0.05 acre (2,178 square feet) of wetland or riparian vegetation. The minimum
size for any minor vegetation work to be notified in SCVWD’s Nationwide Permit
(NWP) is 0.01 acre (436 square feet) per project, which includes any vegetation
work necessary for access or staging. These activities include cleaning debris
and minor sediment removal from culverts; removal of trash or debris that could
impede flows; trash rack cleaning; clearing debris from bridge pilings/piers; repair
and installation of gates and fences; repair of maintenance roads, and graffiti
removal. These activities are (and would be) done in a manner that is sensitive to
protection of aquatic resources.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-45

Chapter 2


Description of Alternatives
Giant Reed Control—The SCVWD also conducts a Giant Reed (Arundo donax)
Control Program as mitigation for impacts associated with SMP vegetation
management activities. Control of Arundo in the Llagas Creek watershed began
in 2005 and continues today. Under that program, the SCVWD has completed
8.2 acres of Arundo control on Llagas Creek with the majority of that work (~5
acres) occurring in the reaches between the Church Avenue Percolation Ponds
to upstream of Llagas Avenue. Arundo has been persistent within the watershed
and has required numerous re-treatments to control new growth. However, the
density of Arundo stands has been reduced overall by approximately 80 percent.
All previously treated areas were re-treated, or were scheduled for re- treatment,
during the 2011–2012 SMP season.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-46

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.4-1 Existing 1-Percent Flooding Extents--No Action Alternative

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-47

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-48

Chapter 2
2.5

Description of Alternatives

PROJECT ELEMENTS COMMON TO ALL ACTION ALTERNATIVES
There are four action alternatives identified and analyzed in this EIS:


Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)



NRCS Alternative



Culvert/Channel Alternative



Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Project features that are common to each of the alternatives are described in this
Section 2.5. Subsequent sections discuss in greater detail each of the alternatives and
the project features that are pertinent to each alternative. The Tunnel Alternative is
identified as the Applicant’s Proposed Action by the SCVWD. From hereon the Tunnel
Alternative is referred to as the Applicant’s Proposed Action.
A 65-percent engineering design prepared for the SCVWD in March 2013 is the basis for
the flood risk management elements that comprise the action alternatives evaluated in
this EIS (RMC 2013). All of the action alternatives provide flood management for a 1percent flood in Morgan Hill (Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B); 10-percent flood management for
the semi-urban area around East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14); and avoid induced
flooding elsewhere on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to upstream
modifications. The post-Project flood extents for all alternatives is shown in Figure 2.5-1.
The existing 1-percent exceedance flood inundates approximately 3,074 acres. The
action alternatives reduce flood extents to approximately 1,365 acres.
Most of the differences between all of the action alternatives are focused on the project
alignment for flood routing and the type of flood management features used in areas in
Reach 8. All of the action alternatives depend on a newly constructed 1.25-mile-long
channel segment in Reach 7A that will direct flow from West Little Llagas Creek at
Watsonville Road to Llagas Creek just downstream from Lake Silveira. Most of the flood
management features that would be implemented in Reaches 7A, 7B, 4, 5, 6, parts of
Reach 8, and 14 are the same in each of the alternatives, except the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative would not require channel widening, deepening or other flow capacity
improvements in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6. The common flood management
features and activities for all of the action alternatives include:


Widening (generally by constructing against one bank) and deepening the
channel in all reaches (except a portion of Reach 8 under the Tunnel and Reach
6 Bypass alternatives);



Construct sinuous low-flow channel, with benches at bankfull elevation (except
for some areas in Reach 8);



Permanent access roads at top of both banks in all reaches, (except for some
areas in Reach 8);

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-49

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives



Aquatic habitat enhancements Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A (except for Bypass
Alternative in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6, which have no planned
enhancements);



Grade control structures constructed of natural boulders, in all reaches;



Culverts at two tributary drainages where they confluence with Reach 6 and
three drainages in Reach 14 to provide for maintenance access;



1.25-mile-long channel on West Little Llagas Creek Reach 7A;



Exhume buried bridge crossings in Reach 7A at Watsonville Road and West
Middle Avenue;



Replacing and/or modifying culverts at four road crossing locations in Reach 7B;



Replacing culverts in Reach 8 (culvert replacement locations vary by alternative);



Removal of a cinder block/brick wall that constricts flows at the Llagas Road
culvert; cleaning of rocks, dirt and debris for all culverts and under the Hillwood
Lane bridge in Reach 8;



Relocation/replacement of some homes and other structures within the Project
ROW;



Replacement of the existing pedestrian footbridge on the private property at the
corner of Llagas Creek Drive and Marianna Court;



Installation of a stream gage upstream of the Church Avenue percolation ponds
in Reach 6;



Relocation/replacement of utilities within the Project construction footprint; and



Acquisition of fee title and easements of adjacent land needed for Project
construction and maintenance.

In addition to the common flood conveyance features listed above, all of the action
alternatives would require the same type and extent of vegetation and sediment
maintenance activities to provide the design flood capacity, as well as maintenance of
other features such as roads, culverts, and grade-control structures. The following
sections provide information on the Project design elements.
2.5.1

Channel Design Features Common to All Action Alternatives
Channel modifications in Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B, and 14 would consist of widening
and deepening, and would result in a cross section with a low-flow channel,
bankfull channel, benches, and engineered banks that are 3H:1V slope. Figure
2.5-2 is a typical cross-section. The channel would be properly sized for

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-50

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
sediment transport, geomorphic stability14 and to allow for unimpeded fish
passage. A low flow channel conveying approximately 2 cfs, would meander
along the channel bottom within the bankfull channel.
Channel benches would typically be on at least one side and sometimes both
sides of the channel, ranging from 9 to 21 feet wide. The channel bench is set at
approximately the 2-year flow elevation. The channel benches would provide
opportunities for natural deposition of sediments during runoff events and also
potentially provide a surface for revegetation by way of natural recruitment and, if
appropriate, for active plantings. In some areas e.g. where large meanders,
crossings, and confluences occur, the benches would be eliminated to allow for
additional capacity and/or to allow natural deposition patterns to form. The total
top width of the channel is on the order of 125 feet, (excluding the maintenance
road itself), but actual widths at any given location are variable depending upon
the existing ground topography. This is about 30 to 60 feet wider than the
existing channel. Channel depths would range up to approximately 14 feet, which
is typically about 4 to 5 feet deeper than they are today. Channel widening would
be limited to one bank, where possible, to avoid and preserve existing stands of
mature vegetation.
In Reach 7A there is no existing channel; most of this reach is agricultural
farmland. A new channel would be constructed (Reach 7A) that connects to the
upstream Reach 7B; diverting flows from West Little Llagas Creek (Figure 2.2-4).
West Little Llagas Creek would be disconnected from the newly constructed
diversion channel at a location 0.2 mile south of South La Crosse Drive. By
diverting flows at this junction, the flow in West Little Llagas where the existing
channel turns east toward U.S. 101 would be limited only to local runoff where its
confluence with East Little Llagas Creek includes approximately five local storm
drain outlets. This will reduce flooding along the 1.9-mile-long segment of West
Little Llagas Creek between La Crosse Drive and U.S. 101. The Reach 7A
channel would also reduce flow in the East Little Llagas Creek channel along
Reach 14 since this portion of the channel would no longer be connected to West
Little Llagas Creek.
The design flow for Reach 7A is to provide capacity for the 1-percent flood (2,090
cfs). Reach 7A would receive flows from the upstream Reach 7B at La Crosse
Drive and collect runoff from adjacent agricultural fields. The downstream end of
Reach 7A is the confluence with Llagas Creek just upstream of Monterey Road.
This alignment and point of confluence with Llagas Creek was extensively
evaluated (Noble Consultants and Northwest Hydraulics 2008) to optimize
channel sediment transport through the reach; to ensure channel stability, and to
thereby reduce maintenance.

14

A geomorphically stable channel is over the long-term, neither aggrading or incising, and is neither widening or
narrowing. However, localized sediment deposition, incision, or localized changes in channel width can occur in a
stable channel form.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-51

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-52

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-1 All Alternatives Post-Project 1-Percent Flood Exceedance Extents

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-53

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-54

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-2 Typical Channel Cross-Section with Bench on One Side

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-55

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-56

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
The Reach 7A channel segment would be designed similar to the channel cross
section shown in Figure 2.5-2. The channel top width would range from 80 feet to
120 feet and excavated about 12 feet to 16 feet deep with 2H:1V or 3H:1V side
slopes. Channel bottom width would be about 12 feet. Benches would be
predominantly on one side of the channel, with a varying range of widths from 10
to 30 feet. A grade control structure constructed as a series of pools would be
installed at the downstream end of Reach 7A / upstream portion of Reach 6 on
Llagas Creek to transition the channel gradient where the new channel
confluences with Llagas Creek below Lake Silveira.
The design flow for Reach 8 is to provide capacity for a 1-percent exceedance
flood (410 cfs at Llagas Road and 640 cfs at Hillwood Lane). Channel
modifications along Llagas Road to Hillwood Lane would be similar in concept to
those described for the other reaches, and would involve widening and
deepening the channel. The slope of the engineered banks in this upstream
section of Reach 8 would be designed at a 2H:1V. The channel benches vary up
to 10 feet. The channel benches, set at approximately the 2-year flow elevation,
would provide opportunities for natural deposition of sediments during runoff
events and also potentially provide a surface for revegetation by way of natural
recruitment and, if appropriate, for active plantings. The total top width of the
channel ranges from 30 to 80 feet (excluding the maintenance road), with the
actual widths at any given location variable depending on the existing ground
toporgraphy. Channel depths would be a maximum of 9 feet. The flow
constricting plate on the culvert located at Llagas Road would be removed to
reduce upstream flooding. This culvert would be cleared of rocks, dirt, and other
debris. In addition, other culverts along this reach and the bridge at Hillwood
Lane would also be cleared of rocks, dirts, and other debris. Another feature of
this channel is replacement of an existing pedestrian bridge on private property
with a 35-foot-long, 10-foot-wide pedestrian bridge constructed on concrete
abutments.
The channel design for Reach 8 would be one of three types: a trapezoidal
vegetated channel (Figure 2.5-3), a channel with two vertical walls (Figure 2.5-4),
or a hybrid channel cross-section (Figure 2.5-5). Selection of the appropriate
cross-sectional form would be based on local ROW constraints. The channel
design with two vertical walls would be used where the ROW is most narrow; and
the trapezoidal and hybrid channel forms would be used where there was a wider
ROW that could accommodate those channel shapes. Note that these three
channel forms in Reach 8 are applicable only to the NRCS and the
Culvert/Channel alternatives. The Tunnel and the Reach 6 Bypass alternatives
do not require modifying the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel through
downtown Morgan Hill, but instead depend on a long section of underground
culvert and a tunnel to divert high flows from the existing channel. For all action
alternatives, the flow constricting plate at the Llagas Road culvert at the
upstream boundary of the Project will be removed to reduce upstream flooding.
The channel will be deepened and widened downstream from Llagas Road to
Hillwood Lane to accommodate the 1-percent exceedance flow.
Maintenance/access roads would be provided along each reach, with roads at
the top of the bank on one or both sides of the channel for winter flood
management, maintenance, and inspection activities. The maintenance road

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-57

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
would be 18 feet wide, designed for all-weather access, and would be aggregatebased. This 18-foot maintenance road width is needed to allow equipment to fully
swing around and reach out as far as the center line of the channel bed for
cleaning.
The maintenance road is to be constructed of aggregate base and involves some
limited excavation. Access ramps would be constructed at various locations
along the Project alignment to provide access to the channel bottom.
Construction of access ramps and construction access areas within the Project
site would be positioned to minimize the need for vegetation removal.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-58

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-3 Reach 8 Trapezoidal Channel

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-59

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-60

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-4 Reach 8 Channel with Vertical Concrete Wall

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-61

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-62

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-5 Reach 8 Hybrid Channel

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-63

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-64

Chapter 2

2.5.2

Description of Alternatives

Easements and Land Requirements
Prior to construction, SCVWD would acquire ROW from landowners along the
Project reaches. In general, most ROW would be acquired in undeveloped
farmland or undeveloped portions of residential or commercial parcels, so
existing structures would be minimally affected. However, some commercial and
residential structures would be affected by temporary and permanent easements
and the Project footprint. These structures would require relocation or removal.
Structures that are located within the construction footprint may have to be
relocated or otherwise compensated. The structures identified within the
construction footprint for each of the alternatives are listed in Table 2.5-1, which
lists the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action) first, organized by
reach and followed by the number of each type of structure. The other
alternatives list only those reaches where there is a difference from the Tunnel
Alternative. For example, the NRCS Alternative has the same number of
residential homes, greenhouses, outbuildings and miscellaneous structures in
Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14 as the Tunnel Alternative . Only Reach 8 is
different with six residential homes under the NRCS Alternative rather than zero
residential homes under the Tunnel Alternative in that reach.
Based on Table 2.5-1 for the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
there are 3 residential homes, 11 greenhouses, 21 outbuildings, and 5
miscellaneous/unknown structures that are located with the Project construction
footprint. For the NRCS Alternative there are an additional 6 residential homes
and for the Culvert/Channel Alternative there are an additional 4 residential
homes within the construction footprint compared with the Tunnel Alternative,
and these homes are all located in Reach 8. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative has
a total of three fewer residential homes inside the construction footprint than the
Tunnel Alternative. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative also has nine fewer
greenhouses, 18 fewer outbuildings, and one fewer miscellaneous/unknown
buildings in the construction footprint than the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-65

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.5-1

Structures Located within Project Construction Footprint

Alternative

Reach

Residential
Homes

Greenhouses

Tunnel Alternative)

4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
Total
8
Total
8
Total
5
6 bypass
Total

0
0
2
0
1
0
0
3
6
19
4
7
0
0
3

1
0
9
0
0
0
1
11
0
11
0
11
0
0
2

NRCS1
Culvert/Channel1
Reach 6 Bypass2

Outbuildings
(sheds,
storage)
3
3
15
0
0
0
0
21
0
21
0
21
0
0
3

Miscellaneous/
Unknown
1
0
3
0
1
0
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
2
4

1

For the NRCS and the Culvert/Channel alternatives, the only difference compared with the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action) is in Reach 8.
2

For the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, there is no construction in Reach 5 and no construction in most of Reach 6,
except for the segment 0.5 mile above the point of the Reach 6 bypass channel; all the other reaches are the same
as the Tunnel Alternative.

2.5.3

Construction
Project construction would include channel modifications such as constructing
and/or replacing culverts; installing maintenance roads and/or access ramps;
constructing temporary (Reaches 6 and 14) and permanent (Reaches 7A and
7B) grade control structures, and upgrading bridge crossings. Revegetation work
would be developed as part of a mitigation plan. An overview of a potential
construction schedule listing construction activities, construction materials and
disposal, equipment and crew needs, staging areas, and best management
practices (BMPs) is provided in this section.

2.5.3.1 Construction Schedule
Construction would take place year-round. In-channel work would occur
during the dry season, typically between May 1 and October 15. During
this time flows are low or, in most reaches, the channel is dry.
Revegetation and work in upland areas adjacent to the creek channel
could occur outside the dry season. Construction in residential areas will
take place Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and
Saturdays from 9:00 am to 6:00 p.m. Construction work outside of
residential areas may go until 10:00 p.m. Night work activities may
include construction on bridges, roadways, utility relocation, mobilization
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-66

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
and demobilization, preparatory work, traffic control, clearing and
grubbing, excavation, and tunneling. Emergency work, for example sewer
main breaks, flooding, loss of utilities, and public safety issues, could
require construction activities at later hours. All construction activities
within residential areas, including work hours, would be governed by local
noise ordinances (the City of Morgan Hill and Santa Clara County). City of
Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 18.48.040 D.1.d exempts public
works projects from noise standards and indicates the public works
director can set construction hours for these types of projects.
Phase 1 of the Project would be construction of the new channel in Reach
7A, the channel improvements in Reach 4, and part of Reach 5 up to U.S.
101. Temporary roads would be built for access for construction and for
providing construction of channel modifications. After the completion of
the Reach 7A channel there would be a temporary berm upstream of the
Watsonville Avenue Bridge to direct flow through Reach 7B and thence
into East little Llagas Creek so it would remain hydraulically disconnected
from Reach 7A to avoid inducing flooding in Reaches 4, 5, and 6. After
completion of Phase 1, it is anticipated that Phase 2 channel construction
would be sequenced from downstream to upstream to avoid induced
flooding. Estimates of time periods needed for construction by reach are
shown in Table 2.5-2 for each of the alternatives. Table 2.5-2 shows the
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action) first, organized by reach
and followed by timeframes. The other alternatives list only those reaches
where there is a difference from the Tunnel Alternative.
Table 2.5-2
Alternative

Tunnel Alternative)

NRCS
Culvert/Channel
Reach 6 Bypass 1

Construction Periods and Duration by Reach
Reach
4
51
61
7A
7B
8
14
8
8
Reach 6 (bypass
channel) and
Reach14

Begin
Construction
Year 1
Year 2
Year 2
Year 1
Year 3
Year 2
Year 2
Year 2
Year 2
Year 2

End
Construction
Year 3
Year 3
Year 6
Year 2
Year 4
Year 5
Year 3
Year 5
Year 5
Year 5

Duration
(days)
497
223
1,003
290
496
735
345
735
735
730

1

No construction would be required in Reaches 5 and 6 of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, however the bypass
segment itself and Reach 14 would be constructed.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-67

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

2.5.3.2 Construction Activities
To the extent possible, construction would take place when the stream
channel is dry, but some dewatering may be necessary in either reaches
where flows persist during the summer months or where the groundwater
table is above the design channel excavation depth, notably in the
downstream portion of Reach 7A near Lake Silveira. Dewatering would
be temporary and would be limited to the area in which active
construction was occurring. Dewatering would be accomplished using a
variety of methods identified in the SCVWD BMPs (see Chapter 5).
Channel modifications would entail widening, deepening and grading to
increase capacity. Instream complexity features such as root wads,
boulders and boulder clusters, and digger logs, would be installed in the
channel as appropriate to improve instream conditions for aquatic
species. Vegetation and soil would be removed (clearing and grubbing),
with topsoil (where suitable) being salvaged before the start of earthwork.
Large woody debris salvaged during clearing and grubbing will be re-used
for fish habitat where possible within the construction footprint. Bank
slopes would be graded, whenever possible, to a 3H:1V. Some areas
would be graded to a 2H:1V slope (i.e., Reach 8). Stockpiled topsoil
resulting from the channel modifications would be spread on Project
design slopes to achieve the final grade. Storm drain outlets to the Project
channel would be modified, as required, to adjust to the reconstructed
channel banks. For erosion control purposes, riprap would be installed at
the reconstructed storm drain outlets.
Construction would use conventional equipment such as backhoes,
excavators, loaders, cranes, tractors, water tankers, paving breakers,
graders, and compactors to achieve the required design criteria. Soil
compaction during construction would be limited to facilitate revegetation.
To facilitate revegetation infill plantings associated with vegetation/habitat
mitigation, some minor grading, removal of debris and trash, will be
necessary at some locations that are not proposed for channel flood
capacity improvements. Construction activities and locations associated
with vegetation mitigation are discussed in the Chapter 5.
All concrete box culverts would be pre-cast and delivered to the site,
ready for installation with minimal preparation. The box culverts would be
designed to be capable of supporting truck traffic loads. Installation of
new culverts would require temporary road closures, which would be
managed through a detour plan. Culverts to convey flows from tributaries
under maintenance roads would be installed before construction of the
maintenance road, and would be designed for loading consistent with
maintenance vehicles. The prefabricated culverts would be either
corrugated metal pipe or concrete cylinders.
Temporary grade control structures would be installed on Reaches 5 and
14 during Phase 1 of construction to allow for the change in grade that
would be created by constructing the Phase 1 improvements. These
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-68

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
temporary structures would be removed during Phase 2 of construction. A
grade control structure designed as a series of rock pools would be
constructed at the bottom of Reach 7A in Llagas Creek, located
immediately upstream from the confluence with the Reach 7A channel to
accommodate the change in grade where the two channels come
together. Another permanent grade control structure would be
constructed in Reach 7B on Edmundson Creek where the channel
confluences with West Little Llagas Creek. Grade control structures,
constructed primarily from rock materials would be installed at various
locations along the channel. These structures would be buried into the
subsurface, with the top of the structure located at the surface of the
streambed.
Existing stream gages along the Project alignment will be temporarily
removed and re-installed as construction is completed. A new stream
gage will be installed near the Church Street percolation ponds in
Reach 6.

2.5.3.3 Construction Materials and Disposal
Imported materials that might be required would be obtained from local
suppliers. To the extent possible, excavated materials would be reused
as fill in suitable locations. The primary disposal area would be to
stockpile excavated earth material at Anderson Dam where it would
eventually be used for an earthquake retrofit of the dam. A portion of the
excavation material, approximately 275,000 cubic yards (CY)
predominantly from Reach 7A will be used for the Lake Silveira mitigation
element of the Project. Some of the excavated material may be reused
on-site where fill or soil materials are needed. Suitable sites for disposal
of any hazardous materials would be identified, as would specification
language for handling of any hazardous materials consistent with state
and local regulations. Disposal of clean material and soil would be done
in accordance with SCVWD BMPs for handling and disposal of material.
Preliminary estimates of earthwork quantities are shown in Table 2.5-3 for
each of the alternatives by reach, beginning with the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action). For each of the other alternatives, only
those reaches that have different excavation and disposal quantities from
the Applicant’s Alternative are shown. For example, the NRCS Alternative
has the same amount of excavation and disposal in Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A,
7B, and 14 as the Applicant’s Alternative, only Reach 8 differs with
66,000 bcy to be disposed under the NRCS Alternative rather than
73,000 bcy under the Applicant’s Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-69

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.5-3

Estimated Excavation, Fill, and Disposal Volumes

Reach
Tunnel Alternative
4
5 and 6
7A
7B
8
14
Total Tunnel Alternative
NRCS Alternative
8
Total NRCS Project Alternative
Culvert/Channel Alternative
8
Total Culvert Project Alternative
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative3
5 and 6
6 Bypass Channel segment
14
Total Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Excavation (bcy)1,2

Fill (bcy)1,2

Disposal (bcy)1,2

300,000
455,000
400,000
98,000
71,000
100,000
1,424,000

5,000
7,500
50,000
3,000
5,000
5,000
75,500

295,000
447,500
350,000
95,000
73,000
95,000
1,348,500

76,000
1,429,000

3,000
73,500

66,000
1,355,500

79,000
1,432,000

3,500
74,000

75,500
1,358,000

0
27,730
169,520
1,066,250

0
0
8220
68,220

0
27,730
161,300
997,030

1

volumes are for the flood conveyance aspect of the Project only and do not include utility or roadwork
bcy = bank cubic yards
3
no excavation would be required in Reaches 5 and 6 of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, however the bypass
segment itself and Reach 14 would be constructed.
2

2.5.3.4 Construction Equipment
Construction equipment would vary by reach, depending on the type of
facilities to be constructed.
The number of estimated crews required for excavation and other related
work would also vary by reach. There would be small differences based
on the alternative and in relation to the amount of potential excavation
required, the length of the reach, and access restrictions. Table 2.5-4 lists
the estimated crew size by reach, along with the estimated construction
duration and equipment to be used during construction.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-70

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.5-4
Construction
Duration
(months)

Construction Duration, Crew Size and Equipment

Crew Size
(non-excavation)

Crew Size for
Excavation Work1

Large Equipment to be Used byExcavation
and Non-Excavation Crews

Reach 4
23














Project manager &
superintendent
2 office staff
1 foreman
4 equipment
operators
12 laborers
4 carpenters
1 arborists
6 landscapers
6 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
12 truck drivers

2 (for channel

excavation and loading:

1 equipment

operator

1 equipment grade

checker)

Project manager &
superintendent
2 office staff
1 foreman
4 equipment
operators
12 laborers
3 carpenters
1 arborists
4 landscapers
4 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
9 truck drivers

3 (for channel

excavation and loading:

2 equipment

operators

1 equipment grade
checker)


Project manager &
superintendent
1 office staff
1 foreman
4 equipment
operators
12 laborers
3 carpenters
1 arborists
4 landscapers
6 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
12 truck drivers

2–3 (for channel

excavation and loading:

1–2 equipment

operator(s)

1 equipment grade

checker)






Dump Trucks (12–
20 CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End Loader
(2.6-3.75 CY
Bucket)
2 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler/
Dozer
Paving Breaker
Air Hose and
Compressor





Dump Trucks (12–
20 CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End Loader
(2.6-3.75 CY
Bucket)
3 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler
(Dozer)
Backhoe (0.8 CY)
Grader (135 HP)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)



Dump Trucks (12–
20 CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End Loader
(2.6-3.75 CY
Bucket)
2-3 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler
(Dozer)
Backhoe (0.8 CY)









Backhoe (0.8 CY)
Grader (135 HP**)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)
Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)
Hydraulic Crane
Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)
Flatbed Trucks

Reaches 5 and 6
10 (Reach 5)
46 (Reach 6)



















Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)

Hydraulic Crane

Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)

Flatbed Trucks
For Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative Add:

Pumps

Shotcrete Truck

Compressor

Vibratory and
Impact Pile Drivers

Reach 7A
13













Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx










Grader (135 HP)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)
Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)
Hydraulic Crane
Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)
Flatbed Trucks

December 2015

2-71

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Construction
Duration
(months)

Crew Size
(non-excavation)

Crew Size for
Excavation Work1

Large Equipment to be Used byExcavation
and Non-Excavation Crews

Reach 7B
22













Project manager &
superintendent
2 office staff
foreman
4 equipment
operators
12 laborers
3 carpenters
1 arborists
4 landscapers
4 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
9 truck drivers

2 (for channel

excavation and loading:

1 equipment

operator

1 equipment grade

checker)

Project manager &
superintendent
2 office staff
1 foreman
8 equipment
operators2
2
24 laborers
3 carpenters
1 arborists
4 landscapers
4 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
9 truck drivers

2–3 (for channel

excavation and loading:


1–2 equipment
operator(s)

1 equipment grade
checker)






Dump Trucks (12–
20CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End (2.6–3.75
CY Bucket)
2 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler
(Dozer)
Backhoe (0.8 CY)




Dump Trucks (12–
20CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End (2.6–3.75
CY Bucket)
2 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler
(Dozer)
Backhoe (0.8 CY)
Grader (135 HP)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)
Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)
Hydraulic Crane
(90 Ton)
Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)
Flatbed Trucks

For Tunnel and Reach 6
Bypass Alternatives,
add:

Vibratory Sheet Pile
Drive

Impact Pile Driver

Dril Jumbo

Roadheader

LHD Unit

Wheel Loader
(4.88 CY)

Spader

Compressor

Shotcrete Truck

Pumps

Ventilation Fan






Grader (135 HP)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)
Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)
Hydraulic Crane
Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)
Flatbed Trucks

Reach 8
36























Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-72

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Construction
Duration
(months)

Crew Size
(non-excavation)

Crew Size for
Excavation Work1

Large Equipment to be Used byExcavation
and Non-Excavation Crews

Reach 14
16

Project manager &
superintendent
2 office staff
1 foreman
2-3 equipment
operators
12 laborers
3 carpenters
1 arborists
4 landscapers
4 roadway workers
4 traffic control
workers
9 truck drivers













2 (for channel

excavation and loading:

1 equipment

operator

1 equipment grade

checker)




Dump Trucks (12–
20CY)
Vibratory and Static
Roller (Single
Drum)
Front End (2.6–3.75
CY Bucket)
2 Hydraulic
Excavators (0.5–
2CY)
Tractor Crawler
(Dozer)
Backhoe (0.8 CY)








Grader (135 HP)
Asphalt Compactor
Roller (6 tons)
Water Tanker
(5,000 Gal)
Hydraulic Crane
(90 Ton – for
culvert)
Hydroseeder
(3,000 Gal)
Flatbed Trucks

*CY=cubic yards
** HP = horse power
1

crew size shown is to run excavation equipment only, therefore, does not include all construction laborers, foremen,
and supervisors, etc.
2

For the NRCS and Culvert/Channel Alternatives, 4 equipment operators and 12 laborers is the Reach 8 construction
crew size.

2.5.3.5 Staging Areas
Approximately 25 acres would be used in each of the actions alternatives
for staging during Project construction. The proposed staging areas are
shown in Figure 2.5-6. Parking for construction workers would be
provided within SCVWD ROW and approved staging areas only. Staging
areas, that are not already paved or covered with compacted aggregate
base, would be graded, as required, and surfaced with compacted
aggregate base rock over a geo-textile fabric that would maintain
separation between native and construction materials. Staging areas
would be used for parking vehicles, trailers, workshops, maintenance
areas, or equipment, formwork, rebar, and metal product storage. Areas
storing soils and sand would not be required to be surfaced with coarse
aggregate base. Staging and equipment storage would take place in the
following areas:
Reach 4


Site I. 2.3 acres of vacant land along Masten Avenue and No
Name Uno near the U.S. 101 interchange on the south side of the
channel; and



Site J. 4.6 acres in an agricultural field at the end of Denio
Avenue, just north of Buena Vista Avenue, on the south side of
the channel.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-73

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Reach 5 and Reach 6


Site G. 0.13 acre of SCVWD-owned lands at the Church Avenue
percolation ponds on the west side of the channel;



Site F. 1.4 acres in an agricultural field at the southeast corner of
San Martin Avenue and Kimble Court on the east side of the
channel; and



Site D. 7 acres in an agricultural field between Llagas Avenue and
the Union Pacific railroad tracks at Monterey Road, on the north
side of the channel, opposite the Nature Quality Inc., foodprocessing facility with 0.38 acre for an access road from an
adjoining parcel.

Reach 7A


Site C. 7 acres along Middle Ave south of Monterey Road.

Reach 7B


Site B. 1 acre of vacant land along La Jolla Drive at Via Navoana
upstream from Watsonville Road, on the south side of the
channel.

Reach 8


Site A. 1.4 acres of vacant land at the site of the Pacific Gas and
Electric Company (PG&E) substation on the southwest of the
intersection of Hale Avenue and East Main Avenue on the west
side of the channel (APN# 767-05-001). This staging site would be
the main location for equipment and materials needed to construct
the portal inlet and tunnel for the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s
Proposed Action).

Reach 14


Site H. 3.3 acres of vacant SCVWD-owned land east of the
southern end of Kannely Lane on the west side of the channel;
and Site E. 5.9 acres of vacant land at the northern intersection of
Sycamore Avenue and San Martin Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-74

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.5-6 Staging Areas

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-75

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-76

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

2.5.3.6 Construction BMPs
For compliance with anticipated requirements of federal and state
permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit from the USACE pursuant to
Clean Water Act (CWA) Section 404 and Water Quality
Certification/Waste Discharge Report from the Regional Water Quality
Control Board (RWQCB) pursuant to CWA Section 401, the SCVWD
would require the contractor(s) to develop and implement a site-specific
erosion control plan(s). The erosion control plans should consider, at a
minimum, scheduling or limiting activities to certain times of the year;
installing sediment barriers such as silt fencing and fiber rolls along the
perimeter of the construction area; maintaining equipment and vehicles
used for construction; tracking controls, such as stabilizing entrances to
the construction site; and developing and implementing a spill prevention
and cleanup plan.
Because soil surface disturbance for the Project would be greater than
one acre, the Project would be required to comply with National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements for control of
stormwater discharges from construction sites. Pursuant to the Statewide
General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction
and Land Disturbance Activities (Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ NPDES No.
CAS000002), the SCVWD would require all contractor(s) to file a Notice
of Intent (NOI) to comply with the General Permit, and to develop and
implement site-specific storm water pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs).
In developing a SWPPP, the contractor must identify potential sources of
pollution and implement BMPs to reduce pollutants in storm water
dischargers. The SWPPPs must also incorporate measures for BMP
inspection, maintenance, and recordkeeping.
Dust control plans are required by the Bay Area Air Quality Management
District (BAAQMD). Therefore, the SCVWD would require the
contractor(s) to develop a dust control plan, which identifies the fugitive
dust sources at the construction site and describes all of the dust control
measures to be implemented before, during, and after any constructionrelated activities. Dust control would be managed with spraying from
water trucks.
Exclusionary fencing would be installed around facilities and adjacent
areas that are to be protected from construction-related disturbance.
Construction access ramps and construction access areas within the
Project site would be positioned to minimize the need for vegetation
removal.
Drinking water for construction workers would be provided in accordance
with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
regulations. Portable toilets would also be provided at the worksite by the
Contractor.
In addition to state and federal permit requirements, the Best
Management Practices Handbook (SCVWD 2013b) provides a list of the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-77

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
SCVWD’s BMPs intended to be incorporated into projects or activities to
minimize potential environmental effects, including for construction and
maintenance.
Applicable construction and maintenance BMPs are fully described in
Appendix C, and include the following resource protection measures:

Air Quality
Use Dust Control Measures for Soil Disturbing Activities
AQ-1
Avoid Stockpiling Potentially Odorous Materials
AQ-4
Biological Resources
Minimize Impacts to Steelhead
BI-3
Minimize Access Impacts
BI-4
Remove Temporary Fills as Appropriate
BI-5
Minimize Adverse Effects of Pesticides on Non-Target Species
BI-6
Avoid Impacts to Nesting Migratory Birds
BI-8
Avoid Impacts to Nesting Migratory Birds from Pending Construction
BI-9
Minimize Impacts to Vegetation From Clearing and Trimming
BI-10
Minimize Root Impacts to Woody Vegetation
BI-11
Choose Local Ecotypes of Native Plants and Appropriate Erosion Control Seed Mixes
BI-13
Restore Riffle/Pool Configuration of Channel Bottom
BI-15
Avoid Animal Entry and Entrapment
BI-16
Minimize Predator Attraction Effects on Wildlife
BI-17
Cultural Resources
Stop Work and Report if Archaeological Artifacts are Found
CU-2
Stop Work and Report if Burial Remains are Found
CU-3
Hazards and Hazardous Materials
Comply with All Pesticide Application Restrictions and Policies
HM-1
Minimize Use of Pesticides
HM-3
Post Areas Where Pesticides Will Be Used
HM-4
Comply with All Pesticide Usage Requirements
HM-5
Comply with Restrictions on Herbicide Use in Upland Areas
HM-7
Comply with Restrictions on Herbicide Use in Aquatic Areas
HM-8
Limit Vehicle and Equipment Fueling and Maintenance
HM-9
Ensure Proper Hazardous Materials Management
HM-12
Utilize Spill Prevention Measures
HM-13
Incorporate Fire Prevention Measures
HM-14
Comply with BAAQMD Regulations for Naturally Occurring Asbestos
HM-17

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-78

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Hydrology/Water Quality
Conduct Work From Top of Bank
WQ-1
Evaluate Use of Wheel and Track Mounted Vehicles in Stream Bottoms
WQ-2
Limit Impact of Pump and Generator Operation and Maintenance
WQ-3
Limit Impacts of Sediments on Water Quality
WQ-4
Limit Impacts From Staging and Stockpiling Materials
WQ-5
Stabilize Construction Entrances and Exits
WQ-6
Minimize Erosion From Removal of In-Channel Vegetation
WQ-9
Limit Impact of Concrete Near Waterways
WQ-10
Isolate Work in Non-Tidal Sites With Use of Diversion of Bypass
WQ-12
Use Seeding for Erosion Control, Weed Suppression, and Site Improvement
WQ-14
Manage Exposed Groundwater at Work Sites
WQ-15
Maintain Clean Conditions at Work Sites
WQ-18
Prevent Water Pollution
WQ-40
Prevent Stormwater Pollution
WQ-41
Manage Sanitary/Septic Waste Noise
WQ-42
Minimize Noise Pollution
NO-1
Minimize Noise Disturbances to Residential Neighborhoods
NO-2
Transportation/Traffic
Incorporate Public Safety Measures
TR-1
Minimize Impacts on Traffic, Bicycles and Pedestrians
TR-2

2.5.4

Utilities
A network of underground and overhead utility lines provides water, gas,
electricity, sewer, storm drains, cable, phone, fiber optics, and other utility
services throughout the Project area. In most cases these utilities are buried
underground. Some utilities located within the footprint of the Project easements
would be either protected in place, rebuilt in place, abandoned, or demolished
and relocated prior to construction. Sewer lines and storm drains may be
relocated at the beginning of construction. Although there are utilities in all
Project reaches, most of the utilities that would need to be relocated are in the
urbanized Reaches 7B and 8. Utilities would be protected in place during
construction if they are not to be abandoned or replaced. There are also
miscellaneous features such as fences that would need to be removed and
potentially relocated. All utilities that are within the Project easements will be
identified and their disposition will be determined during preparation of the final
engineering design plans.

2.5.5

Operations and Maintenance
SCVWD would be responsible for maintaining all Project features, such as the
channel, culverts, and grade control structures consistent with SCVWD and
USACE guidelines. Flood conveyance channels would be managed to provide
adequate capacity for the design flow. The channels would be regularly
inspected for the build-up and removal of trash (non-living material) or other
obstruction to flow. Sediment removal and vegetation maintenance are the two

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-79

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
main activities that are periodically needed to maintain design flow capacity.
Sediment removal and vegetation management generally would be conducted
between June 15 and October 15. However, if the fall season remained dry, work
could continue until the first significant rainfall event occurred. A significant
rainfall event is defined as local rainfall of 0.5 inch or greater within the
watershed over a 24-hour period (SCVWD 2011a).The expected maintenance
activities that are common to all the Project alternatives are described below.
Analysis of potential impacts and associated mitigations that may be needed due
to proposed maintenance activities under each of the action alternatives is
addressed within each of the resource sections in Chapter 4, Environmental
Consequences and Chapter 5, Mitigation. Maintenance activities that occur
under existing conditions were previously summarized and described under the
No Action Alternative in Section 2.4.
2.5.5.1 Vegetation Management
Vegetation maintenance in the flood conveyance channels shall be
performed to maintain the composite design roughness requirements
(hydraulic roughness, or Manning’s n-value15). The design roughness
requirements16 are shown in Table 2.5-5 and are applicable to all the
action alternatives where there will be widening and deepening of the
channel to improve flood conveyance.

15

The flow conveyance capacity of a channel is controlled by the channel slope (gradient), cross-sectional area, and
roughness of the bed and banks. Of these three factors, operation and maintenance practices primarily affect
roughness, which is created by the shape of the streambank, meandering characteristics of the river, size of the bed
sediment materials, presence of debris obstructions, and by vegetation. Channel roughness is represented in flow
conveyance equations or hydraulic models by a unit- less factor called Manning’s n-values. Manning’s n-values can
be identified for specific areas of a channel cross-section, or averaged to a composite value that represents their
aggregate impact on flow rate. For example, a small area of very dense brush with trees could have a high n-value of
0.10 and adjacent areas of the channel with no vegetation around it having a low n-value of .035, with a composited
n-value of .045 for the entire channel.
16
A narrative description of vegetative conditions associated with a range of Manning’s n-values assuming a base
condition of n =.03 for a coarse sandy bed with a uniform, straight channel without vegetation or obstructions, is
provided by the USGS (Arcement and Schneider 1989) as follows: N = .032-.040 dense growth of flexible turf grass
or weeds where depth of flow is at least 2 times height of vegetation; supple tree seedlings such as willow,
cottonwood where average depth of flow is three times height of vegetation. N = .040-.055 moderately dense stemmy
grass, weeds, or tree seedlings; brushy moderately dense vegetation similar to 1-2 year old willows in dormant
season. N = .055-.080 for 8–10 year old willow or cottonwood trees intergrown with weeds and brush. N = .080-0.130
bushy willow trees 1 year old intergrown with weeds on all side slopes with vegetation in full foliage, trees intergrown
with weeds and brush with vegetation in full foliage. Note that n-value narrative descriptions for vegetation can be
variable, depending upon other factors present in the channel that also contribute to roughness.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-80

Chapter 2

Table 2.5-5

Reach
8
7B
7A
6
5
4
14

Description of Alternatives

Target Composite Hydraulic Roughness Coefficients (Manning’s n-value)
for Maintenance
Existing Composite
Hydraulic Roughness1,2
0.046
0.045–0.065
(no existing channel)
0.064–0.070
0.064
0.055
0.050

Design Composite
Hydraulic Roughness2
0.035
0.038–0.069
0.038–0.084
0.064–0.0753
0.065–0.0943
0.064–0.076
0.04

1

Based on roughness values from USACE.
Ranges reflect different roughness requirements in different portions of a given reach.
3
For the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, design composite roughness in Reaches 5 and 6 do not apply since there will
be no construction.
2

Except where specifically allowed, woody vegetation should be removed
before the trunk is greater than 3 inches dbh. Over time, vegetation
density may increase and flexibility of woody riparian species may
decrease as the vegetation matures and becomes well established. This
could cause the hydraulic roughness of the channel to increase beyond
that originally designed, necessitating thinning or removal of vegetation.
Vegetation management is also conducted to maintain access roads clear
of vegetation, maintain the ability to visually inspect the channel, and as
needed to reduce fire loads as may be required by local fire districts.
Vegetation control methods include the following:


Herbicide—The application of herbicide would occur instream
and on bank bench areas as well as on maintenance roads, along
fence lines, and similar non-instream areas. Herbicide describes a
work activity and not the chemical formulation used. This activity
consists of using herbicide as the primary abatement tool to kill
vegetation and provide subsequent follow up for hand removal
activities. On maintenance roads the weed management strategy
calls for two herbicide applications, a pre- emergent application
and post emergent application.



Hand Pruning—Pruning is the partial removal of any individual
plant and includes cutting of tree branches, woody and
herbaceous vegetation, and is conducted with mechanized and
non- mechanized hand tools. Pruning may occur instream and
along banks and bench areas. Pruning of trees and shrubs is a
routine activity necessary to provide access to SCVWD facilities,
improve visibility to inspect SCVWD facilities, protect SCVWD
infrastructure, and maintain the designed hydraulic capacity.
Typical woody vegetation pruning takes place along maintenance
roads and fences. Tree pruning may include thinning the canopy
of an individual tree or shrub. For simplicity, the term “tree” or
“trees” will refer to both trees and woody shrubs.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-81

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives


Hand Removal—Complete removal of above ground portions of
any individual plant using mechanized or non-mechanized hand
tools. This category includes herbicide stump treatment, called 'cut
stump' which is follow-up work from the removal of vegetation. Cut
stump treatment is a paired activity to Hand Removal. Live,
standing trees and shrubs may be removed from SCVWD facilities
to meet one of the following program objectives: maintain design
flow conveyance capacity, provide facility inspection and access,
or maintain the structural integrity of SCVWD facilities. For
simplicity, the term “tree” or “trees” will refer to both trees and
woody shrubs. Stump treatment of removed trees is included
under “Hand Removal” and is not defined as “Herbicide” work.



Mowing—Area-wide cutting of above ground plant material using
a tractor mounted flail mower or hand-held equipment (weedeaters). Work primarily occurs in the bank bench/outboard areas,
conducted annually. Mowing provides visual access for facility
inspections and may be required for flow conveyance capacity
and to meet local fire codes. Local fire codes call for all weeds and
grasses to be maintained below 6 inches in height for 10 feet
horizontally on both sides of access routes. Vegetation must be
cut back 30 feet around any structures and a 30-foot firebreak
must be maintained. Parcels up to 1 acre in size must be
completely mowed. All work is performed to conform to local fire
code requirements.

2.5.5.2 Sediment Management
Sediment management could be required in the flood conveyance
channels within the Project area. Sediment removal is the act of
mechanically removing sediment deposited within a creek and may be
necessary when an accumulation of sediment reduces flow conveyance
capacity or prevents facilities or appurtenant structures from functioning
as intended. These activities would be done in a manner that is sensitive
to protection of aquatic resources. Overall, it is anticipated, based on
hydraulic modeling that the Project design would provide for a balanced
net transport of sediments and would not result in reach- scale
aggradation (USACE 2010a). However, as vegetation develops, and
woody debris and other fish habitat enhancements are installed, there
remains a potential for sediments to locally deposit reducing flood
conveyance capacity. At the confluence of Reaches 14, 4, and 5 the
design includes a widened channel area with a mid-channel bar that
bifurcates the flow. This site is designed for sediment accumulation to
help reduce the need for sediment removal in downstream locations. A
similar sediment depositional site is designed for an over-widened
channel area near the top of Reach 6 at the first large meander bend
downstream of Llagas Avenue. It is anticipated that sediment removal at
both of these sites will be less frequent than once every 10 years.
Sediment management would be performed in an adaptive manner,
identifying depositional patterns and tendencies and updating
management techniques accordingly. This is particularly true for the midUpper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-82

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
channel bar at the confluence between Reaches 4, 5, and 14, and
widened channel area of Reach 6 near Llagas Road which are designed
to be sediment depositional sites.
A sediment detention basin will also be installed in Reach 8 for the Tunnel
and Reach 6 Bypass alternatives, only. The detention basin will
periodically require sediment removal. Heavier sedimentation may occur
after episodic events such as wild fires and large flows. After such an
event the Project should be inspected to identify and address large
deposits that may impact channel capacity.

2.5.5.3 Bank Erosion
The channel cross-sectional form was designed to be in a stable,
dynamic equilibrium with the flow and sediment regime of the Llagas
Creek watershed. This does not mean there would be absolutely no
erosion, but it does mean that the channel dimensions and planform
should, in general, remain about the same over time. It is assumed that
any maintenance for bank erosion that might arise would be related to
localized erosion that might threaten infrastructure, and that this would be
addressed through the SMP. Consequently, the Project does not envision
a need for a bank erosion maintenance regime.

2.5.5.4 Culverts
All of the proposed culvert replacements would be reinforced concrete
box structures. Any spalling (i.e., splitting or flaking) in concrete culverts
would be patched with an appropriate concrete material. Repairs would
be made to the bottom of the concrete culvert if they show more than 1
inch of loss due to wear and abrasion. If significant settlement is detected
in a culvert or pipe, it should be excavated, the foundation raised, the pipe
replaced, the fill material added in 4-inch layers and compacted around
the pipe to a density equal to or greater to that of the surrounding
undisturbed material, and the area reseeded. Sediment and debris must
be removed from culverts to maintain their flow capacity; this is defined as
a minor maintenance activity in the SMP.

2.5.5.5 Concrete Grade Control Structures
Grade control structures would be annually inspected for erosion. Erosion
of the streambed both upstream and downstream of the structures would
be repaired and any debris removed that accumulates on the structures.
The integrity of the concrete would be inspected, and if there is any
substantial cracking or erosion, the structure would be repaired.

2.5.5.6 Habitat Enhancement Features
Habitat enhancement features including a sinuous low-flow channel,
pools, large woody debris placements, boulder placements, root wad
structures, and wing log deflectors, are to be installed in Reaches 4, 5, 6,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-83

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
and 7A. Divide logs17 would also be used, but only in the perennially
flowing section of Reach 6. These types of habitat enhancements
generally improve fish rearing and migration habitat by providing cover
and velocity refuge. The habitat enhancement features would be
maintained by the SCVWD to insure they continue to provide their
designed environmental benefits.

2.5.5.7 Minor Maintenance
Minor maintenance activities would be performed to repair and maintain
SCVWD facility functions. Minor maintenance activities may occur
anywhere within the Project area. For all of the action alternatives, minor
activities are small in size that results in removing less than 0.08 acre of
wetland or riparian vegetation at a site. The minimum size for any minor
vegetation work to be notified in SCVWD’s Regional General Permit for
Stream Maintenance is 0.01 acre per project, which includes any
vegetation work necessary for access or staging. Yearly minor
maintenance activities are limited to less than 0.4 acre of wetland or
riparian vegetation impact per year for the combined Countywide
maintenance activities under the SMP. Cumulative minor maintenance
activities would be limited to 2 acres total wetland or riparian vegetation
impact over a 5-year planning period and 4.0 acres over a 10-year
planning period for all countywide projects combined. The methodology is
consistent with the Countywide Stream Maintenance Program minor
maintenance procedures. Cleaning and minor sediment removal at
culverts, grade control structures, and other facilities is limited to keep
them functioning to as built standards, with a 25 CY total removal per
year. The following minor maintenance activities relating specifically to
the Project which could occur are described as;

17



Removal of wetland/riparian vegetation (less than .08 acre per
site);



Minor in-channel sediment removal (less than 10 CY);



Trash and debris removal;



Repair and installation of fences and gates;



Grading and other repairs to restore the original contour of
existing maintenance roads;



Grading small areas without vegetation above stream banks to
improve drainage and reduce erosion;



Repair of structures with substantially similar materials within
approximately the same footprint (i.e., replacement of concrete
linings, culverts);

Divide logs are used to provide cover and are a visual barrier between pairs of spawning fish.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-84

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives


Graffiti removal;



Installation and on-going maintenance of mitigation and landscape
sites (including irrigation, weed control, and replanting of dead or
declining individual plants until success criteria were met);



Removal of obstructions at structures to maintain function (i.e.,
bridges, stream flow measuring stations, box culverts, storm drain
outfalls, and grade control structures).

2.5.5.8 Application of Maintenance Activities
Each portion of the channel (in cross-section view) will have an applied
set of maintenance activities. Figure 2.5-2 shows the relevant sections of
the channel for purposes of describing maintenance activities, including:


Maintenance roads;



Top of bank (TOB);



Engineered bank;



Natural bank;



Bench;



Bankfull bank (slope between bench and channel bottom); and



Channel bottom.

In some cases there may be a second engineered bank instead of a
natural bank. Benches may be engineered or naturally formed, but in
either case where there are no benches the engineered and natural
banks are assumed to be extended to the channel bottom. On any
channel side where a portion of the bank is natural and a portion is
engineered, it is assumed that maintenance would be performed as if the
entire bank is natural. The tables below (Table 2.5-6, 2.5-7, 2.5-8, and
2.5-9) show the type of maintenance activity and frequency of activity as
well as the targeted roughness for each portion of the channels in the
identified reaches. These roughness values are applicable to all of the
action alternatives. Vegetation maintenance, such as grass and weed
mowing, would occur once or twice annually. Other vegetation
maintenance, such as pruning and removal, is anticipated on about a 5year frequency, except in Reach 6 where perennial water conditions may
require more frequent maintenance of willows on a 3-year maintenance
cycle. Sediment maintenance is anticipated on about a 10-year frequency
over the long term.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-85

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.5-6

Location
Maintenance
Road

Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness
Reaches 4 and 5

Surface/
Vegetation
Aggregate base
and ballast rock

n-value
N/A

Top of Bank

Grasses,
Riparian Forest

N/A

Engineered
Bank

Planted
Riparian Forest

0.10

Natural Bank
Bench

Riparian Forest
Grass

0.15
0.04

Bankfull Bank

Reach 4 – Grass 0.04
Reach 5 – Willow 0.08

Channel
Bottom

Gravel, cobble,
sand

0.03

Maintenance
Method
Herbicide

Frequency
(years)
1

Mowing
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal
None
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal

1

Herbicide1
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal

Notes
Clear of vegetation for
access and reduce fire
hazard
Facilitate access and
observation, reduce fire
hazard

5

Limited understory
development is acceptable

N/A
5 (veg)
10 (sediment)
5 (veg)
10 (sediment)

No maintenance
Clear woody vegetation,
remove excess sediments
Clear woody vegetation
(Reach 5), remove excess
sediments

5 (veg)
Clear woody vegetation,
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments,
some grass acceptable

1

No herbicide in Reach 4
N/A = not applicable

Table 2.5-7
Location
Maintenance
Road

Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness Reach 6
Surface/
Vegetation
Aggregate base
and ballast rock

n-value
N/A

Top of Bank

Grasses,
Riparian Forest

N/A

Engineered
Bank

Planted Riparian
Forest

0.10

Natural Bank
Bench

Riparian Forest
Grass

0.15
0.04

Bankfull Bank

Willow

0.08

Channel
Bottom

Gravel, cobble,
sand

0.03

Maintenance
Method
Herbicide

Frequency
(years)
1

Mowing
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal
Herbicide
Hand PruninG
Hand Removal
None
Herbicide
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal
Herbicide
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal

1

5

Notes
Clear of vegetation for
access and reduce fire
hazard
Facilitate access and
observation, reduce fire
hazard
Limited understory
development is acceptable

N/A
No maintenance
Clear woody vegetation,
5 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments
Prevent spread of willows,
3 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments
Clear woody vegetation,
5 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments,
some grass acceptable

N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-86

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.5-8

Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 14

Maintenance
Road

Surface/
Vegetation
Aggregate base
and ballast rock

Top of Bank

Grass

N/A

Engineered
Bank

Reach 7A Scrub/shrub
Reaches 7B & 14
– Grass
N/A
Grass

0.06
0.04

Location

Natural Bank
Bench

n-value
N/A

N/A
0.04

Bankfull Bank Grass

0.04

Channel
Bottom

0.03

Gravel, cobble,
sand

Maintenance
Method
Herbicide
Hand Removal

Frequency
(years)
1

Mowing
Herbicide 2
Hand Pruning 1
Hand Removal 1
Herbicide 2
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal

1

N/A
Herbicide 2
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal
Herbicide 2
Hand Removal
Sediment
Removal
Herbicide 2
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal

N/A
N/A
Clear woody vegetation,
5 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments

5

Notes
Clear of vegetation for
access and reduce fire
hazard
Facilitate access and
observation, reduce fire
hazard
Clear of woody vegetation

Prevent spread of willows,
5 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments

Clear woody vegetation,
5 (veg)
10 (sediment) remove excess sediments,
some grass acceptable

1

No Hand Pruning or Hand Removal in Reach 7A
No herbicide use in Reach 14 except for the maintenance road
N/A = not applicable

2

Table 2.5-9

Typical Maintenance Activities, Frequency, and Target Roughness Reach 8

Maintenance
Road

Surface/
Vegetation
Aggregate base
and ballast rock

Top of Bank

Grasses

N/A

Engineered
Bank
Natural Bank
Bench
Bankfull Bank
Channel
Bottom

Grasses

0.04

N/A
N/A
N/A
Gravel, cobble,
sand

N/A
N/A
N/A
0.03

Location

n-value
N/A

Maintenance
Method
Herbicide

Frequency
(years)
1

Mowing
Hand Pruning
Hand Removal
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal
N/A
N/A
N/A
Herbicide
Hand Removal
Sediment Removal

1

1
N/A
N/A
N/A
1

Notes
Clear of vegetation for
access and reduce fire
hazard
Facilitate access and
observation, reduce fire
hazard
Limited understory
development is acceptable

Clear woody vegetation,
remove excess sediments,
some grass acceptable

N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-87

Chapter 2

2.5.6

Description of Alternatives

Lake Silveira Mitigation Element
The Lake Silveira parcel is a 52-acre wetland and riparian mitigation element
designed by the SCVWD to reduce and compensate for environmental impacts
associated with other flood protection activities. The Lake Silveira element is not
a part of the Project design for flood management in any of the action
alternatives. However, it is intended to reduce or compensate for flood reduction
actions of the proposed Project. A brief description of the Lake Silveira mitigation
element is included in this EIS, because it entails a substantial amount of
construction activity over a relatively large area; and, because, it is equally
pertinent to all the action alternatives. For a more detailed descrption of the
compensatory mitigation measure for all action alternatives refer to Chapter 5,
section 5.3.

2.6

NRCS ALTERNATIVE
The NRCS Alternative was initially conceived and evaluated as Alternative F in the 1982
EIS/EIR (Section 2.3.1). Subsequent modifications to the NRCS Alternative have been
considered and incorporated since the 1982 EIS/EIR, in response to the changing
physical environment, and to changes in environmental regulations (Section 2.3.4). The
NRCS Alternative evaluated in this EIS is based on all subsequent modifications to
Alternative F, as presented in the SCVWDs’ Map and Construction Plan 65 percent
Design Submittal (RMC 2013). The current NRCS Alternative consists of the following
main components:


Acquisition of fee title and easements of adjacent land needed for Project
construction and maintenance;



Channel improvements including deepening and widening, some limited planform
re-alignment;



Excavation and construction of a diversion channel for flows from West Little
Llagas Creek to Llagas



Creek which would bypass flows from entering East Little Llagas Creek;



Construction of permanent access roads on both banks within permanent
easements for construction and maintenance access;



Construction of reinforced concrete boxes (RCB) of rectangular cross sections,
which are sized to pass the design flood flow under roadways and at tributary
junctions;



Installation of a stream gage near the Church Avenue Ponds



Relocation of homes, farm structures, and all wells where they are within the
ROW;



Relocation of utility and other public service facilities within the ROW;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-88

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives



Instream aquatic habitat enhancements to provide cover and rearing for fish in
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A; and,



Stream operation and maintenance activities.



This alternative would provide an increased level of flood management for urban
areas, specifically: a 1-percent flood in Morgan Hill (Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B); 10percent flood management for the semi-urban area around East Little Llagas
Creek (Reach 14); and, avoid induced flooding elsewhere on Llagas Creek
(Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to upstream improvements. The extent of floodplain
inundation associated with a 1-percent flood event is shown on Figure 2.5-1.



Descriptions of the various components of the NRCS Alternative are provided in
the following subsections on a reach-by-reach basis, starting with the most
downstream Reach 4 and going upstream to Reach 8, and last, Reach 14.

2.6.1

NRCS Alternative Features
Reach 4 (East Little Llagas Creek to Buena Vista Avenue)
Reach 4 (Figure 2.2-7) is typically dry in the summer and fall months, and has
the smallest existing conveyance capacity in the Project watershed. The design
flow objective for Reach 4 is to increase capacity to avoid any additional flooding
that, potentially, could be caused by upstream improvements. Design capacity
would be 7,120 cfs at Buena Vista Avenue.
Modifications to Llagas Creek in Reach 4, would consist of widening and
deepening the channel (Figure 2.5-2). Channel bottom width is 30 feet, with a
bankfull channel width approximately 40 to 50 feet and 3 feet deep. The existing
channel alignment would generally be preserved, except in the most downstream
portion of the reach where the alignment would be shifted slightly to the south to
avoid loss of structures on the north bank of the creek. Some native shrubs and
hardwood trees would be removed to allow for channel widening. These areas
would be revegetated using site specific native species consistent with a
mitigation plan discussed under Section 3.4, Botanical Resources.
Two maintenance roads would be provided along Reach 4, one on each side of
the creek. Access to the maintenance roads would be at Masten Avenue, Rucker
Avenue, Buena Vista Avenue, and Denio Avenue. Three drainages (Rucker
Creek, an unnamed local drainage south of Masten Avenue, and an unnamed
local drainage channel upstream of Buena Vista Avenue) would be culverted at
their confluence with Reach 4 to allow continuous maintenance access. To allow
excavation to deepen the channel, underpinning or some other structural
modification to shore up the stability of the footings of the existing bridge at
Masten Avenue and Llagas Avenue would be needed.
Three grade control structures, constructed of natural boulder materials and in a
manner that contributes to habitat where feasible, would be installed in the
channel. The grade control structures are mostly buried, except where exposed
at the surface of the channel bed. Rock slope and toe armoring would be needed
at only two key locations along the outside of meander bends to protect against

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-89

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
erosion. The grade control structures ensure that there would be no channel
down-cutting.
The channel downstream of Buena Vista Avenue, approximately 800 feet, will be
widened and deepened through the location of an existing fish ladder. The
antiquated denil style fish ladder does not properly function (Martin, Pers.
Comm., 2013) and would be removed along with the grouted concrete rock just
downstream of Buena Vista Avenue so as to not induce flooding associated with
upstream improvements. The channel will be evaluated at the fish ladder so that
a new design which will meet NMFS depth and velocity criteria for steelhead fish
passage can be implemented. The new design will take into account the
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions with the Project in-place.
Instream complexity features are included in this reach to assist with migration of
anadromous fish during moderate to high flows: approximately 12 clusters of logroot wad structures, 19 stream boulders, and 20 triangular boulder clusters. All of
these habitat features provide steelhead and other fish species with cover and
velocity breaks to improve rearing and passage. Examples of these instream
habitat features are provided in Appendix J. Gravel and cobble excavated to
deepen the channel would be returned to the channel bed.
Reach 5
The design flow objective for Reach 5 (Figure 2.2-6) is to increase capacity to
avoid any additional flooding caused by upstream flow conveyance modifications.
Design capacity would be 3,280 cfs. Reach 5 is typically dry in the summer and
fall months.
Channel modifications would be similar to Reach 4, with a cross-section that
includes a sinuous low-flow channel, a bankfull channel with benches
approximately 30 feet in total width and engineered banks that are 3H:1V slope
on either side of the channel (Figure 2.5-2). Channel widening for hydraulic
improvement would be limited to one bank, where possible, to preserve existing
stands of mature vegetation. Channel dimensions would be similar to those in
Reach 4.
Reach 5 would be realigned to split flow around a new mid-channel bar, about 60
feet wide, immediately upstream of the confluence with East Little Llagas Creek.
The majority of the flow would travel to the north of the bar, increasing overall
channel length. The remaining flow would travel in the existing Reach 5
alignment, south of the bar. The expanded bankfull channel width and bar
configuration would be a focal point for sediment deposition and thereby reduce
downstream maintenance. The accumulated sediment could be naturally
removed during high flows to reduce downstream erosion and incision, or would
be removed by the SCVWD as part of its maintenance activities, should it be
necessary to do so. This area would also collect various types of debris (e.g.
woody or trash) and thus reduce maintenance and potential hazards in the
downstream channel.
Maintenance roads 18 feet in width, would be constructed on both sides of the
creek in the same manner as for Reach 4. As maintenance access from U.S. 101

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-90

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
would not be feasible due to traffic and permitting issues, connecting roads would
be constructed to Kannely Lane and Lena Avenue.
Two grade control structures constructed of natural boulder materials (and in a
manner that contributes to habitat where feasible), would be installed in the
channel. Instream complexity features (Appendix J) would be installed for aquatic
habitat including approximately two clusters of log-root wad structures, 23 stream
boulders, two wing deflectors, and three groupings of large woody debris, most of
which would be placed around the upstream and downstream end of the midchannel bar near the confluence with East Little Llagas Creek. Gravel and cobble
would be left in the channel bed.
The improved slopes of the channel would be revegetated, consistent with
requirements for maintaining hydraulic capacity. Revegetation is discussed as
part of a mitigation plan in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
Reach 6
The flow objective for Reach 6 (Figure 2.2-5) is to increase capacity to avoid any
additional flooding caused by upstream flow conveyance improvements. The
existing channel alignment would generally be followed throughout the reach,
except for shifts to avoid structure loss, high quality vegetation, and imposition on
local industry. Design capacity would be 3,280 cfs at the Church Percolation
Ponds. A 6,600-foot segment of Reach 6, from Lake Silveira to about San Martin
Avenue is a perennially flowing stream, continuously supported by releases from
Chesbro Reservoir. Downstream from approximately San Martin Avenue, Reach
6 returns to an intermittently flowing channel as water percolates through the
streambed to groundwater.
Channel improvements would be similar to Reaches 4 and 5, with a crosssection that includes a sinuous low-flow channel, a bankfull channel with
benches approximately 30 feet in total width where they occur on both sides of
the channel and engineered banks that are 3H:1V slope on one side of the
channel (Figure 2.5-2). Channel widening for hydraulic improvement would be
limited to one bank, where possible, to preserve existing stands of higher quality
mature vegetation.
Reach 6 would include a widened section at the first bend downstream of Llagas
Avenue. The expanded bankfull channel width and benches (40 feet to 80 feet
wide on both sides of the bankfull channel) would be designed to induce
sediment deposition during high flows. This creates a focused area for sediment
and debris accumulation where it can readily be removed by the SCVWD during
maintenance activities, thereby reducing maintenance in the downstream
channel.
Similar to Reaches 4 and 5, 18-foot-wide all-weather maintenance/access roads
typically would be constructed on both sides of the channel. Some portions of the
reach provide the opportunity to use existing roads and driveways for
maintenance access. Access to top of bank maintenance roads would be
constructed at Llagas Avenue, Kimble Court, East San Martin Avenue, Church
Avenue, and Murphy Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-91

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
There are five existing bridge crossings within Reach 6: Monterey Highway,
Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR), Llagas Avenue, San Martin Avenue, and Church
Avenue. The existing bridges would not be altered. Two local drainages south of
Llagas Avenue would be diverted into culverts at their confluence with Reach 6 to
allow continuous maintenance access. Underpinning, or some other structural
modification to allow a lower flowline, would be performed at Masten Avenue and
Llagas Avenue. Twenty-six grade control structures, constructed primarily of
natural materials and in a manner that contributes to habitat where feasible,
would be installed at various locations along the channel. There are 11 locations
requiring some rock slope protection. There are three residential homes within
the Project construction footprint in Reach 6. The inlet pipe to the SCVWD most
upstream percolation pond would be reconstructed at a new location to
accommodate the channel deepening and widening. This will allow flow in Llagas
Creek to continue to be diverted into the pond at the same discharges as under
existing operations. A new stream gage would be installed near the new
diversion.
The greatest concentration of instream habitat features would be constructed in
Reach 6, primarily to improve rearing and passage for steelhead since a portion
of this stream reach is perennial. Instream complexity features include
approximately 11 clusters of multiple log-root wad structures, 37 stream
boulders, 28 wing deflectors, and 61 groupings of large woody debris.
Additionally divide logs would be installed in the perennial section of Reach 6.
The improved slopes of the channel would be revegetated, consistent with
requirements for maintaining hydraulic capacity. Revegetation is discussed as
part of a mitigation plan in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
Reach 7A
The design flow for Reach 7A is to provide capacity for 2,090 cfs. The alignment,
shape, and dimensions of the channel are described previous in Section 2.5.1.
Upstream of Watsonville Road, the existing diversion channel would need to be
widened and deepened. There are three existing fixed points that control channel
alignment: the confluence with West Little Llagas Creek; the existing, but
buried/inoperable bridge crossing at Watsonville Road; and the existing, but
buried bridge crossing at West Middle Avenue. Both bridges are buried to the
bottom of their respective superstructures. The new channel would be aligned
through both bridges, which would be exhumed during construction. The bridges
were constructed by the SCVWD and are sized to carry the 1-percent flood.
In Reach 7A there are no structures within the project footprint requiring
relocation.
Similar to other reaches, an 18-foot-wide maintenance/access road would be
constructed on both sides of the channel where feasible. Access points would be
provided at Middle Avenue, Watsonville Road, La Via Azul Court, and La Crosse
Drive. Existing roads would provide shared access for maintenance where
possible. Currently, a bike path straddles the top of the channel bank in the most
upstream portion of Reach 7A. This bike path would be removed by the Project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-92

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
A maintenance road will be constructed on the improved bank which would be
available for a future trail and/or bike path subject to an agreement between the
SCVWD and the City of Morgan Hill. Such a future improvement would require
separate environmental review before approval. Additionally, the existing
pedestrian bridge over West Little Llagas Creek just upstream from Watsonville
Road would be removed.
Some limited instream complexity features would be included at the lower end of
Reach 7A including approximately three log-root wad structures, two large woody
debris elements, and one triangular boulder cluster. Revegetation is considered
and discussed as part of a mitigation plan in Chapter 5 of this EIS. Several pools
would also be constructed at the lower end of Reach 7A to improve aquatic
habitat.
Seven grade control structures, constructed primarily of natural materials and in
a manner that contributes to habitat where feasible, would be installed at various
locations along the channel. Armored rock bank slope protection would be
needed at one location for erosion control and bank stability. A grade control
structure would be constructed below Lake Silveira on Llagas Creek where the
Reach 7A channel connects to Llagas Creek. This structure would be comprised
of boulder materials, and would be configured as a step-pool sequence. The
purpose of this structure is to smoothly transition the channel invert and energy
grade on Llagas Creek to the new (lower) channel elevation at the confluence
with the Reach 7A channel.
Reach 7B
Reach 7B modifications would provide conveyance for 1,130 cfs at upstream end
of Reach 7B and 1,580 cfs at downstream end. Channel design improvements to
Reach 7B are similar to Reaches 4, 5, and 6 as described in Section 2.5.1, and
would include widening and deepening the existing channel and replacing
existing or installing new box culverts. Benches would occur on both sides of the
channel along most of the reach. Channel widening would occur on both banks,
depending on ROW limitations, with bank slopes between 2H:1V to 3H:1V. Top
width would be about 90 to 100 feet, channel bottom would be about 12 feet
wide, and channel depth would be approximately 10 to 12 feet.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-93

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-94

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.6-1 NRCS Alternative Reach 8

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-95

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-96

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
The general existing channel alignment would be maintained, except near
Cosmo Avenue. The channel section near Cosmo Avenue would be realigned
approximately 100 feet to the west to stay within SCVWD ROW and to utilize
larger culverts that appear to have been included in a previous Cosmo Avenue
retrofit or expansion.
A 1,100-foot section of the existing channel, approximately 200 feet downstream
and 900 feet upstream of Cosmo Avenue, would be abandoned and a new
channel would be constructed.
The creek channel crosses seven roads in culverts between West Dunne Avenue
and La Crosse Drive: Ciolino Avenue, Spring Avenue, Cosmo Avenue, Edes
Court, West Edmundson Avenue, North La Crosse Drive and South La Crosse
Drive. Some of the existing culverts are undersized and are not capable of
conveying the 1 percent flood, thereby resulting in the need for modifications as
follows:


The existing triple culverts at Cosmo Avenue and Edes Court would be
expanded by adding a fourth RCB (10 feet by 7 feet) to the existing
configuration;



The existing culvert at Spring Avenue would be replaced with a new triple
RCB culvert (three boxes, each 10 feet by 9 feet in size); and



The existing culvert from Ciolino Avenue to West Dunne Avenue would
be replaced with a 674-foot long box culvert that is 8 feet wide and 8 feet
deep.

Associated with the West Little Llagas Creek channel deepening, a grade control
structure would be constructed at the downstream end of Edmundson Creek at
the confluence to transition the Edmundson Creek channel to the new, lower
elevation of the West Little Llagas Creek channel. Three other grade control
structures would be installed in the reach. There is one residential structure in
Reach 7B located within the project footprint (Table 2.5-1).
There is a paved pedestrian pathway between Edes Court and La Crosse Drive
on the south side of the channel where the planned maintenance road and
pathway would overlap at a couple of locations. Where this occurs the path
would be removed and the SCVWD maintenance road would be constructed in
its place. As discussed above for the trail section in Reach 7A, maintenance road
would be available for improvement as a future pedestrian pathway subject to an
agreement between the SCVWD and the City of Morgan Hill. Such a future
improvement would require separate environmental review before approval.
There would be no instream complexity features installed in Reach 7B. Shallow
pools would be constructed to help generate appropriate instream habitat.
The improved slopes of the channel would be revegetated, consistent with
requirements for maintaining hydraulic capacity. Revegetation is discussed as
part of a mitigation plan discussed in Chapter 5 of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-97

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Reach 8
Channel improvements through the urbanized City of Morgan Hill in Reach 8
begin at Llagas Road and extend downstream to West Dunne Avenue. The
improvements would provide flood conveyance capacity for the 1-percent storm
flow of 640 cfs at Wright Avenue and 1,130 cfs at West Dunne Avenue. The
design for Reach 8 would include the following improvements (Figure 2.6-1):


Remove the flow constricting plate at the Llagas Road culvert at the
upstream boundary of the Project to reduce upstream flooding. The
channel will be deepened and widened along a 2,500-foot section of
channel downstream from Llagas Road to Hillwood Lane.



Widen and deepen approximately 600 feet of channel between Wright
Avenue and Hillwood Lane with an 8-foot deep trapezoidal channel, with
a 20-foot bottom width and 70-foot top width. This channel would be
designed to pass the 1-percent flow.



Widen and deepen approximately 3,000 feet of channel between West
Dunne Avenue and Main Avenue to form a trapezoidal vegetated
channel, a channel with two vertical walls, or a hybrid section (Figures
2.5-3, 2.5-4, and 2.5-5, respectively), as appropriate depending upon the
ROW available.



Replace approximately 2,200 feet of the existing creek between Main
Avenue and Wright Avenue with two 10-foot wide by 7- to 8-foot deep
reinforced concrete box culverts following the existing stream alignment,
but under Hale Avenue. Replace culverts at West Main Avenue and
Wright Avenue (Table 2.6-1). There would be no changes to the culverts
at Llagas Creek Drive or at Hillwood Lane.



Replace five additional existing undersized culverts with new culverts, 10
feet wide by 9 feet deep, at the following locations: 5th Street, 4th
Street/Monterey Highway, 3rd Street, 2nd Street/Del Monte Avenue, and
Warren Avenue.

Maintenance roads would be constructed downstream from Llagas Road to
Hillwood Road. There would be no maintenance roads in the downtown area of
Morgan Hill. Equipment and materials would be inserted and removed from the
channel at road crossings as necessary. Maintenance would be performed from
the channel bottom to reduce the overall footprint.
Grade control is provided by the frequent culvert crossings. One grade control
structure would be located just upstream from Llagas Road. The improved slopes
of the channel would be revegetated, consistent with requirements for
maintaining hydraulic capacity. There are no instream aquatic habitat
improvements. There are six residential structures within the Reach 8 Project
footprint (Table 2.5-1).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-98

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.6-1
Reach 8 Location
5th Street
4th Street/
Monerety Hwy
3rd Street
2nd Street/Del Monte
Avenue
Warren Avenue
Main to Wright along
Hale Ave (Future Santa
Teresa Expwy)
Main Street
Wright/Hale Avenue

Proposed and Existing Culverts for Reach 8

Roadway
Width (ft)
60
270

Proposed Design
Culvert Size
# – w(ft) x h(ft)
2 – 10 x 9
2 – 10 x 9

Type of
Crossing
RCB
RCB

Roadway
Width (ft)
60
270

Existing
Culvert Size
w(ft) x h(ft)
5x5
9x6

Type of
Crossing
RCB
RCB

14
250

2 – 10 x 9
2 – 10 x 9

RCB
RCB

14
250

14 x 7
10 x 5

RCB
RCB

40
2200

2 – 10 x 9
2 – 10 x 7-8

RCB
RCB

40
N/A

10 x 5
--

RCB
--

N/A
N/A

---

---

70
110

9x5
60”

RCB
RCP

RCB = reinforced concrete box culverts
RCP = reinforced concrete pipe
N/A = not applicable

Reach 14
Channel improvements in Reach 14 provide conveyance capacity for the 10percent flood (1,560 cfs at Corralitos Creek confluence to 3,450 cfs at the Llagas
Creek confluence). The proposed design consists of channel widening using a
trapezoidal cross-section with a sinuous low-flow channel, a bankfull channel,
with narrow-width benches and engineered banks at 3H:1V slope (Figure 2.5-2).
Channel widening for hydraulic improvement would predominantly occur on both
banks, but where possible would be limited to one bank to preserve existing
stands of riparian habitat. Benches would be mostly narrow width, about 5 feet
on one or both sides of the channel. In some areas (e.g., at crossings and
confluences), the benches are eliminated to allow for additional capacity and/or
to allow natural deposition patterns to form. Channel bottom width is 30 to 40
feet. Excavation depths to the new channel bed would be about 2 feet or less in
the upstream half of the reach, up to about 4 feet deep in the downstream half of
the reach.
Two tributary streams, Church Creek and San Martin Creek, and an unnamed
drainage would be culverted at their confluence with Reach 14 to allow
continuous maintenance access. Similar to other reaches, an 18-foot-wide
maintenance road would be constructed on both sides of the channel. The
maintenance road on the east side of Reach 14 already exists but would be
replaced. The existing maintenance road on the west side of Reach 14 would
need to be relocated due to channel expansion. Access to the top of bank
maintenance roads would be provided at Sycamore Avenue, East San Martin
Avenue, and Church Avenue.
Twenty-one grade control structures, constructed primarily of natural materials
would be installed along the channel. There are four existing culverts within
Reach 14, Church Avenue, San Martin Avenue, Sycamore Avenue, and Middle
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-99

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Avenue. The existing culverts are capable of conveying the 10-percent flood, so
no modifications to these culverts are needed.
There are no instream aquatic habitat improvements planned for Reach 14. The
improved slopes of the channel would be revegetated as appropriate for soil
conditions, and consistent with requirements for maintaining hydraulic capacity.
Revegetation is discussed as part of a mitigation plan in Chapter 5 of this EIS.

2.6.2

NRCS Alternative Construction
Table 2.5-2 shows the construction schedule by reach for the NRCS Alternative.
Construction is estimated to last for a total duration of 5.5 years. The construction
activities are described under Section 2.5.3.2.
Preliminary estimates of earthwork quantities for the NRCS Alternative are
shown in Table 2.5-3. About 1,355,500 bank cubic yards18 (bcy) of spoil would
require disposal, which would require approximately 223,800 round truck trips19
primarily to Anderson Dam (111,900 trips to the Dam and 111,900 trips returning
from the Dam) over 5.5 year construction period (with 12 CY truck capacity).
Some of the excavated material will also go to filling Lake Silveira to create
wetland habitat, and some material may be reused on-site where fill or soil
materials are needed. The number of truck trips will be roughly equal between
Phase 1 and Phase 2 of construction. Construction materials and disposal are
described in Section 2.5.3.3. Table 2.5-4 shows the types of equipment and
construction crew size needed. Staging areas for construction work are
described in Section 2.5.3.5 and shown on Figure 2.5-6. Construction BMPs are
discussed in Section 2.5.3.6.

2.6.3

Easements and Land Requirements
The NRCS Alternative encompasses 263 acres of easements needed in order to
construct the Project. The Project ROW would require the SCVWD to acquire
private residential properties, agricultural lands, and some lands used for
commercial/industrial businesses. Details on the types of land-uses and
associated acreages within the project footprint are addressed in Section 3.8,
Land Use and Planning.
There are a total of 9 residential homes, 11 greenhouses, 21 outbuildings (e.g.,
sheds, storage buildings), and 5 miscellaneous/unknown structures with the
construction footprint (see Table 2.5-1) all of which may need to be relocated.
One of the residential properties is owned by the SCVWD. One property at the
upstream end of Reach 6 is a food processing company where Llagas Creek
would be widened, requiring infrastructure to be relocated including a pipe bridge
and some facility parking spaces to accommodate the additional cross-sectional
area. There are no structures within the construction footprint of Reach 7A.

18

One Bank Cubic Yard (BCY) equals 27 cubic feet (3'x3'x3') of earth in situ. When excavated and loaded loosely
into a truck, the original one BCY of material is less compacted, expanding to approximately 1.2 Cubic Yards (CY).
19
See section 3.10 Traffic and Circulation for definition of a “truck trip”.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-100

Chapter 2

2.6.4

Description of Alternatives

Utilities
Utilities include underground and overhead utility lines that provide water, gas,
electricity, sewer, storm drains, cable, phone, fiber optics, and other utility
services throughout the Project area. There are also miscellaneous features,
such as fences, that would need to be removed and potentially relocated. Utilities
located within the Project easement footprint would be either protected in place,
rebuilt in place, abandoned, or demolished and relocated prior to construction.
Sewer lines and storm drains may be relocated at the beginning of construction.
Utilities are located in all reaches of the NRCS Alternative; however, most of the
utilities that would need to be relocated are in the urbanized Reaches 7B and 8.
All utilities that are within the Project easements will be identified and their
disposition will be determined during preparation of the final engineering design
plans.

2.6.5

Operations and Maintenance
SCVWD would be responsible for maintaining all Project features, such as the
channel, culverts, roads, fences, and grade control structures consistent with
SCVWD and USACE guidelines. Adequate vegetation and sediment
maintenance are key factors to maintaining the flow capacity of the channel and
culverts. Additionally, maintenance is required for the access roads, for the
structural integrity and functioning of the culverts and grade control structures,
and for installed aquatic habitat enhancements. The maintenance methods and
activities are described in Section 2.5.5. Tables 2.5-6, 2.5-7, 2.5-8, and 2.5-9.
Each table provides a reach-by-reach description of the expected frequency,
method, and target hydraulic roughness characteristics for different portions of
the channel under maintained conditions.

2.7

TUNNEL ALTERNATIVE (APPLICANT’S PROPOSED ACTION)
The SCVWD considered and developed the Tunnel Alternative because there was an
opportunity to reduce the Project footprint associated with the NRCS Alternative in
Reach 8. The Tunnel Alternative would require a smaller ROW, reduce the amount of
vegetation to be removed and excavation needed along the existing West Little Llagas
channel, reduce the extent of utilities to be relocated, and reduce the culvert
replacements required, which would result in less construction related interference with
commercial and residential areas. The Tunnel Alternative is designated the Applicant’s
Proposed Action in this EIS in accordance with NEPA designation (Preferred Alternative
is the CEQA designation).
2.7.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicants Proposed Action) Features
The Tunnel Alternative would provide the same 1-percent flood management as
the NRCS Alternative in Reach 8 protecting downtown Morgan Hill. All other
Project reaches would have the same level of protection, and the same Project
features would be constructed as described for the NRCS Alternative. The key
feature of the Tunnel Alternative is to use an underground concrete tunnel
instead of channel widening and deepening proposed through downtown Morgan

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-101

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Hill under the NRCS design. The main components of the Tunnel Alternative
(Figure 2.7-1) would include:


A 250-foot-long sediment trap and an inlet weir (diversion) structure
would be constructed in the 600 feet of channel between Wright Avenue
and Hillwood Lane. A new 18-foot-wide maintenance/access road would
be installed along the sediment detention basin at the top of the south
bank of the channel between Hillwood Lane and Wright Avenue.



A 36-inch-diameter reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) culvert would be
constructed paralleling Hale Avenue, stretching from the weir structure
2,400 feet downstream and discharging into the existing West Little
Llagas Creek channel south of West Main Avenue. The 2,400-foot-long
earthen channel section of West Little Llagas Creek between Wright Ave
and West Main Ave would be replaced with the RCP culvert. The RCP
culvert would maintain low flows up to 50 cfs in the existing creek through
the downtown area without exceeding the channel capacity.



Two high flow bypass culverts would be constructed. One would be 10
feet by 8 feet in size, while the other would be 10 feet by 9 feet in size.
Both culverts would extend from the weir structure parallel to Hale
Avenue and stretch 2,750 feet to Warren Avenue where they would
convey high flows to the tunnel.



A 2,100-foot-long tunnel would be constructed, extending under Nob Hill
between Warren Avenue and Del Monte Avenue, continuing under Nob
Hill Terrace. This modification also includes using open cut box culverts
for transition to and from the tunnel, and construction of a tunnel portal at
the upstream end.

There would be no change to the existing culverts at 5th Street, 4th
Street/Monterey Highway, 3rd Street, 2nd Street / Del Monte Avenue, and
Warren Avenue, nor would the channel be widened and deepened in this section
of Reach 8 as proposed under the NRCS Alternative. The flow constricting plate
at the Llagas Road culvert at the upstream boundary of the Project would be
removed to reduce upstream flooding. The channel would be deepened and
widened downstream from the bridge to the inlet of the sediment detention basin
near Hillwood Lane.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-102

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.7-1 Tunnel Alternative Reach 8

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-103

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-104

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Also as part of this alternative, Reach 7B would be modified as follows:


Double box culverts would be constructed; one 10 feet by 8 feet in size,
and the other 10 feet by 9 feet in size, from the tunnel outlet at West
Dunne Avenue to downstream of Ciolino Avenue. The Tunnel Alternative
differs from the proposed NRCS design, which would replace the existing
culvert along the current alignment of West Little Llagas Creek.

Aquatic habitat enhancement features identified in Section 2.6.1 under the NRCS
Alternative would be the same for the Tunnel Alternative. Examples of the habitat
enhancement features are provided in Appendix J.
2.7.2

Tunnel Alternative Construction
The construction approach for the Tunnel Alternative would be the same
throughout the entire Project reaches as previously described in Section 2.5.3
and as described for the NRCS Alternative. The key difference would be that a
tunnel and a sediment detention basin would be constructed, and much of the
channel widening, deepening, and culvert replacement construction in Reach 8
through downtown Morgan Hill (Section 2.6.1) would be avoided.

2.7.2.1 Construction Schedule
Construction duration for the Tunnel Alternative would be 5.5 years, with
the construction lasting for about 36 months in Reach 8, which is the
same duration to construct Reach 8 and total Project duration under the
NRCS Alternative (Tables 2.5-2 and 2.5-4).

2.7.2.2 Construction Activities, Equipment, and Crews
Construction activities would be the same as those described under
Section 2.5.3.2 and for the NRCS Alternative, except that in Reach 8
several thousand feet of RCP and RCB culverts would be buried adjacent
to Hale Avenue, the tunnel would be constructed under the Nob Hill
Terrace neighborhood, and a sediment detention basin would be
constructed near Hale Avenue and Wright Avenue.
The tunnel would be excavated toward the south from the Hale Avenue
Portal work area toward Del Monte Avenue near Dunne Avenue. The
Project would use conventional mining equipment and methods to
excavate the tunnel, namely roadheaders, excavators, and controlled
detonations. A roadheader is a boom-mounted cutting head, mounted on
a crawler that cuts through the rock face (Figures 2.7-2 and 2.7-3). As the
roadheader tunnels forward, the excavated material would be transported
from the tunnel face back to the tunnel entrance or shaft using electricpowered muck trains on a temporary railway in the tunnel and/or dieselpowered load-haul-dumps (LHD), also called muck trucks (Figure 2.7-4).
The LHD scoops up muck from the tunnel bottom and transports it to the
tunnel portal where it is loaded onto dump trucks for disposal. In very soft
zones, a bucket excavator may be used.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-105

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.7-2 Typical Roadheader Used for Tunnel Excavation in Soft to Medium
Strength Rock

Figure 2.7-3 Roadheader Excavation with Steel Sets at the Face of a Tunnel

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-106

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.7-4 Load, Haul, Dump (LHD) Unit
In sections of harder rock, controlled detonations would be used to
fracture the rock in advance of the roadheader or bucket excavator.
Controlled detonation is performed by drilling small holes in a specified
pattern in the rock face (Figure 2.7-5), packing them with small amounts
of explosive and primer (Figure 2.7-6 a, b, and c), and detonating the
explosives using a specified time delay between successive detonations.
The detonations would sound like a short succession of thunder generally
lasting a few seconds. Controlled detonation methods would adhere to
stringent state and federal safety requirements and would also be
conducted in accordance with local noise ordinances. Typically, less than
20 pounds of explosives per delay would be used. If explosives are stored
at any of the work areas, they would be kept in specially designed and
secured containers or magazines in accordance with state regulations
(California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Division 1, Chapter 4).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-107

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.7-5 Drill Jumbo for Drilling Holes

Figure 2.7-6 a, b, and c—Photographs of Controlled Detonation Preparation
Tunneling is anticipated to advance at a rate of approximately 15 to 25
feet per day; however, the advancement rate would vary depending on
geological conditions encountered and other factors. In addition, the
Project would implement a two-stage lining system. The first stage or
initial tunnel support may be provided by steel sets and lagging, rock bolts
or dowels, wire mesh, shotcrete, lattice girders, or some combination of
these methods (Figure 2.7-7). The purpose of the initial support is to
provide a stable and safe work environment and help control groundwater
inflow.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-108

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.7-7 Tunnel with Steel Rib and Wood Lagging Initial Support
The second stage involves installing a final liner of concrete throughout
the tunnel intended to provide long-term structural support, to provide a
relative smooth surface to enhance flow capacity, and to reduce
maintenance and enhance safety. For the project tunnel, the final lining
would likely consist of eight to twelve inches of shotcrete.
Portions of the tunnel would have a small amount of cover between the
top of the tunnel and the street. At these locations, it would be necessary
to inject grout into the loose soil to bind the soil together, which would
allow the tunnel to be excavated without causing surface settlement. The
three areas to be pre- grouted are Hale Avenue southeast of Warren
Avenue (250 feet), the intersection of Nob Hill Terrace and Del Monte
Avenue (180 feet on Nob Hill Terrace and 70 feet on Warren Avenue),
and Del Monte Avenue (approximately 150 feet north of Dunne Avenue
for a length of 70 feet). The equipment used for pre- grouting is a drill rig
truck and a grouting truck.
Before the tunnel can be constructed, a tunnel portal would need to be
constructed. In general, a tunnel portal is a vertical shaft from which the
tunnel is constructed. The size of the portal would be approximately 40
feet long by 30 feet wide. It would be approximately 30 feet deep. It would
be located in a vacant parcel just north of the intersection of Warren
Avenue and Hale Avenue. The portal excavation would be supported by
steel sheet piles. It would take approximately three weeks to construct the
portal. The steel sheet piles would be installed using vibratory pile drivers
and/or impact pile drivers. Soil within the portal would be removed using a
large excavator. The material would probably be temporarily stockpiled on
site then loaded into dump trucks using a wheeled loader for disposal.
Power (electricity) is needed in the tunnel and around the portal site.
Power may be brought to the site from existing power lines. Power may
also be generated on-site using a temporary diesel generator.
Due to the intensity, duration, and proximity of construction activities to
the nearby residences, two temporary sound barriers (e.g., walls, soundabsorbing blankets) would be installed along some of the work area
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-109

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
boundaries. These sound barriers would be designed to provide a
minimum 10 A-weighted decibel (dBA) reduction in noise. The final
design of the sound barrier would be determined by the contractor to
achieve the Project’s noise performance standards. For the purposes of
this Project description, the barrier is assumed approximately 20 feet
high.

2.7.2.3 Construction Materials and Disposal
The construction fill and disposal material volumes for the Tunnel
Alternative are provided in Table 2.5-3. The material excavated from the
tunnel would vary from highly weathered rock at either end to
unweathered rock in the middle of the hill. When it is removed, the rock
would be in small pieces ranging from gravel-sized pieces to
approximately four inches in diameter. Some of the rock may be taken to
a SCVWD maintenance yard and temporarily stored and then used later
as construction material in maintenance projects. The remaining material
would be disposed of in the same manner as the material from the nontunnel segments, which is expected to be end-hauled predominantly to
Anderson Dam for stockpiling and later use, with some material also
going to the Lake Silveira element.

2.7.2.4 Staging Areas and Access Routes
The staging areas and access routes would be the same as described
under Section 2.5.3.5 and shown in Figure 2.5-6.

2.7.2.5 Construction BMPs
The construction BMPs will be the same as that described in Section
2.5.3.6. Additional BMPs are prescribed specific to the construction of the
tunnel (Tunnel Alternative and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative) primarily to
address potential noise effects. Those BMPs include specific limits on
construction hours for spoils hauling, delivery trucks, and use of air supply
fans, in addition to other types of BMPs to address potential noise issues.
The type of construction with the greatest noise contributions proposed
for the Tunnel Alternative is the tunnel, which would be constructed using
conventional mining equipment and methods to excavate, specifically
roadheaders, excavators, and controlled detonations. Controlled
detonations would be used in sections of harder rock, to fracture the rock
for the roadheader or excavator. Controlled detonation would be
performed by drilling small holes in a specified pattern in the rock face,
packing them with small amounts of explosive and primer and detonating
the explosives using a specified time delay between successive
detonations. The detonations would sound like a short succession of
thunder generally lasting a few seconds. Controlled detonation methods
would adhere to stringent state and federal safety requirements and
would also be conducted in accordance with local noise ordinances.
Typically, less than 20 pounds of explosives per delay would be used. A
Blasting Plan would be prepared for the Project to provide guidelines for
the safe use and storage of blasting materials that may be used during
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-110

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
construction and would also provide measures to reduce noise, including
the following:


Drill multiple, small charge holes rather than fewer larger holes;



Retain soil 3 to 4 feet above blasting material before detonation;



Use blast mats and timing delays;



Blast small horizontal and vertical areas rather than large areas;



Stem blast holes with dense sand;



Direct charges away from the direction of sensitive receptors; and



Place physical barriers between the detonation site and the
nearest receptors.

BMPs have been prescribed specific to the tunnel construction in order to
reduce noise associated with the tunneling activity. Some BMPs designed
to reduce noise also reduce vibrations. The BMPs specific to tunnel
construction are listed below:


Fan Noise: Tunneling will not be allowed at night. The air supply
fans will be shut off between 7:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



Generator Noise: Power will be supplied to the site using PG&E
facilities. Power will not be generated using portable power
generators.



Tunnel Access: The tunnel will have a gate and this gate will be
closed and locked when the air fans are not supplying air to the
tunnel.



Controlled Detonations: Controlled detonations would be limited
to daytime hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays unless it
can be demonstrated by the qualified vibration consultant that
nighttime controlled detonations would not exceed the applicable
threshold of 0.130 in/sec PPV for transient sources.
Controlled detonation methods would adhere to stringent state
and federal requirements.



Storage of Explosives: Explosives would not be stored at the
tunnel portal work area.



Neighborhood Notice: The SCVWD will provide reasonable
advance notification to the businesses, owners, and residents of
adjacent areas potentially affected by the tunneling about the
nature, extent, and duration of the tunnel construction activities.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-111

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Interim updates should be provided to such neighbors to inform
them of the status of the construction.


Noise and Vibration Control Plan: The contractor shall submit a
Noise and Vibration Control Plan prepared by a qualified noise
consultant. A qualified noise and vibration consultant is defined as
a Board Certified Institute of Noise Control Engineering member
or other qualified consultant or engineer approved by SCVWD.



Noise Monitoring Plan: The contractor shall submit a Noise
Monitoring Plan, which shall at a minimum, include the following:
o

Schedule for tests to confirm the construction noise levels
and effectiveness of noise control measures prior to
commencement of substantial noise-generating activities,
such as grading, earthmoving, demolition.

o

The number and location of monitoring locations and
relation to stationary noise controls.

o

Schedule for ongoing monitoring and reporting of
construction noise levels to meet performance standards.
Monitoring shall occur at least weekly, or more often if
needed in response to complaints.

o

Neighborhood notification procedure for controlled
detonation activities.



Best Available Noise Control Techniques: Best available noise
control techniques (including mufflers, intake silencers, ducts,
engine enclosures, and acoustically attenuating shields or
shrouds) shall be used for all equipment and trucks in order to
minimize construction noise impacts, as necessary, to maintain
noise levels below the applicable thresholds.



Impact Equipment: If impact equipment (e.g., jack hammers,
pavement breakers, and rock drills) is used during project
construction, hydraulically or electric-powered equipment shall be
used wherever possible to avoid the noise associated with
compressed-air exhaust from pneumatically powered tools.
However, where use of pneumatically powered tools is
unavoidable, an exhaust muffler on the compressed-air exhaust
shall be used. The contractor shall use external jackets on the
tools themselves and quieter procedures, such as drilling rather
than using impact equipment as needed to comply with the
established Noise Performance Standards.



Stationary Noise Sources: Stationary noise sources shall be
located as far from sensitive receptors as possible. If they must be
located near receptors, adequate muffling and/or enclosures shall
be used, as needed, to comply with the established Noise

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-112

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Performance Standards. Enclosure opening or venting shall face
away from sensitive receptors. If any stationary equipment (e.g.,
ventilation fans, generators, dewatering pumps) is operated
beyond the time limits specified by the pertinent noise ordinance,
this equipment shall conform to the affected jurisdictions pertinent
day and night noise limits.


Material Stockpiles and Maintenance/Equipment Staging and
Parking Areas: Material stockpiles, as well as
maintenance/equipment staging and parking areas, shall be
located as far as practicable from residential and school receptors.
If such areas cannot be feasibly located 200 feet or more from
residential receptors, then a temporary sound barrier shall be
constructed to block the line of sight between construction
equipment and nearby homes.



Sound Barriers: Sound barrier material shall have a minimum
surface density of 1 pound per square foot and a minimum sound
transmission class rating of 25. Any noise-generating activities
associated with initial site preparation and/or building the sound
barriers that exceed applicable thresholds shall be restricted to
daytime hours and the duration of the activities that exceed
applicable thresholds shall not exceed 2 weeks at any one
location.



Equipment Maintenance and Repair Work: All construction
equipment maintenance and repair work shall be performed
during the daytime hours, when feasible. If nighttime repair is
necessary to maintain operations during the nighttime hours,
hammering, and other high level noise activities shall be
performed in such a way that a sound barrier shields the repair
activity from the line of sight to the nearby residence.



Backup Alarms: Subject to site safety priorities and consistent
with state and federal worker safety laws, the contractor may use
administrative controls instead of audible backup alarms to meet
the Lmax Noise Performance Standards. Such administrative
control shall provide backup warning on all vehicles that operate in
areas where their backward movement would constitute a hazard
to employees working in the area on foot, and where the
operator’s vision is obstructed to the rear of the vehicle (earth
moving equipment) (Title 8 CCR, §1592). Administrative controls
may include procedures that require a spotter or flagger in clear
view of the operator to direct the backing operation, that require
the operator to dismount and circle the vehicle immediately prior
to starting a back-up operation, and the design of traffic patterns
to minimize the need for backward movement. California
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Cal/OSHA) will be
consulted to determine whether additional noise reductions may
be achieved through Cal/OSHA-approved alternatives to backup
alarms without compromising site safety. If Cal/OSHA indicates

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-113

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
that such alternatives are a viable option and SCVWD, in
consultation with the contractor, determines that site safety would
not be compromised, then the contractor shall apply for a variance
from Cal/OSHA and use such alternatives consistent with
Cal/OSHA requirements. Such alternatives could include, but not
limited to:
o

“Smart” alarms with an audible range of 77 to 97 dBA,
which limit the warning signal to 5 dBA over ambient noise
levels.

o

Radar presence-sensing alarms, which identify objects in
the reversing path of a truck; or the “bbs-tek” broadband
backup alarm system, which uses a broadband sound
instead of a more noticeable single-frequency sound.

o

Strobe lights instead of audible alarms (which are
particularly effective at night).

If any of the alternatives described above can be implemented,
the use of backup alarms would be avoided (e.g., by routing trucks
and equipment to eliminate the need to back up, or by eliminating
truck and heavy equipment use at night).


Trucks: The contract specifications shall contain the following
requirements to mitigate noise from trucks:
o

Offsite truck operations (haul trucks and concrete delivery
trucks) shall not occur during nighttime hours and be
restricted during evening and daytime hours, as needed, to
comply with the established Noise Performance Standards.

o

Haul and delivery truck routes shall avoid local residential
streets and shall follow local designated truck routes. Total
project-related haul and delivery truck volumes on any
particular haul truck route shall be limited to 80 trucks per
hour.

o

Spoils hauling shall occur only between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m., Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Saturday, at the tunnel portal work area.

o

Delivery trucks shall be prohibited from operating within
200 feet of any residential uses during the nighttime hours
(10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.). If there are receptors, but they
are beyond 200 feet from the truck route, limited truck
operations shall be allowed during the more sensitive
nighttime hours, but noise generated by these operations
cannot exceed the 50-dBA sleep interference criterion at
the closest receptors. If trucks must operate during these
hours and residential uses are located within 200 feet of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-114

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
the truck route, deliveries shall be made to staging areas
outside residential areas, then transferred to the
construction site during daytime hours (7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.).
o

A truck route plan for muck truck movements that
minimizes backward movement of trucks.

o

In the event that the Noise Performance Standards are
exceeded, the contractor shall immediately inform SCVWD
and provide information to SCVWD within 24 hours of the
exceedance, identifying the source of the exceedance
(e.g., unusually noisy method, broken muffler, emergency
repair) and identifying the corrective actions that are being
taken to reduce the noise.

o

In the event that complaints are received regarding noise,
the contractor shall immediately inform SCVWD and
evaluate whether the noise-generating activity that is the
subject of the complaint exceeds applicable thresholds. If
determined to exceed the applicable thresholds, the noisegenerating activity shall be immediately stopped and/or
corrective measures implemented so that the thresholds
are no longer exceeded. Subsequently, the contractor shall
provide information to SCVWD within 24 hours regarding
the noise levels measured and activities that correspond to
the complaints. The effectiveness of implemented noise
control measures shall be verified and/or corrective actions
shall be taken by the contractor to ensure that future
exceedances are minimized.



Preconstruction Crack Survey: Prior to construction, SCVWD
shall conduct a preconstruction crack survey at homes (where
permission is granted) within 225 feet (slant distance) of planned
controlled detonations to document existing cosmetic and
structural cracks. If complaints of new cracking are made to
SCVWD by nearby property owners, SCVWD shall evaluate the
claim(s) relative to the baseline crack survey and vibration
monitoring data collected during construction. If the claim is
verified, then SCVWD shall repair the project-related damage at
no cost to the property owner.



Blast Overpressure: Blast overpressure shall be limited to
0.0145 psi or 134 decibels (dB) at nearby residences. The
contract specifications shall require the contractor to notify
neighbors at the portals within 500 feet of near-surface detonation
activity of the construction activity schedule and to advise
residents to remove precious and fragile items from walls and
shelves. The contract specifications shall require the contractor to
notify neighbors within 500 feet slant distance of underground

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-115

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
detonation activity (away from the portals) of construction activity
schedules.

2.7.3

Easements and Land Requirements
The easement acreage of the Tunnel Alternative encompasses 262 acres. This
includes permanent easements for operations and maintenance and a temporary
construction easement, which is needed in order to construct the Project.
The number of structures located within the project footprint that may need to be
relocated in each reach are the same as that described for the NRCS Alternative
(Table 2.5-1), with the exception of 6 residential structures in Reach 8 that will
not be within the Tunnel Alternative ROW. As such, there are a total of 3
residential structures, 11 greenhouses, 21 outbuildings, and 5 miscellaneous
structures within the construction footprint under the Tunnel Alternative. Details
on the types of land-uses and associated acreages within the Project footprint
are addressed in the Land Use and Planning section in Chapter 3.

2.7.4

Utilities
Utilities include underground and overhead utility lines that provide water, gas,
electricity, sewer, storm drains, cable, phone, fiber optics, and other utility
services throughout the Project area. There are also miscellaneous features,
such as fences, that would need to be removed and potentially relocated. Utilities
located within the Project easement footprint would be either protected in place,
rebuilt in place, abandoned, or demolished and relocated prior to construction.
Sewer lines and storm drains may be relocated at the beginning of construction.
Utilities are located in all reaches of the Tunnel Alternative; however, most of the
utilities that would need to be relocated are in the urbanized Reaches 7B and 8.
Utilities would be protected in place during construction if they were not to be
abandoned or replaced. All utilities that are within the Project easements will be
identified and their disposition will be determined during preparation of the final
engineering design plans.

2.7.5

Operations and Maintenance
Operations and maintenance would be the same as described in Section 2.5.5,
and is the same as that expected for the NRCS Alternative in all Project reaches,
with a few differences in Reach 8. The Tunnel Alternative would include a
sediment detention basin near the upstream boundary of the Project in Reach 8.
The detention basin would function to capture sediments transported from the
West Little Llagas Creek drainage upstream of the Project, thereby reducing the
need to conduct sediment maintenance in downstream reaches, including the
culverts and tunnel sections in Reach 8. To maintain the detention basin function
it would periodically need to be excavated with the removed sediments endhauled off-site. The detention basin would have a maintenance road along its
south side. The section of West Little Llagas Creek, past the portal intake just
downstream from W. Main Avenue through downtown Morgan Hill, would not be
within the construction footprint; and there are no SCVWD maintenance
easements in this section of channel. Therefore, there would be no maintenance

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-116

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
activities by SCVWD in association with this channel segment under the Tunnel
Alternative.
There would be three types of access to the box culverts and tunnel in Reach 8.
First, there would be major access points where panels can be removed to lower
equipment into the culverts and tunnel such as bobcats to remove debris and
sediment. Second, smaller hatches would be constructed for personnel and small
equipment access. Third, manways would be included along the culvert length
for inspections.

2.8

CULVERT/CHANNEL ALTERNATIVE
The SCVWD developed the Culvert/Channel Alternative to reduce the Project footprint
associated with the NRCS Alternative in Reach 8. This alternative would require a
smaller ROW, reduce the amount of vegetation to be removed along the existing West
Little Llagas channel, and would allow easier maintenance access, relative to the NRCS
Alternative.
2.8.1

Culvert/Channel Alternative Features
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would provide management for a 1-percent flood
exceedance in Reach 8, protecting downtown Morgan Hill. All reaches would
have the same level of protection, and the same features would be constructed
as described for the NRCS Alternative, with a few differences in Reach 8. The
key feature of the Culvert/Channel Alternative is elimination of the need for
channel deepening and widening through residential properties, as proposed for
the NRCS Alternative between West Main Avenue and West 2nd Street in Reach
8. The main components of the Culvert/Channel Alternative that are different
from those previously described for the NRCS Alternative include the following
(all focused in Reach 8 (Figure 2.8-1).


Realign an 800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box culverts that,
in the NRCS design, would be parallel to Hale Avenue through the Britton
School athletic fields up to Del Monte Avenue;



Continue the double box culvert under Del Monte Avenue approximately
900 feet to West 2nd Street; and



From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue perform the same channel
widening and deepening, along with culvert replacements at 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
and 5th Streets as described for the NRCS Alternative for Reach 8. The
upstream most portion of the Culvert/Channel Alternative from Llagas
Road to Hillwood Lane, thence along Hale Avenue up to the Britton
School athletic field would remain the same as the NRCS Alternative. All
other reaches would have the same design as previously described for
the NRCS Alternative.

Aquatic habitat enhancement features identified in Section 2.6.1 under the NRCS
Alternative would be the same for the Culvert/Channel Alternative. Examples of
the habitat enhancement features to be installed are provided in Appendix J.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-117

Chapter 2

2.8.2

Description of Alternatives

Culvert/Channel Alternative Construction
The construction approach for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be the
same throughout all of the Project reaches as previously described for the NRCS
Alternative.

2.8.2.1 Construction Schedule
Construction duration for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be 5.5
years, with the construction lasting for about 36 months in Reach 8, same
as the NRCS Alternative (Tables 2.5-2 and 2.5-4).

2.8.2.2 Construction Activities, Equipment and Crews
Construction activities, equipment, and crew size would be the same as
that described for the NRCS Alternative (Table 2.5-4), except that in a
segment of Reach 8 construction would occur through athletic fields, and
along Del Monte Road to West 2nd Street, rather than through a section
of residential homes between West Main Avenue and West 2nd Street.

2.8.2.3 Construction Materials and Disposal
The construction fill and disposal material volumes for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative are nearly the same as for the NRCS
Alternative, as shown in Table 2.5-3.

2.8.2.4 Staging Areas and Access Routes
The staging areas and access routes would be the same as for all of the
other action alternatives (Figure 2.5-6).

2.8.2.5 Construction BMPs
The construction BMPs will be the same as that described for all
alternatives (Section 2.5.3.5).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-118

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.8-1 Culvert/Channel Alternative Reach 8

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-119

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-120

Chapter 2

2.8.3

Description of Alternatives

Easements and Land Requirements
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would require 261 acres of easement, which
includes permanent easements for operations and maintenance and temporary
construction easements needed in order to construct the Project.
There are a total of 7 residential homes, 11 greenhouses, 21 outbuildings, and 5
miscellaneous structures within the construction footprint that may need to be
relocated (see Table 2.5-1). Details on the types of land-uses and associated
acreages within the Project footprint are addressed in Land Use section in
Chapter 3.

2.8.4

Utilities
Utilities include underground and overhead utility lines that provide water, gas,
electricity, sewer, storm drains, cable, phone, fiber optics, and other utility
services throughout the Project area. There are also miscellaneous features,
such as fences, that would need to be removed and potentially relocated. Utilities
located within the Project easement footprint would be either protected in place,
rebuilt in place, abandoned, or demolished and relocated prior to construction.
Sewer lines and storm drains may be relocated at the beginning of construction.
Utilities are located in all reaches of the Culvert/Channel Alternative; however,
most of the utilities that would need to be relocated are in the urbanized Reaches
7B and 8. The Culvert/Channel Alternative would have the same amount of
utilities in the ROW as the NRCS Alternative in all Project reaches, except for
Reach 8 where the flood management features and Project alignments differ.
Utilities would be protected in place during construction if they were not to be
abandoned or replaced. All utilities that are within the Project easements will be
identified and their disposition will be determined during preparation of the final
engineering design plans.

2.8.5

Operations and Maintenance
Operations and maintenance required for this alternative would be the same as
those as described for the NRCS Alternative.

2.9

REACH 6 BYPASS ALTERNATIVE
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high flow bypass channel between
Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass would
be designed so that no flood capacity improvements would be needed along the
remaining section of Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas Creek downstream of the proposed
bypass. Flood conveyance improvements for the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and
7B and for the downstream Reach 4 would remain the same as described for the Tunnel
Alternative. Reach 14 would be designed similar to the Tunnel Alternative, except that
the channel dimensions will be larger to accommodate the additional high flow routed
from the upstream reaches (8, 7B, 7A) through the Reach 6 bypass, so as not to cause
induced flooding.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-121

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Under existing conditions, Reach 6 of Llagas Creek has capacity to carry up to
approximately the 10-year flow. Flows larger than the 10 percent exceedance flow
overtop the channel banks and flood the surrounding areas. The bypass would convey
the future extra flow (i.e., new capacity) from Reach 8, 7A, and 7B directly to Reach 14.
East Little Llagas Creek downstream of the bypass (Reach 14) would be designed to
carry the extra flow from the upstream channel capacity. The design flow for the Reach 6
high flow bypass segment would be 1,200 cfs. The existing flow capacity in Reach 6
downstream from the bypass channel (2,090 cfs which is approximately a 10-percent
exceedance flow), would continue to be maintained. The existing flow capacity in Reach
5 would also continue to be maintained. In Reach 14 the design flow would be 2,900 cfs
at the confluence with the high flow bypass, which would maintain a 10-percent flow
exceedance capacity in this reach.
2.9.1

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Features
The proposed high flow bypass would start near the top of Reach 6, about 0.5
mile downstream of Monterey Highway. The 0.5-mile section of Reach 6 between
Monterey Highway and the bypass would be widened and deepened as
proposed for all of the action alternatives; however, no construction would occur
downstream from the bypass channel, over a distance of approximately 2.7 miles
in Reach 6 and the entire 0.5 mile length of Reach 5. Consequently, there would
be no instream aquatic habitat enhancements in Reach 6 downstream from the
bypass channel or in Reach 5; however, aquatic habitat enhancements identified
under the NRCS Alternative for all other reaches would be the same.
Construction in Reach 4 would be the same as previously described for all the
action alternatives. The bypass channel would run east through open fields,
continue under Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101, and connect to Reach 14. Figure
2.9-1 shows the alignment of the bypass channel situated near the upstream
portion of Reach 6. The proposed high flow bypass would be approximately
1,660 feet long and would provide a 1-percent exceedance flood protection
through the bypass segment. There are five main flood management features
included in this alternative:


Hydraulic control structure at Reach 6;



Bypass channel from Reach 6 to Reach 14;



Three bridge replacements;



Reach 14 creek improvements; and



Culverts modifications in Reach 14 at Sycamore Avenue Bridge and East
San Martin Avenue Bridge.

2.9.1.1 Hydraulic Control Structure
The hydraulic control structure would include a trapezoidal-shaped weir
and five 6-foot by 6-foot individual working sluice gates at the entrance of
the high flow bypass channel. The invert elevations of the sluice gates
would be set at 290 feet NAVD88. The proposed weir would be 60 feet

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-122

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
wide, would have 3H:1V side slopes, and the bottom elevation would be
set at elevation of 293 feet (NAVD88).
For the 10-percent exceedance flood event, the five sluice gates would be
fully opened. The weir and five gates would be designed to divert 1,200
cfs from Reach 6 of Llagas Creek to Reach 14 of East Little Llagas
Creek. Automatic control devices would be installed to operate gates to
control the flow into the bypass channel and maintain existing flow
condition in Reach 6.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-123

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-124

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.9-1 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-125

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-126

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

2.9.1.2 Reach 6 Bypass Channel
The proposed high flow bypass is 1,660 feet long and connects Llagas
Creek to East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass channel has a 60-foot
bottom width, is roughly 6 feet deep, and has 3H:1V side slopes. The
longitudinal channel slope is 0.2 percent. Maintenance roads would be
constructed at the top of bank on both sides of the channel. Figure 2.9-2
provides a typical cross-section for the high flow bypass channel.

Figure 2.9-2 Bypass Channel Typical Cross-Section Reach 6

2.9.1.3 Bridges
Three bridges are proposed to be constructed at the following locations:
Murphy Avenue, U.S. 101 southbound, and U.S. 101 northbound. The
bridge dimensions are listed in Table 2.9-1 below.
Table 2.9-1

New Bridges Proposed for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Murphy Avenue
U.S. 101-northbound
U.S. 101-southbound

Bridge
Bridge
Bridge

42
52
52

104
140
140

6
10
10

In order to construct the bypass channel temporary traffic control routes
would need to be constructed to accommodate local traffic on Murphy
Avenue (Figure 2.9-3). In addition, two construction phases would be
needed to divert traffic through temporary traffic routes (Figures 2.9-4 and
2.9-5) on U.S. 101 northbound and southbound.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-127

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
Phase 1 would include the diversion of traffic in both directions. In this
phase construction of the north bound bridge and culvert would take
place. The approximate construction time to build the temporary road
detours in Phase 1 would be 60 days. After the traffic is diverted through
the new temporary roads, the construction of the new bridge and culvert
in the northbound direction would be approximately 90 days. In Phase 2,
the new north bound bridge would be used to route traffic flow while the
temporary road in the south bound direction would still be used. During
Phase 2 the south bound bridge and culvert would be constructed,
requiring approximately 90 days. The total number of days for the Phase
1 and Phase 2 work along U.S. 101 would be 250 days. Upon completion
of the Murphy Road and U.S. 101 bridges, the temporary traffic control
routes would be removed.

2.9.1.4 Reach 14 Improvements
The proposed high flow bypass connects directly to the existing Reach 14
(East Little Llagas Creek). To pass the extra flow from the bypass and
have 10 percent exceedance flow capacity, the following channel
widening work is proposed for Reach 14, starting 500 feet upstream of
the confluence with the bypass to 0.5 mile downstream of East San
Martin Avenue. The improvements for the rest of Reach 14 (0.5 mile
downstream of East San Martin Avenue to the confluence with Llagas
Creek Reach 4) are the same as for the NRCS Alternative. No additional
improvements beyond those proposed for the NRCS Alternative are
needed in this downstream section of Reach 14 because there will be
sufficient capacity to carry the 10-percent exceedance flow.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-128

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.9-3 Temporary Traffic Road at Murphy Avenue

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-129

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENATIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-130

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.9-4 Phase 1 – Hwy 101 North Bound Bridge and Culvert Construction and
Temporary Traffice Control

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-131

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENATIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-132

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Figure 2.9-5 Phase 2 – Hwy 101 South Bound Bridge and Culvert Construction and
Tempoaray Traffic Control

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-133

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENATIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-134

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
The proposed trapezoidal cross section has an 80-foot bottom width, 130
foot top-width, 3H:1V side slopes, and an approximately 7- to 10-foot
depth (Figure 2.9-6). The longitudinal channel slope is 0.4 percent. The
channel widening would not be limited to a single bank. To avoid extra
land acquisition, the creek realignment would be designed to stay within
the SCVWD’s ROW. The creek widening to Sycamore Avenue would be
proposed to begin on the north side of the creek and then shift toward the
south side.

Figure 2.9-6 Reach 14 Typical Cross Section for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

2.9.1.5 Culvert Modification
Preliminary hydraulic analyses have indicated that the existing culverts at
Sycamore Avenue and East San Martin Avenue are not adequate to
convey the 10-year flood event under this alternative. Additional culvert
cells are proposed in these two crossings to increase the capacity and
are listed in Table 2.9-2.
Table 2.9-2
Location
Sycamore
Avenue
East San Martin
Avenue

Proposed Culvert Improvements

RCB

Existing
Roadway
Width (feet)
60

Existing No.
of Culvert
Cells
3

Additional
No. of Cells
Are Added
3

Culvert Size
per Cell
(i.e., span x depth)
11.5’x7’

RCB

41.5

4

2

12’x7’

Type of
Crossing

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-135

Chapter 2

2.9.2

Description of Alternatives

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Construction
The construction approach for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be the
same for all of the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B as previously
described for the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action). Reach 14
construction would be similar to that in the other alternatives but with a greater
amount of channel widening. There would be no construction needed to widen or
deepen the channel below the bypass segment in Reach 6 or in Reach 5. Reach
4 flood conveyance improvements would be the same as described for the
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action). Three new bridges and
additional culverts would require construction (Section 2.8.1).

2.9.2.1 Construction Schedule
Construction duration for the Reach 6 bypass channel segment along
with the Reach 14 segment would be 24 months (Tables 2.5-2 and 2.5-4).
The entire Reach 6 Bypass Alternative (all reaches) would require 5.5
years to complete the Project construction.

2.9.2.2 Construction Activities, Equipment and Crews
Construction activities, equipment, and crew size is shown in Table 2.5-4,
and is nearly the same as described for the Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action), except that the new bypass channel
segment would require construction between Reach 6 to Reach 14. This
would require temporary roads and traffic detour routing on Murphy
Avenue and on both north and southbound lanes of U.S. 101.
Construction crews would need to build bridges to accommodate the new
bypass channel segment under these roadway sections. An estimated
construction time of 250 days would be needed to build the bridges at
these three crossings.

2.9.2.3 Construction Materials and Disposal
The construction fill and disposal material volumes are shown in Table
2.5-3. Total disposal volume is less than the other alternatives,
approximately 997,000 bcy.

2.9.2.4 Staging Areas and Access Routes
Construction access and staging areas would be the same as previously
described for all of the other alternatives except for the two staging areas
(F and G) in lower half of Reach 6 (Section 2.5.3.5, Figure 2.5-6.) but with
an additional two staging areas to cover construction of the bypass
channel in Reach 6 to the upstream portion of Reach 14. The two
additional staging and storage areas are described in Table 2.9-3.
Staging Area 3 at the corner of East San Martin Avenue and Sycamore
Avenue was previously listed and described as staging area E (see
Figure 2.5-6).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-136

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

Table 2.9-3
Staging
Area
(acres)
1

2

Summary of Additional Staging Areas for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
Location

Total Area

Construction Activity

East Side of Murphy Ave.
between Reach 6 and
Reach 14

0.34

East side of Sycamore
Ave in Reach 14

0.25

Bypass channel inlet at Reach 6, and channel
between Reaches 6 and 14. Also, to construct
culverts and bridges at Murphy Ave. and U.S.
101.
To construct the outlet of the bypass channel,
culverts and bridges at U.S. 101 and culverts
at Sycamore Ave.

Minor vegetation removal and grading could occur at staging areas to
provide room for equipment, materials, and construction personnel
parking. Work area access would be provided via the existing county
roads and maintenance roads. Construction material and equipment haul
routes could include Murphy Avenue, U.S. 101 northbound and
southbound, Sycamore Avenue, and East San Martin Avenue.

2.9.2.5 Construction BMPs
The construction BMPs will be the same as described for all alternatives
(Section 2.5.3.5)
2.9.3

Easements and Land Requirements
Easements for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative encompasses 183 acres, which
includes the new bypass channel construction in Reach 6 and permanent
easement in Reach 14 for the widening of the channel and maintenance road.
Homes adjacent to the location of proposed channel widening would require
relocation, and in some cases residential property and farmland are located
within the construction footprint and easement boundaries. There are a total of 3
residential homes, 2 greenhouses, 3 outbuildings, and 4 miscellaneous
structures within the construction footprint. (see Table 2.5-1).

2.9.4

Utilities
Utilities include underground and overhead utility lines that provide water, gas,
electricity, sewer, storm drains, cable, phone, fiber optics, and other utility
services throughout the Project area. There are also miscellaneous features,
such as fences, that would need to be removed and potentially relocated. Utilities
located within the Project easement footprint would be either protected in place,
rebuilt in place, abandoned, or demolished and relocated prior to construction.
Sewer lines and storm drains may be relocated at the beginning of construction.
Utilities are located in all reaches of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, however
most of the utilities that would need to be relocated are in the urbanized Reaches
7B and 8. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would have the same amount of
utilities in the ROW as the Tunnel Alternative in all reaches, except there would

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-137

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives
be no construction in Reach 6 below the bypass and in Reach 5, so no utilities
removal and relocation would be needed at those locations.

2.9.5

Operations and Maintenance
Operations and maintenance would be nearly the same as described for the
NRCS Alternative, with the exception of maintenance for the bypass channel and
hydraulic control structure in Reach 6. Reaches 5 and 6 downstream from the
hydraulic control structure would be maintained according to 2012–2022 SMP
wherever SCVWD has maintenance easement responsibilities since these
reaches are not part of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-138

Chapter 2

2.10

Description of Alternatives

SUMMARY OF PROJECT ALTERNATIVES
Table 2.10-1 Summary of Project Alternatives

Project
No Action Alternative
Feature
Flood Capacity
Provides 20- to 10-percent
flood exceedance event
capacity in Morgan Hill
and 10-percent
flood event capacity in
downstream reaches.

NRCS Alternative

Tunnel Alternative

Same flood capacity as the
Morgan Hill, Reaches 7A, 7B &
8: 1-percent flood exceedance
NRCS Alternative
event 10-percent flood
exceedance capacity in semirural areas around East Little
Llagas Creek (Reach 14).
No induced flooding in Reaches
4, 5, and 6 due to upstream
channel improvements.
Land Acquisition/Floodplain Easements and Structures in Project Footprint
No new land would be
263 acres of land for permanent 262 acres for permanent and
acquired.
and temporary easements.
temporary easements.
No structures would be
49 structures within Project
43 structures within Project
relocated or removed.
footprint.
footprint.

Construction
No construction would
occur.
No excavation or disposal
needed

Recreational Facilities
No new recreation
facilities.
No loss of existing trails.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative

Same flood
capacity as the
NRCS Alternative

Same flood capacity as
NRCS Alternative.
Includes a 1-percent
flood exceedance
capacity in the
proposed Reach 6
bypass channel
segment.

261 acres of land
for permanent and
temporary
easements.
47 structures in
Project footprint.

183 acres of land for
permanent and
temporary easements.
12 structures within
Project footprint.

Construction over the entire
Project area would last an
estimated 5.5-year period.
Construction related BMPs
would guide resource protection
activities.
Approximately 1.3 million bcy
excavated for disposal

Construction duration same as
NRCS Alternative.
Same BMPs as NRCS, with
additional BMPs specific to
tunnel construction.
Approximately same disposal
volume as NRCS.
Requires blasting and other
tunnel construction methods in
Reach 8

Construction
duration same as
NRCS Alt.
Same BMPs as
NRCS Alternative.
Approximately
same disposal
volume as NRCS.

Construction duration is
same as NRCS
Alternative.
Same BMPs as NRCS
Alternative.
Approximately
0.99 million bcy for
disposal.

No new recreation facilities.
Existing paved trails along
Reach 7B would be converted
to maintenance road.

Same as NRCS Alternative

Same as NRCS
Alternative

Same as NRCS
Alternative

December 2015

2-139

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-140

Chapter 2

Project
No Action
Feature
Alternative
Bridge/Culvert Replacement
None. Bridge
crossings in
Reach 7A at
Middle Ave and
Watsonville Rd
have been
constructed but
are buried in
place.

Description of Alternatives

NRCS Alternative

Tunnel Alternative

No bridges or culverts to be added or
replaced in Reaches 4 or 5.
Reach 6 culverts to be installed at
two locations on tributaries to provide
continuous maintenance access
along Llagas Ck. Five existing
bridges will not be modified.
Reach 7A two existing bridges that
are buried and inoperable at Middle
Ave and Watsonville Rd to be
exhumed.
Reach 7B multiple culverts to be
replaced at 7 road crossings (S. and
N. La Crosse, Edmundson, Edes Ct,
Cosmo Ave, Spring Ave,
Ciolino/Dunne Ave).
Reach 8 replace culverts at 5 road
crossings (5th, 4th/Monterey Hwy,
3rd, 2nd/Del Monte, Warren Ave).
Replace 2 culverts at Main St and at
Wright/Hale Ave with 2,200 ft long
double 10 x 8 ft RCB along Hale Ave.
Existing channel to be buried.
Remove plate constriction at Llagas
Road culvert to expand opening.
Reach 14, two tributary streams,
Church Ck, San Martin Ck, and
unnamed drainage to be culverted at
confluence with EastLittle Llagas.

Same as NRCS Alternative
except in Reach 8, as
follows:
Instead of 2200 ft long
double 10 x 8 ft RCB along
Hale Ave, install a 36-inch
RCP culvert for low flows
from the weir structure
2,400 ft downstream
discharging to West Little
Llagas Creek; and two high
flow bypass culverts 10 x 8
ft and 10 x 9 ft along Hale
Ave to Warren Ave to tunnel
portal Construct 2,100-foot
long tunnel under Nob Hill
between Warren Ave. and
up to Del Monte Ave, under
Nob Hill Terrace.
No change to existing
culverts at 5th, 4th
St/Monterey Hwy, 3rd St,
2nd St/Del Monte Ave, and
Warren Ave. No channel
widening or deepening in
Reach 8 near downtown
Morgan Hill (downstream of
tunnel portal).
And Reach 7B, as follows:
Double box culverts, 10 ft x
8 ft and 10 ft x 9 ft, from
tunnel outlet at West Dunne
Avenue to downstream of
Ciolino Ave, instead of
replacing existing culvert
along West Little Llagas Ck
as proposed for the NRCS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative

Same as NRCS Alternative
except Reach 8, eliminate
channel deepening and
widening through residential
properties between West
Main Avenue and West 2nd
Street.
Realign an 800-foot
segment of double 10 ft
wide box culverts that, in the
NRCS design, would be
parallel to Hale Avenue
through the Britton School
athletic fields up to Del
Monte Ave; and, continue
the double box culvert under
Del Monte Ave 900 ft to
West 2nd St.
From West 2nd St to West
Dunne Ave the same
channel widening and
deepening, along with
culvert replacements at 2nd,
3rd, 4th, and 5th Streets as
described for the NRCS
Alternative.

Same as Tunnel
Alternative in Reaches
8, 7B, 7A, 5 and 4.
Bridge/culvert
improvements in
Reaches 6 to
accommodate a new
bypass channel. Three
bridges to be
constructed; U.S. 101
northbound, U.S. 101
southbound, and Reach
6 bypass channel at
Murphy Ave.
Culverts modifications
in Reach 14 at
Sycamore Ave bridge
and East San Martin
Ave bridge. Greater
channel widening in
Reach 14 than Tunnel
Alternative.

December 2015

2-141

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-142

Chapter 2

Project
No Action
Feature
Alternative
Utility Relocation
No utilities are to be
relocated.

Operations and Maintenance
Vegetation, channel
sediment, bank
erosion to be
managed according
to the SCVWD SMP.
This would include
Arundo removal in
Reach 6.
Same BMPs for
maintenance as
NRCS Alternative

Description of Alternatives

NRCS Alternative

Tunnel Alternative

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative

Water, sanitation, sewer, and gas, pipelines
Similar to NRCS
Similar to NRCS
to be either protected in-place, abandoned or Alternative, minor
Alternative, minor
replaced. Existing storm drains to be adjusted differences in Reach 8. differences in Reach 8.
to outfall into wider channel. Other utilities
such as fiber optic, phone, fences to be either
abandoned or replaced. Most utilities in
Reach 8.

Same as Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action)
in all reaches, but no utilities
would be replaced in
Reaches 5 and 6
downstream from the bypass
channel. May have additional
utilities in the new bypass
channel section of Reach 6.

Vegetation, and sediment, would be
managed. According to Project hydraulic
capacity requirements. Channel banks
designed for stability, so no erosion or bank
stability measures are assumed to be
needed.
Vegetation maintenance such as grass and
weed mowing on benches conducted
annually, other vegetation maintenance such
as pruning about once every 5 years on all
reaches. No maintenance on natural banks
with riparian forest.
Sediment maintenance at locations where
hydraulic capacity is impaired, estimated to
occur once every 10 years on average.
Minor maintenance to include less than
.08 acre wetland/riparian removal per site,
sediment removal less than 10 CY per site.
Vegetation and sediment maintenance at
Lake Silveira as needed to ensure flow split
at inlet to wetlands and to historic channel is
functioning.
Removal of giant reed (Arundo donax) in
Reach 6 under the SMP.
BMPs for resource protection activities
related to maintenance

Similar to Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed
Action), except for hydraulic
gates to be maintained for
diversion to bypass channel
in Reach 6.
Reaches 5 and 6 vegetation,
sediment, and bank erosion
to be maintained according to
2012-2022 SMP since these
reaches are not part of the
Alternative.
Same BMPs for maintenance
as NRCS Alternative

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Similar to NRCS
Alternative in all
reaches, with addition
of sediment detention
basin and tunnel
maintenance in
Reach 8.
Same BMPs for
maintenance as NRCS
Alternative

Nearly identical to
NRCS Alternative
Same BMPs for
maintenance as NRCS
Alternative

December 2015

2-143

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-144

Chapter 2

Project
No Action
Feature
Alternative
Channel Modification
No modifications or
habitat enhancement
features would be
made to the channel.

Maintenance Roads
Maintenance road at
the bottom of the
channel would be
retained. No new
maintenance roads
would be
constructed.
Grade Control Structures
No new grade
control structures
would be installed.

Description of Alternatives

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative

Same as NRCS in Reaches
4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14.
Tunnel replaces channel
widening and deepening
along a portion of Reach 8,
fewer culvert replacements in
Reach 8. Sediment detention
basin 600- foot long in Reach
8 just downstream of
Hillwood Lane.

Same as NRCS except
Reach 8 eliminate channel
deepening and widening
through residential properties
between West Main Avenue
and West 2nd Street.

Same as Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed
Action) in Reach 8 and in all
other reaches, except no
modifications to Reaches 5
or 6 below bypass channel,
and for a portion of Reach 14
channel widening is about
twice the NRCS Alternative.
Construct high flow bypass
channel 1660-foot length
connecting Reach 6 to
Reach 14; to carry 1-percent
exceedance flow

18 ft wide maintenance roads
at top-of bank on both sides
of the channel; all reaches.

Maintenance roads same as
NRCS Alternative, except
includes roads to access
sediment detention basin.

Maintenance roads same as
NRCS Alternative

Maintenance roads same as
Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed
Action), except no new roads
installed in Reaches 5 or
Reach 6.

Grade control structures:
Reach 4 – 3
Reach 5 – 2
Reach 6 – 26
Reach 7A – 7
Reach 7B – 4
Reach 8 – 1
Reach 14 – 21
One temporary structure
each in Reaches 5 and 14.

Same as NRCS

Same as NRCS

Same as Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed
Action), except no grade
control structures in Reach 5
or Reach 6.

NRCS Alternative

Tunnel Alternative

Channel modifications would
entail widening and
deepening, from just
upstream of Llagas Road to
just downstream of Buena
Vista Ave.
Instream complexity features
for fish habitat would be
installed in Reaches 4, 5, 6,
and 7A.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-145

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-146

Chapter 2

Project
No Action
Feature
Alternative
Fish Enhancement
No fish habitat
enhancements
planned.

Description of Alternatives

NRCS Alternative
Habitat enhancement features
including a sinuous low-flow
channel, pools, large woody debris
placements, boulder placements,
root wad structures, and wing log
deflectors, to be installed in
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A.
Divide logs to be used only in
perennially flowing section of
Reach 6.
Remove and replace dysfunctional
fish ladder downstream of Buena
Vista Ave.
Lake Silveira to include re-water of
1,980 feet of historic abandoned
Llagas Creek channel and creation
of wetland habitat, Sycamore
forest and other forested habitat.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Tunnel Alternative
Same as NRCS

Culvert/Channel
Alternative
Same as NRCS

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative
Same as NRCS, except no
habitat enhancement
features in Reaches 5 or 6
downstream from bypass
channel.
Full extent of Lake Silveira
mitigation element may not
be required.

December 2015

2-147

Chapter 2

Description of Alternatives

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

2-148

CHAPTER 3

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT

This chapter provides a description of the physical, biological, and human environments that
could be affected by the Upper Llagas Creek Project (Project) and project alternatives. The
existing conditions are presented in either a regional- or area-specific context depending on the
nature of the resource or the anticipated effect to that resource. This chapter describes in-depth
environmental impacts in 19 resource and issue areas referred to as the “project area”
throughout this section.


Geology and Soils (Section 3.1)



Hydrology and Water Quality (Section 3.2)



Mineral Resources (Section 3.3)



Botanical Resources (Section 3.4)



Wildlife Resources (Section 3.5)



Aquatic Resources (Section 3.6)



Agriculture and Forestry Resources (Section 3.7)



Land Use and Planning (Section 3.8)



Cultural Resources (Section 3.9)



Traffic and Circulation (Section 3.10)



Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases (Section 3.11)



Noise (Section 3.12)



Aesthetics Resources (Section 3.13)



Utilities and Public Services (Section 3.14)



Recreation Resources (Section 3.15)



Population and Housing (Section 3.16)



Socioeconomics Resources (Section 3.17)



Hazards and Hazardous Materials (Section 3.18)



Environmental Justice (Section 3.19)

Project Location
The Project is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25 miles southeast of San
Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy. The Project consists of the
upper seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8 and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and
West Little Llagas Creek above Buena Vista Avenue (Figure 3-1).
The original Llagas Creek Flood Watershed Project Plan (LCWPP) that was developed by the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soils Conservation Service (SCS) in the late
1960s included both the upper reaches of the watershed, which are the subject of this EIS, and
a set of lower reaches along the West Branch of Llagas Creek in Gilroy and mainstem Llagas

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-1

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Creek below Buena Vista Avenue. The lower reaches were constructed beginning in the 1970s,
and are not part of the analysis presented in this EIS.
The total length of the Project area is approximately 13.9 miles; 6.1 miles of which are along the
main branch of Llagas Creek, 2.8 miles along West Little Llagas Creek; and, 3.4 miles along a
tributary of Llagas Creek, known as East Little Llagas Creek. An additional 1.6 miles of new
bypass would also be constructed along West Little Llagas Creek to Llagas Creek. On the north,
the physical limits of the Project are at the creek’s intersection with Llagas Road on West Little
Llagas Creek in Morgan Hill; and, in the south,1000 feet downstream of the creek’s intersection
with Buena Vista Avenue in Gilroy. A summary description of each of the seven Project reaches
(from upstream to downstream) identified in this EIS is provided below.
Project Reach 8 (West Little Llagas Creek)
Reach 8 is approximately 1.6 miles long and is located along West Little Llagas Creek in
downtown Morgan Hill between West Dunne Avenue in the south and Llagas Road in the north.
The existing channel conveyance capacity is less than a 10-percent flood event (<400 cfs at
Hillwood Lane). Reach 8 is highly urbanized and constrained by development with homes or
other buildings built next to the channel. The existing creek consists of a trapezoidal earthen
channel with top widths varying between eight and 20 feet, and an average depth of 5 feet.
Some sections of the channel are open concrete, and other sections are underground passing
through eight single box culverts, all of which are currently undersized for the 1-percent flow.
The culverts are located at: West 5th Street; West 4th Street; West 3rd Street; the West 2nd
Street/Del Monte Avenue intersection; Warren Avenue; Main Street; the Wright Avenue/Hale
Avenue intersection; and Llagas Road, Llagas Creek Drive, and Hillwood Lane.
The open stream channel bed varies in character from sections with no vegetation, to areas with
broad-leaved cattails (Typha latifolia) and hardstem bulrush (Schoenoplectus acutus). The
banks are generally vegetated with annual grassland species, although a large section of this
reach has a tree canopy comprised of exotic trees, with occasional patches of remnant coast
live oaks (Quercus agrifolia), and valley oaks (Q. lobata).
Project Reach 7B
Reach 7B is a trapezoidal earthen channel, approximately 1.4 miles long, located along West
Little Llagas Creek in an urban, and residential suburban, area of Morgan Hill between South La
Crosse Drive in the south, and West Dunne Avenue in the north. The existing creek passes
through eighteen reinforced concrete box (RCB) culverts at seven locations (Table 2.2-1), three
of which (Spring Avenue, Cosmo Avenue, and Edes Street) are currently undersized for the 1
percent flow. Existing culverts include: a quadruple box culvert at South La Crosse Drive; triple
box culverts at North La Crosse Drive; West Edmundson Avenue; Edes Street and Cosmo
Avenue; and a culvert at Spring Avenue. A 674-foot long single box culvert conveys flows under
the Morgan Hill Plaza Shopping Center from West Dunne Avenue to Ciolino Avenue. A paved
pedestrian/bike path meanders alongside approximately 2,000 feet of the south side of the West
Little Llagas Creek channel between Edes Court and South La Crosse Drive.
The stream channel bed contains riparian herbaceous species (e.g., nutsedges, [Cyperus
spp.]). The banks and the non-disturbed areas beyond the top of bank support annual grassland
species. Extensive portions of this reach have no tree canopy. Where tree canopy is present, it
consists of a combination of planted exotic trees and native trees.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-2

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Project Reach 7A
This reach extends approximately 1.55 miles from Reach 6 just above the Monterey Road
Bridge in the south, to South LaCrosse Drive in the north. The majority of Reach 7A is currently
agricultural fields; there is no existing channel here except for a short 0.3-mile length of
trapezoidal shaped constructed channel at the north end of the reach. Each of the alternatives
would excavate a proposed earthen diversion channel approximately 1.25 miles long through
Reach 7A to divert flows from West Little Llagas Creek upstream of Watsonville Road to Llagas
Creek downstream of Lake Silveira at Monterey Road. Vegetation consists of row crops or
annual, nonnative grassland on fallowed lands. There are two inoperable bridges in this reach
(Table 2.2-1) constructed by the SCVWD at Watsonville Road and West Middle Avenue that
were previously constructed in anticipation of this project and would be exhumed if the diversion
channel were constructed.
Project Reach 6
Llagas Creek Reach 6 is a natural earthen channel, approximately 3.2 miles long from 700 feet
upstream of U.S. Highway 101 (U.S. 101) in the south, to Monterey Road in the north. Reach 6
meanders between Monterey Road and South County Airport. The southern portion of this
reach is adjacent to SCVWD percolation ponds between Church Avenue and Murphy Avenue.
Reach 6 is a perennially-flowing stream segment over a 6,600-foot-long segment from below
Lake Silveira to about San Martin Avenue, with flow continuously supported by releases from
Chesbro Reservoir. Downstream from San Martin Avenue, Reach 6 is an intermittent channel
as flow percolates through the streambed to groundwater.
Land use adjacent to the creek varies from commercial and residential in the north to
agricultural in the south. There are five, existing bridge crossings: Monterey Road; the Union
Pacific Railroad tracks; Llagas Avenue; San Martin Avenue; and Church Avenue. There is a mix
of native and non-native vegetation along the stream banks. Patchy tree canopy is provided
both by native oaks, cottonwood (Populus fremontii), sycamore (Platanus racemosa), and
willows (Salix spp.), as well as by exotic eucalyptus, particularly red gum (Eucalyptus
camaldulensis).
Project Reach 5
Llagas Creek Reach 5 is a natural earthen channel approximately 0.5 mile long from the Llagas
Creek / East Little Llagas Creek confluence in the east to 700 feet upstream of U.S. 101 in the
west. Two bridges cross Llagas Creek along the north and south lanes of U.S. 101.
Reach 5 is ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall months, and, as a consequence,
riparian vegetation is limited along this segment of Llagas Creek. Where tree canopy is present,
it consists of a combination of planted exotic trees and native trees, particularly red gum and
introduced Monterey pine (Pinus radiata). Additionally, the stream channel bed supports riparian
species such as mule fat (Baccharis salicifolia). The banks and the undisturbed areas beyond
the top of the banks support annual grassland species.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-3

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Project Reach 4
Reach 4 is the downstream-most reach of the Project. It is a natural earthen channel, extending
approximately 2.4 miles along Llagas Creek from 1000 feet downstream of Buena Vista Avenue
in the south to the East Little Llagas Creek/Llagas Creek confluence in the north. There are
three existing bridge crossings at Masten Avenue, Rucker Avenue, and Buena Vista Avenue.
Reach 4 contains sinuous bends, particularly near Masten and Buena Vista Avenues; and, is
ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall months. The stream channel bed supports
sparse mature vegetation such as mule fat. The banks support a mixture of riparian and nonriparian species. Although tree canopy is patchy, it is more extensive than on any of the other
Project reaches, including extensive stands of red gum.
Project Reach 14
Reach 14 is a constructed channel that extends approximately 2.4 miles along East Little Llagas
Creek from the Llagas Creek confluence in the south, to just downstream of the Corralitos
Creek confluence in the north. It is an excavated earthen channel that was straightened and
realigned by Caltrans in the 1970s during the construction of U.S. 101. Above the upstream
boundary of Reach 14, between Sycamore Avenue to about Middle Avenue, East Little Llagas
Creek is parallel to U.S. 101 for approximately 5,400 feet. U.S. 101 in this area is located atop
an embankment, which also acts as the right bank of East Little Llagas Creek.
Agricultural and rural residential land uses, and commercial buildings are present in the area
surrounding Reach 14. Reach 14 is ephemeral, typically dry in the summer and fall months. The
channel contains box culverts where the creek crosses East San Martin Avenue and Church
Avenue. The bottom of the channel banks contains a combination of annual grassland species
and bare ground. Vegetation on the stream banks is primarily annual grassland with a few
scattered trees (mostly native).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-4

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3-1

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Upper Llagas Creek Project Reaches

December 2015

3-5

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-6

Chapter 3

3.1

Affected Environment

GEOLOGY AND SOILS
3.1.1

Introduction
The Upper Llagas Creek Project (Project) area is located within an actively
forming geologic environment of earthquakes and faulting as well as associated
uplift of mountain ranges and lowering of basins. These geological processes,
ongoing for millions of years, have created the landforms upon which the Project
streams flow; and, as a result, must be accounted for in Project design and
potential impacts. In addition, the Project involves excavation of soils and
exposure of underlying geologic layers in order to construct Project features,
such as new or expanded channels, culverts, maintenance, and access roads.
The ongoing risks of major earthquakes and potential hazards resulting from
ground shaking and failures, such as ruptures and liquefaction are important
factors to consider in design of key Project elements. In general, the geologic
and soils setting described below applies to the Project area and surrounding
region. Baseline information on geologic and soil resources in the Project area
was compiled from existing published literature. Primary data sources include the
following:

3.1.2



California Geological Survey (CGS). 2010a. 2010 Geologic Map of
California, Geologic Data Map No. 2. Available online at:
http://www.quake.ca.gov/gmaps/GMC/stategeologicmap.html. Accessed
on February 15, 2013.



California Geological Survey (CGS). 2010b: Historical California
Earthquakes. Available online at:
http://redirect.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/rghm/quakes/historical/degreemap
.asp?Map=12237#Map. Accessed February 15, 2013.



Santa Clara County. 2006. Chapter IV Geologic Provisions. Available
online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/PermitsDevelopment/GeoHazards/D
ocuments/Geologic_Ord_0 31902.pdf. Accessed on February 15, 2013.



Santa Clara County. 2012a. County Geologic Hazard Zones. Available
online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/GIS/GeoHazardZones/Pages/SCCG
eoHazardZoneMaps.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.

Project Area
The Project is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25 miles
southeast of San Jose, passing through rural, residential, and a commercial
district in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy (Figure 1.1-1,
Regional Area Map). The northern portion of the Project (Reaches 8, 7B, and
portions of 7A) is within the City of Morgan Hill; a portion of 7A is within
unincorporated Santa Clara County. Reaches 6, 5, and 14 are within the San
Martin planning area, and a portion (north of Masten Avenue) of Reach 4 is also
in the San Martin planning area. The southern portion of Reach 4 is within

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-7

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

unincorporated Santa Clara County. The southern extent of the project area is
less than 1 mile from the City of Gilroy.
The following section describes the environmental setting for the Project area
and regional setting for geology and soils.
3.1.3

Environmental Setting
Geologic Setting
The Project area and its 84-square-mile watershed are located within the
Coast Range Geologic Province of Central California. The Upper Main
Llagas Creek drainage basin originates at the crest of the Santa Cruz
Mountains. The creek flows southeastward through foothill terrain, then
onto the floor of the Southern Santa Clara Valley, before joining the
Pajaro River. The Pajaro River flows into Monterey Bay near Watsonville
in Santa Cruz County. West Little Llagas Creek flows along the western
edge of the valley, turns eastward north of San Martin, and joins East
Little Llagas near the center of the valley. East Little Llagas Creek drains
small creeks gathering flow from tributaries from the east side of the
valley before joining the main stem just north of Masten Avenue. The
Project area includes segments of all three creeks to the Project terminus
near Buena Vista Avenue.
Southern Santa Clara Valley is geologically a fault-bounded, downdropping basin structurally oriented northwest to southeast. It is bounded
by the Santa Cruz Mountains to the west and the Diablo Range to the
east. The region and the Project area are structurally dominated by San
Andreas and Calaveras Fault systems: to the west the San Andreas Fault
is a right lateral movement with thrust zones that have raised the Santa
Cruz Mountains and shortened the earth’s crust by several kilometers
(Page, et al. 1998); to the east is the parallel Calaveras Fault, which
trends through the lower foothills forming linear valleys and basins such
as that holding Coyote and Anderson reservoirs and dams. The fault
zones are within several miles of the Project area and are historically
active, most notably the 1906 San Francisco Quake (M=7.8)1 and the
1989 Loma Preita Quake (M=6.9).
Movement and earthquakes along the San Andreas Fault system, and
associated faults to the east and west, occur along a major tectonic plate
boundary between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate. The
headwaters of the Llagas Creek drainage area are east of the San
Andreas Fault, which has lifted older Mesozoic Rocks of marine origin
(such as the Franciscan Complex) to the surface, including metasedimentary rocks, deep ocean shales, cherts, and serpentine and
ultramafic rocks (Figure 3.1-1; CGS 2010a).

1

“M=” refers to earthquake magnitude for the specific event as measured by the Richter Scale (see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richter_magnitude_scale for more information).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-8

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

The terrain of the Llagas Creek headwaters in Santa Cruz Mountains is
comprised of steep vegetated slopes, with heavily sheared and deeply
weathered rocks and soils. These slopes are prone to large landslides
during earthquakes and rainstorms as well as debris flows during intense
rainstorms. Below the steep headwater terrain; Llagas Creek flows
through Chesbro Reservoir and Chesbro Dam into the foothills, where
younger (Quaternary) continental deposits are encountered. These
formations include the Pleistocene Santa Clara Formation, older alluvial
fan deposits (terraces) and Holocene Alluvium, and the most recently
moved sediments within the modern Llagas Creek corridor and floodplain.
Further downstream, Llagas Creek flows on the valley floor where lower
gradients and historical tectonic movements have created layers of
alluvium (sand and gravel) and thick muds associated with past lake
(lacustrine) environments categorized as “Basin Fill”.
The Diablo Range to the east is predominately Mesozoic sedimentary
and metasedimentary rocks, sandstones and siltstones of the Great
Valley Sequence, as well as Tertiary volcanic rock and exposures of
Franciscan Complex—like Mesozoic metamorphic and meta sedimentary
rocks along fault lines (e.g., at Coyote Reservoir Dam). The Diablo Range
has drier conditions than the forested Santa Cruz Mountains to the west;
and, as a result, is predominately grasslands or oak/grasslands. Only
small, short drainages from the Diablo Range enter the valley floor east of
East Little Llagas Creek. The structural trend of linear fault valleys dip
northward resulting in much of the Diablo Range watershed draining into
San Francisco Bay.
The Santa Clara Valley is underlain with up to 1,000 feet of PlioPleistocene alluvial and basin sediments lying over older bedrock units.
Within the Project area, recent basin deposits range up to 450 feet in
thickness and consist of a mix of alluvial stream deposits interbedded with
dense clay lacustrine sediments that act as confining layers for
groundwater (aquicludes). This stratigraphy reflects the environmental
history of stream systems and intervening periods of lake environments
within the past 2 million years, likely formed by the ongoing warping and
down dropping of the valley floor caused by regional tectonic movements.
Seismicity
The geologic region is subject to intense earthquakes generated on both
the San Andreas Fault, 9 miles to the west; and the Calaveras Fault, 4
miles to the east (Figure 3.1-2). Historical quakes and shaking have
caused building damage and ground failures by many mechanisms
nearby (i.e. ground offsets, heaving, and landsliding). However, mapping
of the 1906 quake ground failures did not indicate any major damage in
the Project area. The three most significant recent events include the
Great 1906 San Francisco Quake (M7.8); the 1989 Loma Prieta Quake
(M=6.9) on the San Andreas Fault system; and the Morgan Hill Quake of
1986 (M6.2), closer to the Calaveras Fault (CGS 2010b).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-9

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Historical records indicate that the Project area has been subject to major
earthquakes greater than M5.0 more than six times since 1800.
Landslides, stream bank failures, and liquefaction have occurred in the
region; and due to the presence of saturated, unconsolidated sand layers
and shallow groundwater, areas of the Llagas Creek corridor have been
designated as potential, severe earthquake shaking and liquefaction
failure zones (Figure 3.1-3; Santa Clara County 2012a).
Soils
The soils underlying the Project area’s valley floor location reflect the
recent geologic history of periods of alluvial sediment deposits and
gravels and sands in old channels, which are interlayered with fine layers
of floodplain deposits. The intervening periods of lake environments,
Ancient Lake San Juan and Lake San Benito, resulted in thick layers of
dense lacustrine clays. Soil mapping and a site investigation for the
Project was performed to address revegetation planning (Cardno ENTRIX
2012a). In general, the soils present in the Project area are deep, well
drained, medium to fine textured loams (gravels, sands, and silts), and
clay loams and include Yolo, Zamora, Pleasanton, San Ysidro, Cropley,
and Arbuckle Series. According to the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring
Program (Section 3.7) as of 2010, there were 17,270 acres of Prime
Farmland, 3,630 acres of Farmland of Statewide Importance, and 2,523
acres of Unique Farmland in Santa Clara County. Within the Project
footprint, there are 57 acres of Prime Farmland as well as 3 acres of
Farmland of Statewide Importance. Agricultural Resources are discussed
further in Section 3.7.
Ultramafic rocks, such as serpentine, are a source for naturally-occurring
asbestos (NOA). While serpentine soils and NOA are not known to occur
in the Project area, some deposits of ultramific source rocks have been
identified upstream of Reach 8 (Figure 3.1-1; Formation um). Potential
impacts related to encountering NOA soils are discussed in Section 3.18,
Hazards and Hazardous Materials, HAZ-2 determinations.
One key characteristic of Project area soils involves varying degrees of
silica cementation of some underlying conglomerate layers. Such
cementation results in a hardening of sediment materials causing
consolidation that limits root penetration (Cardno ENTRIX 2012a).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-10

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.1-1 Geology in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-11

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-12

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.1-2 Faults in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-13

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-14

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.1-3 Liquefaction Susceptibility in the Project Vicinity

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-15

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-16

Chapter 3

3.2

Affected Environment

HYDROLOGY AND WATER QUALITY
3.2.1

Introduction
This section addresses surface water, groundwater, and water quality conditions
in the Upper Llagas Creek watershed. The hydrologic setting of the project area
and the regional vicinity is described. This section also includes discussion of
variables that affect hydrology, and water quality within the project area.

3.2.2

Project Area
For the purpose of describing the surface and subsurface water resources and
evaluating associated impacts, the project area includes the watershed and
groundwater basin of upper Llagas Creek within the communities of Morgan Hill,
San Martin, and Gilroy in southern Santa Clara County. The project area includes
West Little Llagas Creek from Llagas Road to its transition to East Little Llagas
Creek, and from there to the confluence with Llagas Creek and Llagas Creek
downstream of Lake Silveira to 1,000 feet downstream of Buena Vista Avenue.
The project area for impacts related to surface water includes the channels and
floodplains of upper Llagas Creek and lower reaches of West Little Llagas and
East Little Llagas creeks. The groundwater resources project area is defined as
the Llagas subbasin of the larger Gilroy-Hollister Groundwater Basin.

3.2.3

Environmental Setting
Climate
Llagas Creek is located on the eastern slope of the Santa Cruz Mountains with
moderating influence from the Pacific Ocean and is subject to a Mediterraneantype climate. The watershed experiences mild, wet winters and dry summers.
Average annual precipitation ranges from about 40 inches near the headwaters
of Llagas Creek to 28 inches at Chesbro Reservoir and to 20 to 24 inches on the
valley floor. About
92 percent of the average annual rainfall falls between November 1 and April 30
(Soil Conservation Service 1982). Mean annual temperature is 58°F, with a mean
monthly variation from 66°F in July to 48°F in January. Extreme temperatures in
Gilroy are recorded as 20°F and 116°F. The average frost-free period is 273
days. The growing season varies between 209 and 365 days in Gilroy.
Surface Hydrology
Llagas Creek originates in the Santa Cruz Mountains from Mount Loma Prieta
and flows southeasterly towards the lower agricultural plains of Santa Clara
County. The Llagas Creek watershed covers an area of approximately 104
square miles and is contained within the larger Pajaro River watershed, which
drains to Monterey Bay. The Project covers a drainage of 61.7 square miles
within Santa Clara Valley, including the Santa Cruz Mountains and a portion of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-17

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

the Diablo Range on the eastern side of the Santa Clara Valley, that give rise to
the major tributaries of West Little Llagas and East Little Llagas Creeks.
Historically, channels in the Llagas Creek watershed were more diffuse and
discontinuous prior to 19th and 20th century modifications. The streams were
shallow, braided, and branched into smaller distributary channels within broad
riparian corridors supporting seasonal and perennial ponds and wetlands (SFEI
2008). Small creeks descending from the hills in some cases dissipated across
alluvial fans and divided into multiple channels before eventually soaking into the
ground (SFEI 2008). In the dry season sections of Llagas Creek would go
completely dry, with the exception of a few standing, isolated pools. Large flows
during the rainy season were supported by Llagas Creek, but stream banks
would overflow regularly during flood events (SFEI 2008).
Today Llagas Creek is a mixture of natural and engineered stream features.
Increased runoff with impervious surfaces associated with urban development
and stormwater drains routed in to West Little Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas
Creek, and Llagas Creek. The stream channels have historically been altered by
realignment and channelization and the constructions of culverts and bridges to
accommodate development in the urban areas of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and
Gilroy as well as for farmland reclamation and road and freeway construction.
Chesbro Reservoir was constructed in 1955 to provide an increased water supply
for the growing population in Santa Clara Valley (Santa Clara County 1997) and
regulates the upper 19 square miles of the watershed. Historic and ongoing
channel incision are identified as the cumulative effects of decades of changes in
land use, the increase in impervious surfaces from urbanization, sediment supply
loss associated with Chesbro Reservoir, water diversions, hydrograph
modifications, and past channelization (Balance Hydrologics 2012; Schaaf &
Wheeler 2012). Streambed incision of the Llagas Creek watershed ranges from
0.4 to 0.8 feet per decade (Balance Hydrologics 2012).
The Upper Llagas Creek watershed is a flashy system. Stream channels are
typically dry or nearly dry even through the winter. Runoff occurs during larger
storm events. The duration of flow varies but after rains have subsided, stream
channels typically return back to their dry state. As such, the Project stream
reaches have ephemeral flow, except for a 6,600-foot portion of Llagas Creek in
Reach 6 from below Lake Silveira to about San Martin Avenue, which is usually
perennial and continuously supported by releases from Chesbro Reservoir.
Downstream from San Martin Avenue, Reach 6 returns to an ephemeral channel
as flow percolates through the streambed to groundwater. Urban return flows
from lawns, irrigation, etc. may provide a small discharge in the upper urbanized
Reaches 8 and 7B along West Little Llagas Creek.
The section of West Little Llagas Creek to be cut-off from flows by diversion in
Reach 7A extends nearly 9,600 feet from near La Crosse Drive flowing east
toward U.S. Highway 101 (U.S. 101). By naming convention, West Little Llagas
Creek becomes East Little Llagas near the Union Pacific Railroad crossing about
3,500 feet downstream from Monterey Road. East Little Llagas Creek
confluences with a straightened channel known as the Madrone Ditch on the east
side of U.S. 101, and thence the East Little Llagas Creek channel parallels U.S.
101 for about 5,500 feet before it reaches the beginning of Reach 14. The
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-18

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

channel to be cut-off passes through mostly open fields with a few scattered
homes and a trailer court, and flows through culverts at six road crossings. This
entire section of West Little Llagas Creek to East Little Llagas Creek is
intermittent, flowing only when there is sufficient rain to generate runoff. Flooding
occurs all along the channel length during a 1-percent exceedance flow (see
Figure 2.4-1).
Under all the action alternatives, there would be no flows from the upstream
segment of West Little Llagas Creek entering the cut-off channel segment
reducing, but not eliminating the flooding extent occurring during a 1 percent
exceedance flow event for a 6,500-foot distance downstream from the cut-off
point (see Figure 2.5-1). Only local runoff, which includes several storm drains,
would continue to discharge through the West and East Little Llagas Creek
channel starting at the cut-off to a point 6,500 feet downstream where the
Butterfield Channel extension confluences with West Little Llagas Creek. The
recently completed Butterfield Detention facility and City of Morgan Hill’s
Butterfield Channel extension has a drainage area of 2.78 square miles (Schaaf
and Wheeler 2013). The Butterfield Channel extension confluences with West
Little Llagas Creek about 6,500 feet downstream from the Reach 7A cut-off point.
The Butterfield extension will introduce flows at this confluence point to West
Little Llagas Creek that are similar to the discharges that would have naturally
occurred prior to the 7A diversion. The West Little Llagas Creek channel is
expected to continue to flow only intermittently under post-Project conditions, and
high flows of the magnitude occurring under existing conditions would no longer
occur between the cut-off point and the Butterfield Channel extension
confluence. However, some flooding although reduced compared with existing
conditions, would continue to occur both upstream and downstream from the
Butterfield Channel extension, high flow events will still persist, and the channel
will continue to flood under a 1 percent exceedance flow event (see
Figure 2.5-1,The post-Project 1 percent exceedance flow (i.e., 100-year flow)
would be 110 cubic feet per second (cfs) near the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR)
(which is 5,200 feet downstream from the cut-off point for the bypass channel)
and 870 cfs near the confluence with the Madrone Channel at U.S. 101
(Table 3.2-1).
There is currently no channel in Reach 7A. All of the action alternatives would
include the construction of a bypass channel in Reach 7A, which would carry all
of the flow formerly in West Little Llagas Creek to East Little Llagas Creek and
route it through the bypass channel to the Llagas Creek channel just downstream
from Lake Silveira near Monterey Highway. This will decrease flow in East Little
Llagas Creek and increase the discharge magnitude routed to Llagas Creek
through Reaches 6, 5, and 4. These reaches would be widened and deepened to
accommodate the additional flow magnitude, so that there is no new flooding
induced by the channel capacity improvements in the upstream reaches. The
SCVWD diverts a portion of the flow from Reach 6 to the Church Street
percolation ponds for groundwater recharge. Reaches 5 and 4 are an
intermittently flowing channel as the perennial flow in Reach 6 recharges to
groundwater. East Little Llagas Creek (i.e., Reach 14), which was deepened and
channelized several decades ago for construction of U.S. 101, is also an
intermittently flowing channel. A reach-by-reach summary description of the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-19

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

stream channels and the Project features common to all of the action alternatives
is provided in Sections 2.2 and 2.5, respectively.
Historically, flooding was a natural process of the southern Santa Clara Valley’s
drainage. Sloughs and wetlands were common features that would swell and
stream bank overtopping was not uncommon during large storm events. Modern
urbanization has further compounded the effect of large storm events on the
drainage by reducing permeable surfaces within the valley and directing
stormwater runoff into the local streams. Additionally, Chesbro Reservoir,
attenuates the flows by affecting the timing, magnitude, and duration of flood
flows within the Project reaches. Flows through the Project reaches during
various flood events under existing conditions and the proposed design
conditions for the Project are provided in Table 3.2-1. At the upstream boundary
of the Project at Llagas Road the 1-percent exceedance flow is 410 cfs. All of the
action alternatives would remove a constricting plate in the Llagas Road culvert
and widen and deepen the channel downstream to accommodate the 1-percent
exceedance flow.
Llagas Creek is a primary source of flood risk in the City of Morgan Hill and the
unincorporated community of San Martin. A number of floods have occurred in
the southern Santa Clara Valley during major storm events. The floods in 1937,
1955, 1962, 1963, 1969, 1982, 1986, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 2006 damaged
existing homes, businesses, and agricultural property within these communities
(USACE 2010b). The largest recorded flood, estimated to be a 33-year event,
occurred in December 1955 (SCVWD 2010a).
3.2.4

Groundwater
The Llagas Creek and Llagas subbasin of the Gilroy-Hollister Groundwater Basin
comprise a linked surface water-groundwater hydrologic setting. Llagas Creek
surface water discharge (streamflow) is partially dependent upon groundwater
conditions, and groundwater conditions are equally dependent on recharge by
precipitation (infiltration) and streamflow contributions.
Llagas Creek is within the Llagas subbasin of the Gilroy-Hollister Groundwater
Basin. The groundwater bearing formations of Llagas subbasin include Pliocene
to Holocene age continental deposits of unconsolidated to semi-consolidated
gravel, silt, and clay (DWR 1981). The principal water producing deposits include
the Santa Clara Formation and valley fill materials of old and young alluvium and
alluvial fans (California DWR 1981). Water quality from these deposits varies with
depth and deposit type. The Santa Clara Formation is the deepest water-bearing
unit with water quality suitable for irrigation and municipal purposes. The young
alluvium deposits are the uppermost water-bearing unit and water quality is
generally acceptable for domestic purposes (DWR 1981). Operational
groundwater storage capacity of the Llagas subbasin is estimated to be between
150,000 and 165,000-acre feet (SCVWD 2011a).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-20

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.2-1

Existing and Proposed Project Design Flow Capacities
Existing Channel
Capacity in Reach

From
Reach 4
(Llagas
Creek)

E. Little Llagas Ck

To
Masten Ave.

With Project Peak
Discharge (cfs)

Min

Max

Min

Max

10-yr

100-yr

Design
Capacity
(cfs)

2,200

3,400

<2-yr

5-yr

6,790

11,830

6,790

Location

Design
Return
Period
10-yr

Masten Ave

Rucker Ave

2,200

7,000

<2-yr

25-yr

6,790

11,830

6,790

10-yr

Rucker Ave

Buena Vista Ave

2,200

9,500

<2-yr

25-yr

6,790

11,830

6,790

10-yr

Reach 5
(Llagas
Creek)

U.S. 101

E. Little Llagas Ck.

2,700

>2,800

<5-yr

>5-yr

3,280

5,780

3,280

10-yr

Reach 6
(Llagas
Creek)

Silveira Lake

U.S. 101

1,300

>2,800

2-yr

>5-yr

2,990

5,540

2,990

10-yr

U/S Silveira Lake

Silveira Lake

3,000

6,200

25-yr

>100-yr

1,930

4,860

—

—

Reach 7A
N/A

La Crosse Dr.

Llagas Ck.

n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a

1,360

2,100

2,100

100-yr

Reach 7B
(West Little
Llagas
Creek)

W. Dunne Ave

Ciolino Ave

—

300

—

<2-yr

720

1,130

1,130

100-yr

Ciolino Ave.

Spring Ave.

200

650

<2-yr

4-yr.

950

1,490

1,490

100-yr

Spring Ave.

La Crosse Dr

<410

1,700

<2-yr

>100-yr

1,050

1,580

1,580

100-yr

W. Little Llagas
near La Crosse Dr.
(diverted channel
section)

West Little Llagas Ck
at UPRR

110

4

4

870

4

4

Reach 8
(West Little
Llagas
Creek)

West Little Llagas
Ck at UPRR

West Little Llagas at
U.S. 101, before
Madrone Channel

W. Main Ave

W. 5th St

<260

260

<2-yr

<2-yr

630

990

990

100-yr

W. 5th St

W. Dunne Ave

<320

320

<2-yr

<2-yr

720

1,130

1,130

100-yr

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-21

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Existing Channel
Capacity in Reach

Location

Reach 14
(East Little
Llagas
Creek)

With Project Peak
Discharge (cfs)

From
Madrone Channel

To
Corralitos Ck

Min
1,200

Max
21,000

Min
5-yr

Max
>100-yr

10-yr
1,570

100-yr
2,160

Corralitos Ck

San Martin Ck

1,700

3,000

5-yr

25-yr

2,540

4,060

Design
Capacity
(cfs)

Design
Return
Period

1,570

10-yr

2,540

10-yr

San Martin Ck

Church Ck.

2,300

3,000

5-yr

< 10-yr

3,150

5,140

3,150

10-yr

Church Ck

Llagas Ck

2,300

2,300

5-yr

5-yr

3,450

5,780

3,450

10-yr

1 10-yr and 100-yr Peak Discharges from USACE Llagas Creek Flood Control Project Hydrologic Investigation, rounded.
2 Based on Hydrologic Engineering Center - River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) models for Existing Llagas Creek (i.e. discharge not in overbank areas. Actual
channel capacity will vary.) USACE estimates existing Reach 8 capacity = 300 cfs.
3 Relative to estimated Project peak discharge.
4 The cut-off West to East Little Llagas Creek channel segment would not have a design capacity since there would be no improvement work in this channel
segment. The flow capacity would remain the same as existing conditions.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-22

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Recharge of the Llagas subbasin occurs naturally from streams, through
percolation of precipitation and surplus irrigation waters, from seepage along
canals, and subsurface inflow. Average natural groundwater recharge in the
Llagas subbasin is estimated to be 23,000 acre feet per year (SCVWD 2010c). In
southern Santa Clara County, ground water pumping provides 95 percent of
supply for all beneficial uses and 100 percent of the drinking water supply
(SCVWD 2010c). Natural ground water recharge is insufficient to replenish the
amount of ground water withdrawn and SCVWD conducts a managed recharge
program to maintain groundwater supply.
Groundwater elevation in the Llagas subbasin Index Well (10S03E13d003) has
remained stable over the period of record (1969 to 2001) with the exception of
water level drops and subsequent recovery associated with drought periods
(DWR 2004). A groundwater condition report from SCVWD in August of 2012
(SCVWD 2012b) states that Llagas subbasin groundwater levels from 2010 to
July of 2012 in the City of Morgan Hill were above the normal year represented
by 2004 and above or slightly below the 5-year average (SCC 2012). In July
2012, groundwater elevations were roughly 50 feet below ground surface (bgs)
near Morgan Hill and approximately 40 feet bgs near San Martin (SCVWD
2012b). The SCVWD groundwater report for February 2012 (SCVWD 2012a)
shows that January groundwater levels in the Llagas subbasin increased in
elevation since July and remained the same with respect to the normal and the 5year average (Table 3.2-2). Current well monitoring (2014-2015) at Lake Silveria
does indicate that the groundwater levels dropped in response to the recent
drought but have recovered as has been seen in the historic records (Balance
Hydraulics, 2015 unpublished). These monitoring wells are not indicative of
elevations in all wells, but suggest seasonal changes in the groundwater basin.
Table 3.2-2

Selected Monitoring Well Water Levels for January 2012
Water Level Below Ground Surface (ft)
Jan
1987

Jan
2004

5-Year
Average
2007 to 2011

Jan
2012

Change from
2004 to 2012

Change from
5-Year
Average
to 2012

09S03E22P005

50.4

47.7

50.3

40

7.7

10.3

San Martin

10S03E13D003

34.6

33.4

36.4

30.4

3.0

6.0

Gilroy

11S04E10D004

13.4

16.7

14.5

13.3

3.4

1.2

Monitoring
Well

State Well
Number

Morgan Hill

Source: SCVWD 2012a

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-23

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Review of groundwater elevations from streamside observation wells2 installed
and used for geotechnical observations related to the Proposed Project indicates
that maximum annual groundwater elevations are near or above the existing
stream channel bottom (Table 3.2-3). Average well water elevations were
typically 2-5 feet bgs. However, soil sampling conducted for the SCVWD in 2012
did not find evidence of groundwater near or above the channel invert; and there
were no redoximorphic soil features encountered which would have indicated
sustained groundwater levels close to the channel bottom (Cardno ENTRIX
2012a). Liquefaction maps discussed in the Section 3.1, Geology and Soils,
reflect shallow groundwater within 15 feet bgs.
Soil borings obtained during Phases II Environmental Site Assessments (ESAs)
conducted in 1997 and 2004 showed that in Reaches 7A and 7B groundwater
was encountered in many borings at depths of 14 to 26 feet bgs (Weiss 2011). A
geotechnical investigation near Lake Silveira area, within Reach 7A, encountered
groundwater at depths as shallow as 3 feet bgs. However this data does not
represent static water levels, but rather the depth at which saturated soils were
first encountered, which ranged between 3 feet bgs to 13 feet bgs (Pacific
Geotechnical Engineering 2013 unpublished).
Recent well, piezometer, and pump test data was collected near Lake Silveira
along the Reach 7A channel alignment, just east of the lake (Balance Hydrologic
2013). The well data found that groundwater was approximately 8 feet bgs in
August 2013. The proposed channel will be excavated to depths of
approximately 12 feet in this part of the reach; as such, it is likely that
groundwater will be encountered during construction and dewatering will be
necessary. About 0.5 mile further upstream from the lake near West Middle
Avenue, groundwater elevations are deeper, approximately 14–15 feet bgs
(based on data collected by Kleinfelder, June 1997, and Pacific Geotechnical
Engineering, August 2010, as reported in Balance Hydrologics 2013). Proposed
construction depths will be nearly 15 feet deep, so that groundwater is also likely
to be intercepted, although, to a lesser extent than closer to the lake.

2

Observation wells listed in Table 3.2-3 were installed for geotechnical study purposes and do not supply
water.These wells will be sealed and operationally closed as part of the Project construction.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-24

Chapter 3

Table 3.2-3

Affected Environment

SCVWD Observational Well Elevations In Proximity to Llagas Creek, West
Little Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek
Well Elevations (ft) 1

Location

Well Number

Months Dry
Mean

Min

Max

OW4-11

214.6

213.1

219.8

0

OW4-18

209.5

207.7

211.0

6

OW6-7

288.6

287.8

289.7

0

OW6-17

264.6

262.3

268.1

0

OW6-25

249.4

247.7

251.2

2

OW6-27

244.9

244.4

245.4

7

Reach 7

OW7A-2

312.1

310.2

314.3

6

Reach 8

OW8A-2C

329.4

324.2

334.5

4

OW8A-3B

327.4

324.5

334.6

0

OW8A-4

328.5

324.7

336.5

0

OW8A-5

333.1

329.2

338.2

0

OW14-10

277.0

272.2

282.6

4

OW14-16

259.7

252.8

265.2

2

OW14-22

249.6

247.9

252.8

2

OW14-26

236.1

234.4

237.8

7

Reach 4

Reach 6

Reach 14

1 Values calculated from nine measurements. Well elevation data was generally collected monthly from June 1, 2012
to January 4, 2013. Two measurements were taken in December 2012.
Source: Pacific Geotechnical Engineering 2013

3.2.5

Water Quality
Water quality in a given area of a flowing stream is controlled by multiple factors,
which include the chemical and physical nature of streambed material (erodibility,
grain size, and rock type) as well as influences outside the stream corridor, such
as quality of groundwater and upstream runoff acting to recharge the system.
Minerals with differing rock types greatly affect types and levels of dissolved
metals within a stream. More easily erodible or finer-grained material presents a
greater surface area on which chemical reactions can occur; and, therefore, also
influence water quality. Very fine-grained sediments contribute to elevated
turbidity and temperature, which in turn affects oxygen levels. All of these
variables occur within a natural stream system. In streams within urban or
agricultural corridors, water quality is typically influenced from increases in peak
runoff, dissolved hydrocarbons, dissolved fertilizers, and increases in sediment
loads. Water quality impacts associated with agricultural runoff are linked to
residual level concentrations of fertilizers and pesticides, as well as increased
sediment loads in receiving waters. In streams with urban corridors other
pollutants can be directly introduced into the stream through storm drains and
can be further concentrated with the increased proportion of impermeable
surfaces within urban areas. The more densely populated and developed areas

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-25

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

draining to Project Reaches 8 and 7B are potential sources of urban pollutants,
while most of Reaches 7A, 6, 5, and 14 drain areas that are more likely to be
subject to water quality constituents carried by agricultural runoff.
The Central Coast Regional Water Control Board (CCRWQCB) monitors Llagas
Creek for known pollutants and other parameters that can impair water quality.
Impaired water bodies are listed on the Clean Water Act 303 (d) list by pollutant
and then submitted to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for
determination of total maximum daily loads (TMDL). From the 2010 integrated
report (SWRCB 2010), there are two specific areas within Llagas Creek where
water quality has been identified as impaired: Reach 14 and downstream of
Reach 4. East Little Llagas Creek downstream of Church Avenue in Reach 14,
elevated levels of fecal coliform, nitrates (nutrients), sedimentation/siltation, and
total dissolved solids have been detected (SWRCB 2010). Sources for these
pollutants range from natural to agricultural and due to channel
hydromodifications. Sources of sediment include nonpoint and point source
discharge activities including agricultural and grazing land uses, urbanization and
rural development, roads, and modifications to the channel (i.e.,
hydromodification).
Four pollutants (fecal coliform, nitrates [nutrients], sedimentation/siltation, and
total dissolved solids) are currently listed on the Clean Water Act (CWA) Section
303 (d) list; and TMDLs have been established by the EPA for nitrates (nutrients)
and sedimentation. The TMDL for nitrates in the Pajaro River and Llagas Creek
is set at a maximum of 10 milligrams per Liter (mg/L) in receiving waters (Final
Regional SWMP 2010). The TMDL for sedimentation in Llagas Creek is provided
in Table 3.2-4. High levels of chloride and sodium have been detected on Llagas
Creek downstream of the confluence with Miller Slough on an approximately 1mile-long section of stream near Southside Drive. However, Southside Drive is
roughly 7 miles downstream of Reach 4 and outside of the Project footprint.
Llagas Creek is listed on the CWA Section 303 (d) list for chloride and sodium,
but TMDLs for each pollutant have yet to be established. Other pollutants and
impairment parameters without specified locations on Llagas Creek are also
listed on the Section 303 (d) list. These include chlorpyrifos, electrical
conductivity, E. coli, low dissolved oxygen (DO), and turbidity. Sources of these
more general area impairments range from unknown to agricultural and
municipal, as well as habitat modification and TMDLs have yet to be established.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-26

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.2-4

Suspended Sediment Total Maximum Daily Load Numeric Targets for
Llagas Creek (CRWQCB)

Exposure Category

1

Numeric targets 1

Exceedance Event Criteria

Duration
(Consecutive
Days)

Suspended
Sediment
Concentration
(mg/L)

Duration
(Consecutive
Days)

Suspended
Sediment
Concentration
(mg/L)

Maximum
Number of
Exceedance
Events

Maximum
Duration of
Exceedance Event
(Consecutive Days)

1

666 – 1808

2

>1808

0

0

2

245 – 665

3

>665

0

1

6

91 – 244

7

>244

9

15

14

91 – 244

15

>244

1

15

49

33 – 90

50

>90

0

28

Numeric targets are comprised of two components: a maximum number of exceedance events that may
occur and the maximum duration (consecutive days) in which the maximum suspended sediment
concentration (SSC) value for each range can be exceeded. Exceedance events are specific to each
exposure category.

Lake Silveira (an artificially created instream pond) influences water quality
conditions, notably turbidity, temperature, and DO in both the lake itself and
downstream in Reach 6. The SCVWD measured turbidity, temperature and DO
during the spring, summer and winter periods in 2011 (Balance Hydrologics et al.
2012) in order to obtain information on lake water quality and its influence on
water quality in receiving waters immediately downstream. Water quality data for
turbidity, temperature, and DO were collected just upstream, downstream, and
within the lake itself.
Temperature and DO are two water quality parameters that strongly influence
steelhead growth and survival. As discussed in the Aquatics Resources, Section
3.6.3, DO levels within Lake Silveira do not meet water quality objectives
established by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) Central
Coast Region criteria. In the Water Quality Control Plan for the Central Coast
Region (Basin Plan) for the Llagas Creek watershed (RWQCB 2011) it states “for
waters not mentioned by a specific beneficial use, DO concentration shall not be
reduced below 5.0 mg/L at any time. Median values should not fall below 85
percent saturation as a result of controllable water quality conditions”. DO never
fell below 7 mg/L when measured upstream and downstream of the lake and
percent saturation did not fall below 85 percent above or below the lake in any
season. As such, DO is not likely adversely influenced by the lake in the
downstream Reach 6. However, the average daily percent saturation did fall to
as low as 40 percent saturation in the lake itself during the summer season
measurements. It should be noted that the percent saturation measurements
were taken near the bottom of the lake in the hypolimnion, indicating a natural
process of lake stratification, which is not an unusual condition and is in fact an
expected process.
Outflow from Lake Silveira causes higher water temperatures downstream in
Reach 6, varying from 9-14°F greater than upstream of the lake in summer, in
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-27

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

some cases exceeding water quality objectives established in the Basin Plan
(RWQCB 2011), which states “at no time or place shall the temperature of any
water be increased by more than 5°F above natural receiving temperature”.
Warming within Lake Silveira raises downstream temperatures above optimal
temperature range for juvenile steelhead (59-65°F). Daily average temperatures
in late August exceeded 75°F, which are stressful and potentially lethal to rearing
juvenile steelhead. Temperature and DO conditions are not further addressed in
Section 3.2, Hydrology and Water Quality; but are addressed in Section 3.6,
Aquatics Resources, because of the important connection of these water quality
parameters to steelhead growth and survival. Additionally, turbidity in the lake
was consistently higher than upstream reaches and exceeded Basin Plan
objectives by increasing turbidity downstream from the lake in the summer and
winter seasons.
Groundwater quality in South County is good for most beneficial uses except for
nitrate levels, which remains the primary ground water protection challenge
(SCVWD 2013c). The Llagas subbasin of the Gillroy-Hollister groundwater basin
is distant from the coast and seawater intrusion has not been documented.
Seawater intrusion has been documented in other aquifers of the region, but the
encroachment has been arrested by changes in management practices resulting
in the decrease in groundwater withdrawals and increasing groundwater
recharge.
A Nitrate Management Program was created in 1991 to investigate and
remediate increasing nitrate concentrations. Nitrate concentrations in excess of
federal standards were found only in private wells, while all public wells meet
federal drinking water standards. A hazardous material investigation was
performed in Reach 7A. Groundwater analytical results indicate the presence of
nitrate at hazardous waste concentrations (Kleinfelder 1997). In 2012, nitrate was
detected above the drinking water standard in 30 percent of South County water
supply wells, primarily domestic wells (SCVWD 2013c). For a full discussion of
the investigation, please see Section 3.18 Hazardous Materials.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-28

Chapter 3

3.3

Affected Environment

MINERAL RESOURCES
3.3.1

Introduction
This section describes the mineral resources of the Project area, including the
designation of mineral resource zones (MRZ) in the Project area as delineated
on statewide MRZ maps. Section 3.3.2, Project Area, presents the existing
environmental setting conditions with respect to mineral resources in the Project
area.
Baseline information on mineral resources in the Project area was compiled from
existing published literature. Primary data sources include the following:

3.3.2



City of Gilroy. 2002. Gilroy General Plan 2002 to 2020. Adopted June
2002. Gilroy, California.



City of Morgan Hill. 2010a. Morgan Hill General Plan. February 2010.
Morgan Hill, California.



Santa Clara County. 1994. Santa Clara County General Plan, 1995–
2010. Adopted December 1994. County of Santa Clara, California.



U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 1957. Gemstones of the United States;
Geological Survey Bulletin 1042-G.

Project Area
The Project is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25 miles
southeast of San Jose, passing through rural, residential, and a commercial
district in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and Gilroy (Figure 1.1-1,
Regional Area Map). The northern portion of the Project (Reaches 8, 7B, and
portions of 7A) is within the City of Morgan Hill; a portion of 7A is within
unincorporated Santa Clara County. Reaches 6, 5, and 14 are within the San
Martin planning area, and a portion (north of Masten Avenue) of Reach 4 is also
in the San Martin planning area. The southern portion of Reach 4 is within
unincorporated Santa Clara County. The southern extent of the project area is
less than 1 mile from the City of Gilroy.
The project area for assessing impacts to mineral resources is defined as work
conducted directly on or within an identified resource area that has the potential
to cause a “loss of availability”. This would specifically apply to channel
earthwork or construction of maintenance roads, which could result in a loss of
aggregate resources through consumption (road construction) or removal
(channel earthwork).

3.3.3

Environmental Setting
According to the Santa Clara County General Plan, 1995–2010 (1994), mineral
resources of significance found and extracted in Santa Clara County include
construction aggregate deposits and, to a lesser extent, salts derived from

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-29

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

evaporation ponds at the edge of San Francisco Bay. Crushed rock is also a
commercially important material in the region. It may be derived from greenstone,
serpentine, diabase, and chert-limestone (Jensen 1988; Kohler-Antablin 1996;
Kohler 1999). Eight mines are currently operating within the county. The Sargent
Oil Field (7 miles south of the City of Gilroy) is also active. Cinnabar (mercury
ore) deposits are present within in the county.
In the Project area, Reaches 4, 5, and 6, and the southernmost portion of Reach
14 have been classified by the California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG)
as MRZ-2 (significant deposits present), because they contain sand and gravel
resources. There are no active quarries or other mineral extraction sites within
the Project area.

3.3.3.1 Poppy Jasper
Poppy jasper, a semi-precious gemstone used in art and jewelry, is a type
of orbicular jasper with characteristic orange and red “poppy flowers”
within a microcrystalline quartz matrix found in rhyolitic deposits along the
eastern wall of the valley. A famous locality for poppy jasper is Morgan
Hill, California (USGS 1957). Historically strip mining has been conducted
to extract this gemstone. Due to this former practice, the resource has
become rare and is now protected by the City of Morgan Hill General Plan
(Maxey Pers. Com. 2013a). However, the major deposits of poppy jasper
have been previously identified outside of the Project boundary.
Lake Silveira (located just east of where Reach 7A and 6 come together)
is an element of the Project that would be constructed primarily for
mitigation to be implemented for all proposed alternatives as described in
Section 2.4.6. This feature was a former shallow open pit quarry likely a
source of sand and gravel material for local construction prior to 1980.
This quarry was not described in any searches of the historic U.S.
Geological survey bulletins pertaining to the region. It is located within
recent (Quaternary) alluvium, lake, playa, and terrace deposits (Figure
3.1-1; Formation Qoa). It is unlikely that the former quarry site contains
any poppy jasper due to its location relative to the poppy jasper parent
rock outcrops (Figure 3.1-1; Formation Tv).
3.4

BOTANICAL RESOURCES
3.4.1

Introduction
This section describes the botanical resources in the project area, including
vegetation types and habitats, rare or important plant communities, special-status
plant species, and waters of the United States and state.
The following reports were reviewed for relevant information on botanical
resources and jurisdictional waters in the project area:


Upper Llagas Creek Project Baseline Biological Resources Report
(Cardno ENTRIX 2012b).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-30

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.4.2

Affected Environment


Baseline Biological Resources/Habitat Mapping, Upper Llagas Creek
Flood Protection Project (Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012a).



Wetland Delineation and Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination Santa
Clara Valley Water District Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project
Santa Clara County, California. Prepared for Cardno ENTRIX, August 1,
2012 (Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012b).



Upper Llagas Creek Stormwater Improvements Project Preliminary
Delineation of Wetlands and Other Waters. 5 July (H. T. Harvey &
Associates 2013b).



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project 65% Design Habitat Impact
Analysis Technical Memorandum. June 17. (H. T. Harvey & Associates
2013c).



Final Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan, Appendix D Species
Accounts. August 2012. (ICF International 2012a).



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Soil Characterization
Report, June 2012 (Cardno ENTRIX 2012a).



Revised Draft Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act Report (CAR) for the
Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Santa Clara County, California
(USFWS 2003).

Project Area
The Project area for the evaluation of vegetation and habitats includes any areas
that would be directly, permanently, or temporarily affected by the construction
activities associated with all the Project alternatives (Figure 3.4-1). The Project
area includes access roads, temporary staging areas, and some areas that were
included at various stages of the Project design to ensure all potentially impacted
areas were included in biological studies. Specific locations relating to the project
area include Upper Llagas Creek channel north of the City of Gilroy to Silveira
Lake in the City of Morgan Hill, Reaches 4, 5, and 6; West Little Llagas Creek in
the City of Morgan Hill (Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8); the stream channel of West
Little Llagas Creek proposed to be cut off by Reach 7A in the City of Morgan Hill,
and the southern portion of the East Little Llagas Creek within the City of San
Martin (Reach 14). The project area is approximately 320 acres. The footprint of
the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action) is approximately 305 acres
and is referred to as the Tunnel Alternative Project area (Appendix E).
The wetland delineation conducted for the Project has a unique project area
boundary (delineation project area) that includes areas outside of the current
Project area, such as the Lake Silveira proposed mitigation area (Appendix F).
Tree surveys and California sycamore woodland mapping were also conducted
in some areas adjacent to the Project area (Appendix F).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-31

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.4-1 Upper Llagas Creek Project Reaches

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-32

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-33

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.4.3

Affected Environment

Environmental Setting
The project area is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25
miles southeast of San Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and
Gilroy (Figure 3.4-1). The project area is in the southern Santa Clara Valley, in
relatively flat terrain, with elevations ranging from 220 to 350 feet (67 to 106
meters) above sea level. Existing land use in the project area is agricultural,
residential, open space, and commercial.
The project area and its 84-square-mile watershed are located within the Central
California Coast Ranges. The Upper Main Llagas Creek drainage basin
originates at the crest of the Santa Cruz Mountains and extends southeastward
through foothill terrain then onto the floor of the Southern Santa Clara Valley
before joining the Pajaro River, which then flows into Monterey Bay near
Watsonville in Santa Cruz County. West Little Llagas Creek flows along the
western edge of the valley then turns eastward north of San Martin where it joins
East Little Llagas near the center of the valley. East Little Llagas Creek gathers
flow from tributaries from the east side of the valley before joining the main stem
just north of Masten Avenue. The project area includes segments of all three
creeks and southward to just beyond Buena Vista Avenue.
The soils underlying the project area’s valley floor location reflect the geologic
history and periods of flowing stream sediment deposits, gravels, and sands in
old channels with overlapping fine layers of floodplain deposits. In general, the
soils present in the project area are deep; well drained; medium to fine textured
loams (gravels, sands, and silts) and clay loams; formed on gradients less than 9
percent; and include Yolo, Zamora, Pleasanton, San Ysidro, Cropley, and
Arbuckle Series (Cardno ENTRIX 2012a). Serpentine, alkaline, or volcanic soils
that potentially support special-status plant species endemic to these soil types
are not present in the project area. The soils investigation conducted for the
Project identified several soil conditions in the project area that could influence
the success of proposed plantings (Cardno ENTRIX 2012a). These conditions
include cemented soil layers that would limit root growth and soil moisture and
low fertility, which could limit plant growth.
The following discussion describes vegetation and general characteristics of the
creek channel that are present in the project area for each reach. These
descriptions are based on field surveys conducted in portions of the project area
during September 20 through 23, 2011 vegetation sampling; October 18, 19, and
21, 2011 vegetation mapping; October 17 and 18, 2011 and January 16 and 17,
2012 wetland delineation investigations; and vegetation mapping and sampling
on West Little Llagas on April 17 through 20, 2012 (Condor Country Consulting,
Inc. 2012b). The following floristic descriptions are limited to surveys that were
conducted primarily during the fall and winter when identification of herbaceous
species would be limited. Specific vegetation types and habitats are described in
more detail in Section 3.4.3.1. Vegetation types and habitats in the project area
are shown in Appendix E.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-34

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Reach 4
Reach 4 is an intermittent stream channel that winds through agricultural and
suburbanized areas. The stream channel averages about 30 feet wide at the
OHWM along its 2.4-mile stretch. The stream channel bed is cobbles, pebbles,
and sand, which support sparse riparian vegetation, such as mule fat (Baccharis
salicifolia). The stream banks are typically steep, well defined, and support a mix
of riparian and non-riparian species. Annual non-native grass species, such as
wild oats (Avena spp.) and ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus), are common along
with invasive non-native species, such as Italian thistle (Carduus pycnocephalus)
and yellow star thistle (Centaurea solstitialis). Top of bank areas support nonnative trees, such as red gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis) and native trees, such
as Fremont cottonwood (Populus fremontii ssp. fremontii), western sycamore
(Platanus racemosa), and coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia). Black walnut
(Juglans sp.), which are escapes from orchard rootstock, are also present in
Reach 4.
Reach 5
Reach 5 is a short approximately 0.4-mile segment connecting Reaches 6 and
14 that averages 15 feet wide at the OHWM. The channel is composed of gravel
and sand and contains riparian species, such as mule fat in the stream channel,
red gum at the top of bank, and annual grassland dominating the understory
throughout. There is a large grove of Monterey pine (Pinus radiata) on the bank
above the southeast portion of the reach, but this commonly-planted species,
while native to California, is not native to the project area. Land use to the north
is agriculture and to the south is urban.
Reach 6
Reach 6 flows southward for 3.7 miles. The channel is composed of gravel, sand,
and silt and varies between 15 to 30 feet wide. The southern portion of Reach 6
is adjacent to several SCVWD percolation ponds to the west and greenhouses
and agricultural fields to east. The southern portion supports riparian species,
such as mule fat and willow (Salix spp.) in the stream channel and coast live oak,
red gum, and western sycamore on top of the banks. The middle portion of
Reach 6 traverses agricultural fields, small corporation yards, and suburban
areas. Portions of this central reach are adjacent to paved roads and invasive
non-native species, such as giant reed (Arundo donax) and Himalayan
blackberry (Rubus armeniacus), are abundant amid the annual grassland and
scattered native and non-native tree species, such as western sycamore, red
gum, and willows. The northern portion of Reach 6 passes through an industrial
area and waste treatment facilities, but still supports considerable riparian forest
and scrub habitat.
Reaches 7A and 7B
Reach 7 is divided into two sections, Reaches 7A and 7B. The southern end of
Reach 7A ends at Llagas Creek and Silveira Lake, and this small portion of
Reach 7A is biologically diverse with valley oak (Quercus lobata) and coast live
oak, walnut, willow, and broad-leaved cattail (Typha latifolia). The majority of the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-35

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
southern half of Reach 7A is a non-channelized topographically flat section of
land with a combination of heavy agricultural use (plowed fields) or fallow land
that has converted to annual non- native grassland. The northern half of Reach
7A supports non-native grassland and patches of perennial marsh and highly
fragmented riparian forest and runs through a residential neighborhood.
Reach 7B contains West Little Llagas Creek and the channel is composed of
gravel, sand, silt, and clay, which transects an urban area. The stream channel
supports riparian scrub species and the banks and the undisturbed areas above
the top of bank support non-native grasslands dominated by wild oats along with
Bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon) and annual canary grass (Phalaris
canariensis). Over half the project area in Reach 7B is grassland (Table 3.4-1).
The tree canopy consists of a combination of planted exotic trees and native
trees, such as coast live and valley oaks, and Fremont cottonwood. The southern
half of the Reach 7B channel averages 75 feet in width and the northern half of
Reach 7B (north of Tennant Avenue) averages 15 feet in width. In the northern
portion, the stream channel is adjacent to small businesses and is in an
underground culvert for the northernmost 650 feet of the reach.
Table 3.4-1

Vegetation Types and Habitats in the Project Area

Vegetation Type

Project Area Total (Acres)

Reach 4
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

17.5

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

2.9

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

--

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

41.1

Aquatic

7.9

Developed

1.2

Reach 5
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

1.8

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

2.1

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

--

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

13.7

Aquatic

1.9

Developed

0.9

Reach 6
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

12.9

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

11.1

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

1.0

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-36

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Vegetation Type

Project Area Total (Acres)

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

49.7

Aquatic

8.5

Developed

9.3

Reach 7A
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

3.9

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

3.3

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

1.7

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

43.2

Aquatic

0.1

Developed

1.3

Reach 7B
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

1.4

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

0.1

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

1.6

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

13.7

Aquatic

0.3

Developed

3.1

Reach 8
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

3.4

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

0.9

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

1.3

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

10.2

Aquatic

0.4

Developed

4.1

Reach 14
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)

1.4

Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)

2.7

Perennial Marsh (PEM)

0.3

Upland Herbaceous (U/H)

28.6

Aquatic

13.4

Developed

11.0

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-37

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 8
Reach 8 is an intermittent stream (West Little Llagas Creek) and the channel is
composed of gravel, sand, silt, and clay, which averages 12 feet in width. The
channel transects an urban area with businesses, residential areas, and roads
abutting many portions of the top of the channel bank. The channel runs
underground for 250 feet in two locations. The bottom of the channel varies from
sections with no vegetation to areas with broad-leaved cattails and hardstem
bulrush (Schoenoplectus acutus). The banks are predominately vegetated with
non-native annual grassland. A large portion of this reach has a canopy of exotic
trees with occasional patches of remnant coast live oak and valley oak. The
northernmost section runs along Hale Avenue and supports mostly ruderal
vegetation, with some cattail and scattered oaks throughout. Most of the project
area in Reach 8 is bordered by developed urban and landscape habitats
(Table 3.4-1).
Reach 14
Reach 14 is an engineered wide channel with several portions that were recently
re-excavated in 2011. The channel width at the OHWM averages 25 feet and the
top of bank width averages 70 feet. The stream channel substrate is composed
of cobbles, gravel, sand, and silt. A few sections contain riprap. The bottom of
the channel is mostly bare ground with scattered patches of riparian herbs, such
as curly dock (Rumex crispus) and cocklebur (Xanthium strumarium). The
vegetation on the banks of the channel is predominately non-native grasslands.
The top of the channel on both sides is lined with roads or ruderal habitat with
scattered scrub, exotic trees, and willows. Agricultural fields or suburban areas
are present beyond the roads on each side of the channel.

3.4.3.1 Vegetation Types and Habitats
Vegetation types and habitats in the project area were mapped using a
SCVWD vegetation classification, which was based on the Manual of
California Vegetation (Sawyer et al 2009), the industry standard for
California vegetation mapping. The SCVWD categories were applied to
the project area (Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012a; Cardno ENTRIX
2012b). Additional adjustments and data gaps for vegetation mapping
were addressed to maximize mapping precision with aerial photograph
interpretation and ground surveys (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013c). This
analysis resulted in 43 vegetation types or habitats in the project area,
which were grouped into 15 corresponding vegetation types and habitats
for this EIR. Thirteen of the 15 types were further grouped into six CAR
types for the purpose of conducting an impact analysis and proposing
compensatory mitigation that is consistent with the requirements of the
CAR (USFWS 2003). The CAR habitat types are riparian habitats that
were described in the USFWS (2003) report prepared for this Project for
the purpose of identifying appropriate mitigation measures and
compensatory mitigation ratios for impacts to habitats. A map series
showing CAR habitat types in the project area is provided in Appendix E.
Subsequent to completion of the analysis described above, an additional
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-38

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
section was added to Reach 8, between Hillwood Lane and Llagas Road;
and CAR vegetation types were determined for this area using aerial
photography, ground based photos and other data.
The following section provides a general description of each of the six
CAR habitat types and each of the corresponding SCVWD vegetation
types or habitats associated with that CAR type. Table 3.4-1 provides a
summary of the acreages by reach of four main CAR habitats in which
Riparian Forest (native) and Riparian Forest (non-native) are combined,
and Riparian Scrub-shrub (native) and Riparian Scrub-shrub (non-native)
are combined. In addition, Aquatic and Developed habitats, which do not
correspond to a CAR habitat, are also described.
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native)
The Riparian Forest (PFO) (native) CAR habitat type consists of five
SCVWD vegetation types in the project area that are dominated by native
riparian trees (Appendix E). These types include: (1) broad- leaved
woodland, (2) California sycamore woodland1, (3) horticultural and
landscape plantings (native), (4) native riparian scrub, and (5) riparian
woodland. The Riparian Forest (native) category refers to habitat
dominated by woody plant species over 20 feet in height in the riparian
corridor (USFWS 2003). This habitat is generally found within the bed and
banks of the creek, but includes the canopy of trees that extend beyond
the bed and banks. The structure of this habitat varies throughout the
project area, ranging from single isolated trees with sparse to no
herbaceous understory to dense, multiple-layered canopy forest. Isolated
trees, such as those found in much of Reaches 7 and 8, represent
degraded habitat with limited biological function whereas multi-layered
canopy forest, such as those found in Reach 4 and parts of Reach 6,
provides high biological functions and values.
Broad-leaved Woodland
Broad-leaved woodland consists of upland woodland with a tree layer
composed of varying proportions of coast live oak, valley oak, and
California buckeye (Aesculus californica). Dominant shrub species
include poison oak (Toxicodendron diversilobum). In some portions of the
project area the broad-leaved woodland type is dominated by coast live
oak or valley oak with over 50 percent of the relative tree canopy cover
provided by one of these two oak species. The broad-leaved woodland
type also includes mixed oak woodland; where neither the coast live oak
nor valley oak comprises over 50 percent of the tree canopy cover.
Broad-leaved woodland is generally represented as individual trees or
small clusters along most reaches, except in Reach 4, where more
extensive patches exist.

1

The California sycamore woodland type is dominated by western sycamore trees.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-39

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
California Sycamore Woodland
California sycamore woodland in the project area is based on the
SCVWD Platanus racemosa type. This woodland alliance generally
occurs within the riparian corridor and is composed of mature, widely
spaced western sycamore comprising at least 5 percent of the absolute
cover of the tree canopy layer. Other species associated native trees
include coast live oak, valley oak, sandbar willow, red willow, arroyo
willow, and black walnut. California sycamore woodland is considered a
rare and sensitive vegetation community by the California Department of
Fish and Game (CDFG [2010]). Regulatory agencies are concerned with
the decline in this habitat type in Santa Clara County (CBI 2006). It is
considered a declining habitat type and relict trees are considered
particularly valuable, because seed produced by native sycamores in the
Santa Clara Valley includes genetic material from widely-planted nonnative sycamores (Platanus sp.). For that reason, the limited young trees
that have recruited from seed are often hybrids with non-native trees. In
addition, the extent of hydrologic alteration in the region has made natural
recruitment of native sycamores infeasible in most areas, including most
reaches of the Project and, therefore, new native sycamore trees are not
replacing the old trees that reach the end of their lifespan.
California sycamore woodland was mapped in the field during the 2013
site investigations to encompass all California sycamore woodlands,
including small mapping units. During these field surveys, existing
California sycamore woodland mapping units that were defined as
western sycamore occupying 50 percent of the relative tree canopy were
expanded to encompass some adjacent woodland areas and western
sycamore occupying at least 5 percent absolute cover. This method
resulted in larger mapping units in some areas and a higher acreage of
California sycamore woodland than for the trees alone in the project area.
Horticultural and Landscape Plantings (native)
Horticultural and landscape plantings (native) consist of planted native
trees such as Monterey pine.
Native Riparian Scrub
The native riparian scrub vegetation type in the project area is dominated
by one or more riparian shrub species and the absolute vegetative cover
in the shrub layer ranges from 20 to 50 percent. Herbaceous plants may
occur in the understory. Dominant species in this vegetation type that
occurs in PFO (native) include arroyo willow (Salix lasiolepis) and other
willow species with a shrubby understory of Himalayan blackberry.
Riparian Woodland
Riparian woodland in the PFO CAR habitat is dominated by red willow
(Salix laevigata) and/or Fremont cottonwood. The subcanopy may include
arroyo willow. In the project area, this habitat type generally consists of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-40

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
individual trees or small clusters of trees except on Reach 7A just south
of La Crosse Drive and Reach 4 south of the convergence of Reaches 5
and 14. This habitat provides important biological functions and values.
Riparian Forest (PFO) (non-native and planted non-local natives)
The Riparian Forest (PFO) (native) CAR habitat type consists of two
vegetation types in the project area (Appendix E). This habitat is similar to
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native) except that this habitat is dominated by
non-native or planted non-local native riparian trees. This habitat is
generally found within the bed and banks of the creek, but includes trees
where canopy extends beyond the bed and banks. The structure of this
habitat varies throughout the project area, ranging from single isolated
trees with sparse to no herbaceous understory to dense, multiple-layered
canopy forest.
Eucalyptus
The eucalyptus type contains a eucalyptus tree canopy with a relative
tree cover greater than 80 percent. The predominant eucalyptus species
in the project area is red gum. Other scattered eucalyptus species in the
project area include blue gum (E. globulus) and forest red gum (E.
tereticornis). Red gum has a California Invasive Plant Council (Cal-IPC)
rating of limited and is considered to have a low to moderate rate of
invasiveness (Cal-IPC 2006).
Horticultural and Landscape Plantings
Horticultural an landscape plantings consist of ornamental non-native
trees and stands of black walnut, which are escapes from orchard
rootstock.
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native)
The Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native) CAR habitat type consists of two
vegetation types in the project area that are dominated by native riparian
shrubs (Appendix E). Riparian Scrubshrub (native) is habitat composed of
woody plant species less than 20 feet tall within the riparian corridor
(USFWS 2003). This includes species that are in an early developmental
stage of PFO, shorter stature native trees and native shrub species. The
structure of this habitat ranges from single isolated shrubs to dense,
multi-species canopy scrub habitat.
Native Riparian Scrub
The native riparian scrub vegetation type in the project area is dominated
by one or more riparian shrub species and the absolute vegetative cover
in the shrub layer ranges from 20 to 50 percent. Dominant species in this
vegetation type include mule fat, sandbar willow (Salix exigua), and
arroyo willow. This vegetation type often has an herbaceous understory,
but may also have a shrubby understory of Himalayan blackberry.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-41

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Upland Scrub
The Upland vegetation type in the project area is vegetation complex that
consists of a shrubby layer of coyote brush (Baccharis pilularis) that
occupies over 50 percent of the absolute cover.
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (non-native)
The Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native) CAR habitat type consists of
one vegetation type in the project area that is dominated by non-native
riparian shrubs and giant reed (Appendix E). Riparian Scrub-shrub (nonnative) refers to habitat composed of vegetation that is less than 20 feet
tall within the riparian corridor (USFWS 2003). This includes species that
are in an early developmental stage of PFO and shorter stature
vegetation. The structure of this habitat ranges from single isolated
shrubs to dense, multi- layered canopy scrub habitat.
Riparian Exotic Scrub
Riparian exotic scrub is dominated by giant reed or Himalayan blackberry,
with 60 percent or greater relative cover of one of these species. Giant
reed has a Cal-IPC rating of high and considered a highly invasive plant
that can have a severe impact on animal communities and vegetation
structure with a high likelihood of invading and dominating adjacent
riparian plant communities (Cal-IPC 2006). Himalayan blackberry has a
Cal-IPC rating of high and considered a highly invasive plant that can
have a severe impact on animal communities and vegetation structure
with a high likelihood of invading and dominating adjacent wetland plant
communities (Cal-IPC 2006).
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
The Upland Herbaceous (U/H) CAR habitat type consists of four
vegetation types or habitats in the project area that are dominated by
non-native grasses and forbs and include sparsely vegetated disturbed
areas with invasive species (Appendix E). This type includes: (1)
agriculture, (2) barren, (3) grassland, and (4) ruderal. It is located on the
Creek channel banks and levee slopes. Areas where the Creek banks
occur under bridges were characterized as Upland Herbaceous but
vegetation cover tends to be sparse in these areas.
Agriculture
Agriculture habitat in the project area supports agricultural activity or
recently fallowed fields and includes orchards and land planted with
crops.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-42

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Barren
Barren habitats are sparsely vegetated to unvegetated areas. These
areas have less than 10 percent absolute cover of vegetation. Recently
plowed agricultural areas are included in agriculture.
Grassland
Grassland habitat is the dominant vegetation type in the project area
(Table 3.4-1). This vegetation type is dominated by naturalized (nonnative) annual plants, such as wild oat (Avena fatua), slender wild oat
(Avena barbata), ripgut brome, Italian ryegrass (Festuca perennis), or by
naturalized perennial grasses such as Harding grass (Phalaris aquatica),
Dallis grass (Paspalum dilatatum) and Bermuda grass.
Ruderal
Ruderal vegetation consists of weedy species growing on highly disturbed
land that is frequently subject to disturbance from people and vehicles.
Ruderal plant species in the project area include non-native wild radish
(Raphanus sativus), narrow-leaved plantain (Plantago lanceolata), filaree
(Erodium spp.), and annual grasses, such as wild oat. Ruderal habitat is
commonly found adjacent to highways.
Perennial Marsh (PEM)
The Perennial Marsh (PEM) CAR habitat type consists of any perennial
marsh and seasonal wetlands habitat that were delineated as USACE
jurisdictional features (H. T. Harvey & Associates 2013b; Appendices E
and F). These habitats are generally found on the edges of the active
channel; however, some span the entire channel bed (H. T. Harvey &
Associates 2013b). Perennial marsh habitat occurs in the perennially and
intermittently flowing reaches of the creek and is composed of species,
such as cattail (Typha sp.), California bulrush (Schoenoplectus
californicus), tall flatsedge (Cyperus eragrostis), and fringed willowherb
(Epilobium ciliatum). Seasonal wetlands are generally located in the
ephemerally flowing reaches of the creek and are composed of species
such as curly dock, cocklebur, and Dallis grass.
Other Habitats
Two habitats in the project area do not correspond to a CAR habitat:
Aquatic and Developed (Appendix E).
Aquatic
Aquatic habitat includes concrete lined channels, perennial stream
channels, and seasonal intermittent streambeds. Concrete lined channels
are characterized by an impermeable layer of concrete that may have an
overlying layer of sediment that contains herbaceous plant species.
Perennial stream channels have moving water year round. Seasonal

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-43

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
streambeds are over 80 percent bare ground composed primarily of sand,
gravel, and cobbles. These gravelly stream beds do not contain surface
water for at least 3 months of the year. Facultative, facultative wet, and
facultative upland plant species, such as curly dock, cockle bur, and crab
grass (Digitaria sanguinalis), and other species, such as black mustard
(Brassica nigra) and teasel (Dipsacus fullonum), may occur in scattered
stands.
Developed
Areas in the project area that are mapped as developed include urban
and suburban, roads, and riprap. Water channels in urbanized areas may
be underground inside large diameter pipes with built up urban areas
above. Roads are regularly maintained and traveled gravel or asphalt
surfaced roads. Riprap consists of channel areas with a fill composed of
large boulders greater than 10 inches (25 centimeters).

3.4.3.2 Rare or Important Plant Communities
The CDFW regulates impacts to rare or important plant communities
(CDFG 2010). Locations of some these communities occurrences are
recorded in the California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) (CDFW
2012), but many are not. There are two sensitive natural communities in
the CNDDB within 10 miles of the project area: Serpentine Bunchgrass
and Sycamore Alluvial Woodland (Figure 3.4-2). Serpentine Bunchgrass
does not occur in the project area, because serpentine soils are not
present. The CNDDB Sycamore Alluvial Woodland community
corresponds to California sycamore woodland in the project area, and to
the Platanus racemosa Woodland Alliance in A Manual of California
Vegetation, second edition (Sawyer et. al 2009). There are 24.02 acres of
this habitat in the vicinity of the project area, primarily in Reaches 4 and 6
(Appendix E). The updated List of Vegetation Alliances and Associations
(CDFG 2010) ranks Platanus racemosa Woodland Alliance as G3, S3,
which means there are 21 to 100 occurrences of it worldwide/statewide
and/or more than 2,590 to 12,950 hectares of the alliance.
Other riparian habitats in the project area are also considered sensitive
vegetation communities by CDFW, because of their ranking (CDFG 2010)
and their location adjacent to Aquatic habitat that consists of bare
channels (perennial and intermittent stream channels). The CDFW’s
jurisdiction along channels with a defined bed and bank extends to
adjacent riparian habitats. Most of the Riparian Forest (42.09 acres) in the
project area is located adjacent to Aquatic habitat and is comprised of
vegetation subtypes that are ranked as sensitive, including Populus
fremontii, Salix laevigata, and Quercus lobata.
The project area also has the potential to support native grassland
alliances that could be considered rare, such as purple needle grass
grassland (Nassella pulchra alliance). The CDFW ranks this alliance as
G3? S3?, which means a tentative ranking is that there are 21 to 100
occurrences of it worldwide/statewide, or more than 2,590 to 12,950
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-44

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
hectares (CDFG 2010). Another sensitive native grassland community
that is potentially present in the project area is blue wild rye meadows
(Elymus glaucus alliance), which has a ranking of G3?, S3?, meaning that
tentatively there are only 21 to 100 occurrences of it worldwide/statewide,
and/or 2,590 to 12,950 hectares of the alliance. Most of the grasslands in
the project area are disturbed, especially in Reach 14, so these sensitive
grassland habitats are not likely to be present in the upper reaches of the
Project, but are potentially present in less disturbed areas, such as
Reach 4.

3.4.3.3 Waters of the United States and Waters of the State
Two recent wetland delineations have been conducted for different parts
of this Project. The first delineation was on October 17 and 18, 2011,
January 16 and 17, 2012, and April 17 through 20, 2012 and covered
Reaches 6 and 7A bypasses, Reach 7A at Watsonville Road, north tunnel
portal terminus construction area, and the West Little Llagas Creek
channel and adjoining banks, as well as several areas outside the project
area (Appendix F) (Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012b). The second
was conducted on November 8 through December 7, 2012 and May 2, 6,
and 14, 2013 and covered the remaining portions of the Project project
area, as well as the northern section of Reach 8 and some of the
proposed mitigation areas, such as Lake Silveira (H.T. Harvey &
Associates 2013b). Both delineations were routine onsite investigations
that followed the USACE standard methods (Environmental Laboratory
1987; USACE 2008). The results of the delineations were combined and
are included as Appendix F. The delineation project area corresponds to
the botanical project area except for one part of Reach 7A, where no
delineation has been conducted. However, this area is primarily
agricultural fields and wetlands, if present, are anticipated to be very
limited in extent.
Table 3.4-2 provides a summary of the 52.70 acres of potential
jurisdictional waters (Section 404) that were identified in the 181.93-acre
delineation project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013b). A total of 9.75
acres of perennial marsh and seasonal wetlands were delineated as
potential jurisdictional wetlands.
A total of 42.95 acres and 53,473 linear feet of intermittent and perennial
streams, culverts, or ponds situated below the OHWM were delineated as
potential jurisdictional other waters (non-wetland waters) of the United
States. These jurisdictional wetlands and other waters are shown in
Appendix E where perennial marsh and seasonal wetlands correspond to
the CAR Perennial Marsh (PEM) habitat, and intermittent and perennial
streams, culverts, and ponds are grouped as Aquatic habitats. All reaches
within the delineation project area are relatively permanent waters
(RPWs) and Lake Silveira is a palustrine feature (P) (H.T. Harvey &
Associates 2013b). None of the non-wetland waters in the project areas
are traditionally navigable waters (TNWs).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-45

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Table 3.4-2

Jurisdictional Waters in the Delineation Project Area

Potential Jurisdictional Waters

Acres

Section 404 Wetlands

9.75

Perennial Marsh

1.42

Seasonal Wetlands

8.33

Section 404 Other Waters

42.95

Intermittent Streams

24.21

Perennial Streams

9.90

Culverts

0.94

Pond

7.90

Total Jurisdictional Waters

52.70

Source: H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013b

Two hundred twelve (212) potential jurisdictional perennial marsh features (totaling 1.42
acres) were mapped in the project area (Appendix F). Perennial marsh is restricted to
areas that retain water throughout the year, such as areas within the OHWM in the
perennial stream corridors and along the banks of Lake Silveira. There are 6,329 total
linear feet of perennial marsh in streambeds throughout the project area. Vegetation
below the OHWM, supported wetland species, such as spotted ladysthumb (Persicaria
maculosa), and obligate wetland species, such as California bulrush and cattail.
Hydrophytic vegetation along the edge of the low-flow channel included facultative
species, such as curly dock, cocklebur and Dallis grass, tall flatsedge, fringed
willowherb, and wild mint (Mentha arvensis).
Seventy-seven (77) potential jurisdictional seasonal wetlands (totaling 8.33 acres) were
mapped in the project area (Appendix F). Seasonal wetlands are present, adjacent to
the intermittent stream channels in all reaches and at Llagas Creek at Lake Silveira.
Most seasonal wetlands in the delineation project area are in channels at or below the
OHWM, and some are outside of the main Llagas Creek channel. There are 15,465
linear feet of the seasonal wetlands. Cattail and California bulrush were observed in
wetlands located at or below the OHWM and tall flatsedge, curly dock, cocklebur, and
Dallis grass were often observed in wetlands that occurred at or just above the OHWM.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-46

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.4-2 CNDDB Records
of Special Status Plants and Sensitive
N
Communities in the Vicinity of the Tunnel Alternative Project Area

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-47

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-48

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

A total of 42.95 acres of non-wetland waters (other waters) were identified in the project
area, corresponding to 53,473 linear feet (Table 3.4-2; Appendix F). These features are
located in the low-flow channels and active floodplains within OHWM of the Llagas
Creek watershed. Most of the non-wetland waters identified in the delineation project
area are intermittent streams within a single channel. The intermittent streams did not
often have surface water at the beginning of the delineation period in November 2012,
but seasonal flows were observed later during the survey period after precipitation
events in December 2012. Perennial features were only observed in Reach 6 and the
portion of Llagas Creek near Lake Silveira and were the most complex stream channels
in the delineation project area. Twenty culverts were also identified as other waters of
the United States.

3.4.3.4 Special-status Plant Species
For the purpose of this section, special-status species are plant species
that meet one or more of the definitions listed below.


Species listed or proposed for listing as threatened or endangered
under the federal ESA.



Species that are Candidates for possible future listing as
threatened or endangered under the federal ESA.



Species listed or proposed for listing by the State of California as
threatened, endangered, or rare under California Endangered
Species Act (CESA).



Species that meet the definitions of rare or endangered under
CEQA Guidelines Section 15380. This includes plant species that
have a California Rare Plant Rank (RPR) of 1A, 1B, or 2 (CNPS
2012).

A list of 55 special-status plant species that are known to occur or
potentially occur in the vicinity of the project area were compiled and
evaluated for their potential to occur within the project area. This list is
provided in Appendix G and describes the species’ scientific and common
names, status, habitat, and potential to occur in the project area. The list
was compiled based on a review of special-status species lists and
records from the CNDDB (CDFW 2012), USFWS online species list
(USFWS 2012), California Native Plant Society online Inventory of Rare,
Threatened, and Endangered Plants of California (CNPS 2012)
databases, and literature resources. The CNDDB and the USFWS
databases were reviewed for special-status species that are known to
occur or potentially occur in the three USGS, 7.5-minute topographic
quadrangles that the project area is located within (Morgan Hill, Mount
Madonna, and Gilroy), and the nine neighboring quadrangles: Chittenden,
Gilroy Hot Springs, Loma Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San
Felipe, Santa Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, Watsonville West, Lick
Observatory, Isabel Valley, and San Jose East (Appendices H and I). The
CNDDB records of special- status plant species and sensitive vegetation
communities within 5 miles of the Project area were also reviewed and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-49

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
are shown in Figure 3.4-2. There is no Critical Habitat for special-status
plant species within 10 miles of the project area.
The 55 special-status plant species in the Appendix G list were evaluated
for their potential to occur in the project area. Based on an analysis of
distribution, known occurrences, and habitat requirements four of the
special-status plant species evaluated may occur in the project area
(Table 3.4-3). Focused protocol-level surveys for special-status plant
species have not been conducted in the project area, but no specialstatus plant species were observed during various site surveys such as
the vegetation mapping on October 18, 19, and 21, 2011; and the wetland
delineation on October 17 and 18, 2011, January 16 and 17, 2012, and
April 17 through 20, 2012.

Table 3.4-3

Special-status Plant Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Area

Common Name
Big-scale balsamroot

Scientific Name
Balsamorhiza macrolepis var. macrolepis

Status
RPR 1B

Loma Prieta hoita

Hoita strobilina

RPR 1B

Fragrant fritillary

Fritillaria liliacea

RPR 1B

Arcuate bush-mallow

Malacothamnus arcuatus

RPR 1B

RPR 1B = Rare Plant Rank 1B: rare, threatened or endangered in California and elsewhere

None of these species are state or federally listed; and they have a
California Rare Plant Rank of 1B, meaning that they are considered rare,
threatened, or endangered in California and elsewhere. All four of these
species are sometimes associated with serpentine soils, which is not
present at the ground surface in the project area. However, these species
may also occur in non-serpentine soils. Many other special- status plant
species evaluated for potential to occur in the project area were
eliminated from further consideration, because suitable habitat is not
present in the project area. For example, many species are restricted to
serpentine soils, which do not occur in the Project footprint (Appendix G).
The four special- status plant species with the potential to occur in the
project area are discussed below.
Big-Scale balsamroot (Balsamorhiza macrolepis)
Big-scale balsamroot (Balsamorhiza macrolepis) is an RPR 1B species
(CDFW 2012). This species is a perennial herb that occurs in chaparral,
cismontane woodland, valley, and foothill grassland, and sometimes
serpentine soils, at elevations between 90 and 1,555 meters (300 to
5,100 feet). Big-scale balsamroot is in the sunflower family (Asteraceae)
and blooms from March to June.
This species may occur in the project area in grasslands or in various
woodland habitats; although, no serpentine soils are present in the project
area. There is one CNDDB (CDFW 2012) occurrence of this species
within 10 miles of project area. This 1990 occurrence is approximately 2.6

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-50

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
miles northeast of the project area, west of Coyote Dam on SCVWD
property (Figure 3.4-1).
Fragrant Fritillary (Fritillaria liliacea)
Fragrant fritillary (Fritillaria liliacea) is an RPR 1B species (CDFW 2012).
This lily occurs in grasslands, coastal scrub, and coastal prairie on
various soils that are often serpentine and sometimes heavy clay, at
elevations from 3 to 410 meters (10 to 1,350feet). It flowers from
February to April.
Fragrant fritillary may occur in the project area in Grassland or woodland
habitats. Serpentine soils are not present in the project area, but clay
soils are present. There are five CNDDB (CDFW 2012) occurrences of
fragrant fritillary within a 10-mile radius from the project area. These
records range from 6.1 to 6.8 miles from the Project area. The closest
occurrence is a 1989 record of 150 plants on private land in the East
Santa Clara Valley, southeast of Metcalfe Canyon.
Loma Prieta hoita (Hoita strobilina)
Loma Prieta hoita (Hoita strobilina) is an RPR 1B species (CDFW 2012).
This species usually occurs on serpentine, moist sites in cismontane
woodland, riparian woodland, and chaparral, between 30 to 860 meters
(100 to 2,825 feet) in elevation. Its primary habitat is woodland, especially
in the understory of riparian woodlands or shaded slopes, and its
secondary habitat is chaparral (ICF 2012). Although Loma Prieta hoita
can inhabit non-serpentine soils, it is often associated with serpentine
soils (Safford et al. 2005). It is a perennial herb in the legume family
(Fabaceae) that blooms from May to July.
Loma Prieta hoita may occur in the project area in riparian woodlands and
other woodland habitats; although, serpentine soils are not present in the
project area. There are 12 CNDDB (CDFW 2012) records of this species
within 10 miles of the project area. The closest CNDDB occurrence is
approximately 1.7 miles south of the Project area that is broadly mapped
in Gilroy and is a historic record from 1918 that is possibly extirpated, but
other records within 10 miles are believed extant.
Arcuate bush-mallow (Malacothamnus arcuatus) [Malacothamnus
fasciculatus]
Arcuate bush-mallow (Malacothamnus arcuatus) [Malacothamnus
fasciculatus] is an RPR 1B species (CDFW 2012). It occurs on gravelly
soils and alluvium in chaparral and cismontane woodland at elevations
between 15 to 355 meters (15 to 1,165 feet). This species is an
evergreen shrub in the mallow family (Malvaceae) that blooms from April
to September.
This species may occur in the project area in woodland habitats. There
are CNDDB occurrences within 10 miles of in the project area. The

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-51

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
closest CNDDB occurrence is approximately 2.0 miles from the Project
area at the SCVWD’s Chesbro Reservoir Spillway where two plants were
observed in 2006 (Figure 3.4-1).

3.4.3.5 Protected Trees
The project area contains approximately 2,200 native and non-native
trees that range in size from 2 to 90 inches in dbh. This total includes
trees inventoried within the footprint of the Action Alternatives, as well as
trees adjacent to the footprint. Some of the trees meet the criteria (dbh
and species) to be considered protected trees under the City of Morgan
Hill and the Santa Clara County tree ordinances and, therefore, would
require removal permits. Common tree species include eucalyptus,
western sycamore, various fruit trees (Prunus spp.), coast live oak, valley
oak, black walnut, willow, and Fremont cottonwood.
3.5

WILDLIFE RESOURCES
3.5.1

Introduction
This section describes the wildlife resources of the Project area, including wildlife
habitats, common wildlife species, and special-status wildlife species. In addition,
this section discusses potential Project impacts to special-status wildlife species
and their habitats that occur within the Project area. Section 3.5.3, Environmental
Setting, describes the regulations and ordinances that apply to wildlife resources.
A list of special-status wildlife species was compiled for the Project area based
on the following sources: the CDFW, California Natural Diversity Data Base
(CNDDB; Appendix H; Figure 3.5-1), the USFWS species lists for the Project
Quadrangles, and the Santa Clara County List (Appendix I).
Baseline information on wildlife resources in the Project area, including specialstatus species and their habitats, was compiled from existing published and
unpublished literature describing biological resources in the region,
environmental database searches, consultation with local wildlife professionals,
and information provided by staff from the CDFW, USFWS Pacific Southwest
Region, the SCVWD, and the USACE. Primary data sources include the
following:


Baseline Biological Resources/Habitat Mapping—Verification and
updated habitat map of the 2006 Tetra Tech habitat map and updated
California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) query of the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection Project. Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012.
(prepared for Cardno ENTRIX).



Biological Resources Report for Lake Silveira Master Plan – H.T. Harvey
& Associates (prepared for Amphion Environmental Inc.) 1988.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-52

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Hydrography, Hydrology, Water Quality, and Plant Communities of Lake
Silveira, Morgan Hill area, Santa Clara County. July 23, 2012 (prepared
for Cardno ENTRIX).



Baseline Biological Study of Lake Silveira - prepared by Condor Country
Consulting, Inc.



Surveys for Red-legged Frog and California Tiger Salamander – prepared
by Santa Clara Valley Water District.



Butterfield Biological Boulevard Resources Extension Assessment –
Wetlands Research Associates (WRA), Inc. May 2010 (prepared for the
City of Morgan Hill, California).



California Red-legged frog distribution and status—1997. H.T. Harvey &
Associates (prepared for SCVWD).



California Tiger Salamander Distribution and Status—1999. H.T. Harvey
& Associates (prepared for SCVWD).



California Tiger Salamander Surveys and Site Assessments at Selected
Santa Clara County Locations H.T. Harvey & Associates (August 2012).



Final Recovery Plan for the Least Bell’s Vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus) – U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). March 1998.



Draft Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Biological
Assessment—Santa Clara County. November 2001.



Lake Silveira Restoration Project Design Development Report – H.T.
Harvey & Associates (Prepared for RMC Water and Environment).
October 18, 2013.



Least Bell’s vireo breeding records in the Central Valley following
decades of extirpation - Howell, C.A., Wood, J.K., Dettling, M.D., Griggs,
K., Otte, C.C., Lina, L., Gardali, T. 2010. pp. 105-113.



Lower Llagas Creek Least Bell’s Vireo Surveys (Project # 3035-14), H.T.
Harvey & Associates. August 19, 2010.



Upper Llagas Creek Bridge and Culvert Surveys for Bat Habitat (HTH
Project #3270-18) – H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD).
January 28, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: Inclusion of Bat Evaluations
into Environmental Documents -- Technical Memorandum from Melissa
Moore to Mitchell Katzel—Cardno ENTRIX. February 6, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: Biological Report – Least
Bell’s Vireo Assessment. Technical memorandum from Stephen M.
Ferranti to Mitchell Katzel -- Cardno ENTRIX. February 6, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-53

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.5.2

Affected Environment


Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Burrowing Owl Survey and
Impact Assessment, H.T. Harvey & Associates. July 5, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project least Bell’s vireo
Assessment. Unpublished report prepared by Dr. Rottenborn, H. T.
Harvey & Associates. September 26, 2011.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Notice of Preparation, SCH
#2012102032, Santa Clara County. California Department of Fish and
Wildlife.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: West Little Llagas Creek
Wildlife Habitat Assessment Technical Memorandum (HTH Project#327021) – H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD). September 13,
2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Project: Lake Silveira special study: focused surveys
for detection of California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander
final report. Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012.



Upper Llagas Creek Tunnel Bat Exclusion Design (HTH Project #327017) – H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD). December 21,
2012.

Project Area
The project area for wildlife resources is the area that has potential for
unobstructed movement of wildlife species within a maximum of 2.5 miles from
the Project area and includes all areas that may be directly and indirectly
disturbed by the Project (Chapter 2.1, Figure 2.1-1). The Project area consists of
the upper seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little
Llagas Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek, starting at the downstream
boundary about 1,000 feet below Buena Vista Avenue upstream to Llagas Road.
The project area is approximately 13.9 miles long and includes 6.1 miles of the
main branch of Llagas Creek, 2.8 miles along West Little Llagas Creek, 2.4 miles
of East Little Llagas Creek (a tributary of Llagas Creek), and 1.3 miles of a new
bypass that would be constructed along West Little Llagas Creek to Llagas
Creek. The terrestrial portion of the project area extends 100 feet from top of
bank from both sides of the aforementioned portion of Llagas Creek to include
the riparian corridor.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-54

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.5-1 CNDDB Records of Special-Status Animals and Critical Habitat in
the Vicinity of the Project Area

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-55

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-56

December 2015

Chapter 3
3.5.3

Affected Environment
Environmental Setting
This section describes wildlife resources by Project reach as described in
Chapter 2, Project Description.
Project Reach 4
Reach 4 is an intermittent stream channel that winds 2.4 miles through
agricultural and suburbanized areas from just downstream of Buena Vista
Avenue in the south to the East Little Llagas Creek/Llagas Creek confluence in
the north (Figure 2.2-7). Typically this reach is ephemeral: dry in the summer and
fall months. The stream banks are typically steep and well defined and support a
mixture of riparian and non- riparian species. The stream channel bed supports
sparse mature vegetation, such as mule fat (Baccharis salicifolia). The canopy
consists of non-native trees, such as red gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis) and
native trees, such as Fremont cottonwood (Populus fremontii), western sycamore
(Platanus racemosa), coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia), and Northern California
black walnut (Juglans hindsii). The understory consists of annual non-native
grasses, such as wild oats (Avena spp.), ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus), weeds
(such as Italian thistle (Carduus pycnocephalus), and yellow star thistle
(Centaurea solstitialis) (Cardno ENTRIX 2012b). Along the majority of this reach,
the vegetation is sparse and open, with a scant understory (H.T. Harvey &
Associates 2011). Tree canopy along this reach is patchy; however it is more
extensive than any other Project reach. The habitat along and adjacent to
Reach 4 may provide suitable habitat for a variety of nesting birds, some reptiles,
and small mammals.
Project Reach 5
Reach 5 is a short riparian corridor approximately 0.5 mile long from the East
Little Llagas Creek/Llagas Creek confluence in the east to 700 feet upstream of
U.S. 101 in the west connecting Reaches 6 and 14 (Figure 2.2-6). The channel
contains Upper Llagas Creek that runs ephemeral drying in the summer and fall
months. As a result of the limited availability of water, riparian vegetation is
sparse along this section of the creek, consisting of species, such as mule fat in
the stream channel, red gum at the top of bank, and annual grassland dominate
the understory throughout that may provide suitable habitat for nesting migratory
birds. There is a large grove of Monterey pine (Pinus radiata) on the bank above
the southeast portion of the reach, but this species is not native to the Project
area (Cardno ENTRIX 2012b). The habitat along this reach is characterized by
very open vegetation with extensive areas dominated by weedy herbaceous
species (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2011).
Project Reach 6
Reach 6 travels south for approximately 3.2 miles from Monterey Road in the
north to 700 feet upstream of U.S. 101 in the south (Figure 2.2-5). This section of
Upper Llagas Creek is the most dense and well- vegetated riparian corridor of
the reaches within the Project area (Cardno ENTRIX 2012b). Due to releases
from Chesbro Reservoir, Reach 6 is typically a perennially flowing stream from
just downstream of Lake Silveira to San Martin Avenue, a distance of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-57

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
approximately 1.3 miles. The southern portion of the reach is considered
intermittent. The reach is characterized by a narrow band of stratified riparian
forest with multiple canopy layers. The southern portion of this reach contains
riparian species, such as mule fat and willow (Salix spp.) in the stream channel
and a patchy mix of native and non-native canopy species consisting of coast live
oak, red gum, and western sycamore on top of the banks. Native plants comprise
the majority of vegetation in the riparian forest and scrub communities. Dominant
species include willow and California blackberry (Rubus ursinus). Invasive
weeds, such as giant reed (Arundo donax) and Himalayan blackberry (Rubus
armeniacus) are abundant amid the annual grassland. The southwestern portion
of Reach 6 is adjacent to several SCVWD percolation ponds and the south
eastern portion of Reach 6 is adjacent to greenhouses and agricultural fields.
Portions of the reach traverse through agricultural fields, corporation yards,
suburbanized areas, and is adjacent to paved roads. The northern portion of
Reach 6 passes through a commercial and residential area while the southern
portion is adjacent to agricultural areas. The habitat along and adjacent to Reach
6 would provide suitable habitat for a variety of nesting birds, amphibians, and
small mammals.
Project Reach 7A
Reach 7A is approximately 1.55 miles long extending from Reach 6 just above
the Monterey Road Bridge in the south to South La Crosse Drive in the north
(Figure 2.2-4). The southern half of Reach 7A is currently a non-channelized flat
section of land with agricultural use (plowed fields). All Project alternatives would
excavate a proposed earthen diversion channel through this section of Reach 7A
approximately 1.25 miles long to divert flows from West Little Llagas Creek
upstream of Watsonville Road to Llagas Creek downstream of Lake Silveira at
Monterey Road. The southern portion of Reach 7A connects to mainstem Llagas
Creek just downstream of Lake Silveira. Llagas Creek is a contiguous, perennial
riparian corridor up to Chesbro Reserboir; therefore the connection to this higherquality habitat increases the diversity and biological value of this portion of the
reach. The northern half of Reach 7A runs through a residential neighborhood
with the northern most 0.3-mile section consisting of a trapezoidal shaped
constructed channel. Vegetation in this section consists of row crops and annual,
non- native grassland on fallowed lands. Reach 7A would potentially provide
suitable habitat for a variety of wildlife.
Project Reach 7B
Reach 7B runs for approximately 1.4 miles through a residential suburban area
of Morgan Hill between South La Crosse Drive in the south and West Dunne
Avenue in the north (Figure 2.2-3). West Little Llagas Creek in this section is
intermittent. The riparian corridor along Reach 7B is disturbed habitat and the
creek is intermittently channelized. Portions of the corridor have been developed
or are adjacent to roads and residences. A paved recreational path runs along
0.4 mile of the southern portion of the channel. Annual grasslands, ruderal or
developed habitat are the prevalent habitat type adjacent to the creek. The
stream channel contains riparian scrub species (e.g., nutsedges, [Cyperus spp.])
and the non-disturbed areas contain annual grassland species. The tree canopy
consists of a combination of planted exotic and native trees, such as coast live

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-58

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
and valley oaks, and Fremont cottonwood. In the northern portion, the stream
channel includes emergent wetland vegetation, some taller trees, is adjacent to
small businesses, and is in an underground culvert for the last 650 feet on the
north end. Sections of Reach 7B may provide suitable habitat for migratory
nesting birds, some amphibians and reptiles, and mammals.
Project Reach 8
Reach 8 is approximately 1.1 miles long and is located in downtown Morgan Hill
between West Dunne Avenue to the south and Llagas Road to the north
(Figure 2.2-2). This portion of West Little Llagas Creek is an intermittent stream.
The channel is developed and transects a heavily urbanized area with
businesses, residential areas, and roads abutting many portions of the channel.
The channel varies from sections with no vegetation, to areas with broad-leaved
cattails (Typha latifolia), and hardstem bulrush (Schoenoplectus acutus); and the
banks are predominately vegetated with annual grassland species. A large
portion of this reach has a canopy of exotic trees with occasional patches of
remnant coast live and valley oaks. The northern-most section runs along Hale
Avenue, and hosts mostly ruderal vegetation, with some cattail and scattered
oaks throughout. Although wildlife habitat suitability is low, Reach 8 may provide
suitable habitat for migratory nesting birds and common reptiles, amphibians,
and small mammals.
Project Reach 14
Reach 14 extends approximately 2.4 miles along East Little Llagas Creek from
the Llagas Creek confluence in the south to just downstream of the Corralitos
Creek confluence in the north (Figure 2.2-8). This portion of the creek is
ephemeral, typically with dry summer and fall months. The riparian corridor is
disturbed, dominated by agriculture with both sides of the channel lined with
roads or ruderal habitat. The channel bottom consists of a mix of annual
grassland species and bare ground. The stream banks are predominately annual
grasslands with a few scattered trees that are mostly native. Riprap is also
prevalent along portions of this reach. Beyond the roads on each side of the
channel, are agricultural fields or suburbanized areas. Reach 14 is highly
disturbed and may provide suitable habitat for common wildlife and migratory
nesting birds.
East/West Little Llagas Creek
The section of East/West Little Llagas Creek to be cut-off from flows by diversion
in Reach 7A extends nearly 9,600 feet from near La Crosse Drive flowing east
toward U.S. 101 where it confluences with East Little Llagas Creek. East Little
Llagas Creek at this point is in a straightened ditch paralleling U.S. 101 for about
5,500 feet before it reaches the beginning of Reach 14. The cut-off channel
passes through mostly open fields with a few scattered homes and a trailer court,
and flows through culverts at six road crossings. This entire existing section of
West Little Llagas Creek to East Little Llagas Creek is intermittent, flowing only
when there is sufficient rain to generate runoff. Under all action alternatives,
there will be no flows entering the cut-off channel segment from West Little
Llagas Creek. Only local runoff, including two detention basins and eight outfalls

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-59

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
will continue to discharge to the channel. The channel is expected to continue to
flow only intermittently under post-Project conditions (see Section 3.2, Hydrology
and Water Quality).

3.5.3.1 Wildlife Habitat
Fifteen habitat types were identified in the Project area during botanical
surveys and vegetation mapping (Section 3.4.3.1 Vegetation Types and
Habitats) conducted in the Project area along the Upper Llagas Creek
(Figure 3.4-1). These 15 habitat types were mapped in the Project area,
according to classifications in Preliminary Descriptions of the Terrestrial
Natural Communities of California (Holland 1986), with the exception of
ruderal and urban habitat types. The 15 habitats in the Project area are
agricultural, bare channel, barren, broad-leaved woodland, developed,
California sycamore woodland, eucalyptus, horticultural, freshwater
marsh, grassland, riparian exotic scrub, riparian native scrub, riparian
woodland, ruderal, and upland scrub. Section 3.4.3.1 provides a detailed
description of the floristic composition and distribution of these habitat
types in the Project area. A discussion of wildlife that has been
documented or that typically occurs in these habitats in the Project area
or in the vicinity is presented below. Other sources of information for this
section include documented field observations during field surveys,
databases, regional literature, reports prepared for this Project and
nearby projects as listed previously in Section 3.5.1 and A Guide to
Wildlife Habitats of California (Mayer and Laudenslayer 1988).
The predominant wildlife habitats in the area consist of riparian (both
woodland and scrub), agricultural, urban (e.g., developed, residential),
annual grassland, and ruderal lands. Although the majority of these
habitat types include regular human presence, many of these habitat
types support a number of resident, migratory, and common and specialstatus wildlife species. Additional details on vegetation type and habitats
are provided in Section 3.4.3.1.
Agriculture
Agricultural habitats are areas with agricultural activity or recently
fallowed fields, orchards, and row crops. This habitat type provides
foraging habitat for a variety of wildlife, including migratory birds and
mammals. Avian species, such as European starlings (Sturnus vulgris),
American crow (Corvus brachyrhynchos), American robin (Turdus
migratorius), Great blue heron (Area herodias), Great Egret (Area alba),
and cow bird (Molothrus ater) are commonly associated with agricultural
habitat. Agricultural ditches boarding planted fields and irrigation canals
may provide suitable habitat for a variety of common reptiles and
amphibians, including bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana) and Pacific gopher
snake (Pituophis catenifer catenifer). Many species of small mammals are
adapted to agricultural croplands (CWHR 1988a). Rodents and mammals
that forage in agricultural areas include California vole (Microtus
californicus), California ground squirrel (Otospermophilus beecheyi),
black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), and raccoon (Procyon lotor).
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-60

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
This habitat type predominates Reach 7A and occurs adjacent to
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14. Reaches 7A and 14 contain this agricultural
habitat type which could possibly be affected by Project-related activities.
Bare Channel
Bare channel habitat includes: concrete lined channels, perennial stream
channel (i.e., contains water year round), and seasonal streambeds (i.e.,
a streambed with over 50 percent bare ground composed primarily of
sand and gravel and is without water for at least three months of the
year). The habitat value to wildlife may be dependent upon the variety
and complexity of vegetation that is growing adjacent to the channel, as
well as other geomorphic characteristics (e.g., the presence of riparian
vegetation).
Bare channels may provide suitable foraging and loafing habitat for
common waterfowl, such as mallards (Anas platyrhynchos) and
mergansers (Mergus spp.); wading birds, such as great blue heron; and
great egret and other birds, such as kingfishers (Alcedines spp.).
Common mammals, such as raccoon, skunks (Mephitis mephitis), and
coyote (Canis latrans) will also forage in or around bare channels for
small amphibians and invertebrate prey. If the channel contains sufficient
emergent wetland vegetation and basking sites, amphibians and reptiles
may also utilize this habitat type. The Western pond turtle, a California
species of special concern (CDFG 2011), has been documented in Lower
Llagas Creek and Lake Silveria (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2010) (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2013a). This habitat type occurs at various parts of
all Project reaches, except Reach 6. The reaches with the most area of
this habitat type, which could be affected by Project activities, are
Reaches 4 and 14.
Barren
Barren areas are habitats that have sparse or no vegetated cover. The
structure and composition of the substrate is largely determined by the
region and surrounding environment; along rivers and creeks, barren
habitat may include creek banks and canyon walls (CHWR 1988b). In
urban settings, barren habitat may be covered in pavement or gravel.
Barren habitat locations may change seasonally and are dependent upon
management regimes (e.g., disked or plowed agricultural fields are barren
until re-sowed or flooded, but this situation is included in the agriculture
type). Barren habitat is usually found adjacent to other habitat types and
the value to wildlife is dependent upon the structure of the non-vegetated
substrate. For example, barren areas may support wildlife that nest on
rock ledges, such as hawks and falcons; it may support wading birds that
rely on open ground covered with sand or gravel for foraging and
constructing small scrape nests (e.g., plovers and terns). Within this
Project area, wildlife that may utilize barren habitat would include mallard,
killdeer (Charadrius vociferus), rock pigeon (Columba livia), western
fence lizard (Sceloporus occidentalis), and bank swallow (Riparia riparia).
This habitat type occurs adjacent to various parts of all Project reaches.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-61

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
The reaches with the most area of this habitat type that could be affected
by Project activities are Reaches 6 and 7A.
Broad-leaved Woodland
This habitat type includes California broadleaf woodland and oak
woodland (e.g., mixed Quercus spp.) and is present in the driest reaches
of the Project area, often lining seasonal drainages of north and westfacing slopes. This habitat type is an upland habitat consisting of a tree
layer composed of mixed oaks and California buckeye (Aesculus
californica) with a dominant shrub species consisting of poison oak
(Toxicodendron diversilobum). In all oak-dominated habitats, an
understory of blackberry, poison oak, and invasive annual grasses is
common. A variety of common nesting birds found within or adjacent to
the Project that utilize this habitat type for foraging and nesting include
acorn woodpeckers (Melanerpes formicivorus) and Northern flicker
(Colaptes auratus). Raptors, including red-shoulder hawks (Buteo
lineatus) and red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), utilize this habitat type.
Although unlikely, this habitat type may be used as a migratory corridor
for special-status mammals, such as the American badger (Taxidea
taxus) and San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica). This habitat type
occurs adjacent to all Project reaches. The reaches with the most area of
this habitat type that could be affected by Project activities are Reaches 4
and 7A.
Developed
Developed habitat includes urban disturbed areas, such as gravel and
asphalt surface roads, riprap, and water channels that run underground
inside large diameter pipes and areas within residential and commercial
structures above, roads, and riprap. Urban areas provide limited wildlife
habitat and generally support only generalist and sometimes non-native
wildlife species that are tolerant of human presence and activities.
Raccoon, opossum (Didelphis virginiana), striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis), black-tailed jackrabbit, California slender salamander
(Batrachoseps attenuatus), and western fence lizard (Sceloporus
occidentalis) are common urban wildlife species that may be found
utilizing developed areas in Llagas Creek. Birds adapted to urban
environments and documented within or adjacent to the Project area
include Western scrub-jay (Aphelocoma californica), white-crowned
sparrow (Zonotrichia atricapilla), house finch (Carpodacus mexicanus),
mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), and house sparrows (Passer
domesticus) (Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012). Developed habitat is
adjacent to all Project reaches. The reaches with the most area of this
habitat type to be affected from Project activities are Reaches 8 and 14.
California Sycamore Woodland
This habitat type is a specific riparian community dominated by western
sycamore with an understory composed of herbaceous annuals and
shrubs that have adapted to fluvial depositional plains consisting of sandy

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-62

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
loam to coarse alluvium substrate (Gillies 1998). Other vegetation species
that are found in the Project area include coast live oak, valley oak,
sandbar willow, red willow, arroyo willow, and black walnut (H.T. Harvey
& Associates 2013c). This habitat type is distributed in lower elevations
from central to southern California and serves as a critical wildlife corridor
for a variety of species, such as resident and migratory birds (i.e., redshouldered hawk, California quail, spotted towhee, white-breasted
nuthatch, and chestnut-back chickadee) and mule deer (Odocoileus
hemionus) (Keeler-Wolf 1993; Sawyer and Keeler- Wolf 1995; CWHR
2006). This habitat type is found in discontinuous patches in all reaches;
except Reach 14 where it is not present. California sycamore woodland in
the Project area provides habitat for many of the same species discussed
in Riparian habitat (see below). The California sycamore trees in the
Project area provide important habitat, however, degradation as a result
of channel incision and hydrologic modifications have substantially
impacted their habitat value (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013c). California
sycamore woodland habitat is found in Project Reaches 4, 5, and 6. The
reaches with the most area of this habitat type to be affected by Project
activities are Reaches 4 and 6.
Eucalyptus
This habitat type is a woodland community dominated by a Eucalyptus
tree canopy, with a relative tree cover of greater than 80 percent. Red
gum is the predominate Eucalyptus species in the Project area. Other
scattered Eucalyptus species in the Project area include Blue gum (E.
globulus) and forest red gum (E. tereticornis). There is little understory in
this community type; however, annual grasses and small shrubs may be
present. Eucalyptus is known to become established along stream
courses, encroaching upon existing riparian vegetation (CWHR 1988c).
This habitat type provides suitable roosting and perching habitat, as well
as nesting habitat for a number of bird species, particularly raptors. The
stringy bark or rapid deposition of litter creates suitable habitat for a
variety of smaller wildlife including alligator lizard (Elgaria multicarinata),
gopher snake, and wood rat species (Neotoma spp.). Characteristic
wildlife species and those species associated with this habitat type within
the Project area include barn owl (Tyto alba), red-tailed hawk, and redshouldered hawk. Eucalyptus woodlands generally adjoin other wildlife
habitat. This habitat type can be found along Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B, and 14.
The reaches with the most area of this habitat type that could be affected
by Project activities are Reaches 4 and 6.
Horticultural and Landscape Plantings
Horticultural or landscaped habitats typically contain non-native or
ornamental species, but can contain native planted trees. These areas
generally support non-native vegetation, and adjacent land use includes
residential, commercial, and urban areas. The Project area occurs
adjacent to residential housing and commercial businesses where this
habitat type dominates. Horticultural and landscaped areas can provide
forage and refugia for wildlife adapted to a more suburban environment;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-63

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
although, the wildlife diversity tends to be low. Wildlife species associated
with this habitat type include raccoon, western fence lizard, bullfrog, and
many species of nesting birds including mourning dove, black Phoebe
(Sayornis nigricans), and house finch. This habitat type is found adjacent
to all Project reaches. The reaches containing the largest amount of this
habitat type potentially affected by Project activities are Reaches 7B
and 8.
Freshwater Marsh
Freshwater marsh communities are dominated by emergent vegetation
and found in low-lying perennially wet areas. Freshwater marsh or
wetlands includes both vegetated areas and pockets of open water within
the channel. It is found along the edges of Llagas Creek and can occupy
most of the channel in reaches with sediment build up, resulting in
reduced water flows and establishment of marsh vegetation. The location
of freshwater marshes and open-water habitats can shift from year to
year, depending on annual rainfall. Typical vegetation species found in
this habitat include cattails, California bulrush (Scirpus californicus), and
salt grass (Distichlis spicata). Agricultural ditches and man-made basins
are included in this habitat type in the Project area and provide lower
quality habitat than emergent marshes, but support similar wildlife
species.
Freshwater marsh habitat with emergent vegetation provides a high
quality seasonal resource a variety of nesting birds including the following
birds observed adjacent to the Project area: pied-billed grebe
(Podilymbus podiceps), black-crowned night-heron (Nycticorax
nycticorax), common mallard, egrets, and herons. A number of
amphibians require standing or flowing water for breeding, including
western toad (Bufo boreas), Northern Pacific tree frog (Pseudacris regilla)
and bull frogs. The Western pond turtle, a California species of special
concern, is found in freshwater marsh that is adjacent to open water,
which is present within the Project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2010).
This habitat type may be found in all reaches with perennial flows and is
found in disconnected patches throughout the main channel of Llagas
Creek and its tributaries. It is predominately present along Reaches 6, 7A,
7B, and 8.The reaches containing the largest amount of this habitat type
potentially affected by Project activities are Reaches 7A and 7B.
Grassland
Grassland habitat is the dominant vegetation type in the Project area and
consists of a combination of naturalized annual plants, such as wild oats,
ripgut brome, Italian ryegrass, or a combination of naturalized perennial
grasses, such as Bermuda grass. Within the Project area, this habitat
type is usually dominated by non-native grasses and can be found along
banks, along the outside of levee maintenance roads, and undeveloped,
open space. Non-native grasslands generally support relatively low
wildlife diversity, but could be used by common and special-status
species for foraging habitat and migratory corridors. Many common

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-64

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
species, such as birds, reptiles, and mammals use annual grasslands.
Typical species associated with annual grassland include western fence
lizard, gopher snake, Western meadowlark (Sturnella neglecta), and song
sparrow (Melospiza melodia). Additionally, grassland habitat provides
foraging habitat for predatory birds that nest in the adjacent woodlands,
such as red-tailed hawk and American kestrel (Falco sparverius). This
habitat type is found in all Project reaches. The reaches containing the
largest amount of this habitat type potentially affected by Project activities
are Reaches 4 and 6.
Riparian
Riparian habitat includes riparian scrub (both exotic scrub and native
scrub) and riparian woodland. Riparian habitat is an important habitat in
California for many wildlife species. This habitat type provides food,
water, cover, and migration and dispersal corridors for a diversity of
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. This habitat type occurs along
creek banks where trees and shrubs species prefer a moist environment.
Plant species found in exotic riparian scrub include giant reed and
Himalayan blackberry. Vegetation found in native riparian scrub includes
poison oak, mule fat, willow, and Arroyo willow (Salix lasiolepis).
Vegetation species associated with riparian woodland habitat include
Fremont cottonwood, buckeye (Aesculus californicus), and walnut.
Riparian scrub and woodlands provide high habitat suitability for foraging
and nesting for a variety of common and special-status wildlife species.
Common wildlife species associated with riparian habitat include cavity
nesting birds (e.g., acorn woodpecker) and other small passerines,
raptors, small mammals (e.g., raccoon, tree squirrels, fox squirrel, wood
rats, etc.), and reptiles (e.g., Western fence lizard [Sceloporus
occidentalis]). Special-status wildlife species that typically use riparian
habitat and are found in or around Llagas Creek include Western pond
turtle and dusky footed woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes) (WRA 2010).
Riparian scrub and woodland habitat is most dense in Reach 6 and in
some parts of Reach 7A. Patches of riparian scrub are also present in
parts of Reaches 4, 5, 7B, and 14. Patches of riparian forest are present
in parts of all Project reaches. The reaches containing the largest amount
of this habitat type potentially affected by Project activities are Reaches 4
and 6.
Ruderal
Ruderal areas consist of weedy, upland vegetation that typically occurs in
areas where soils and native vegetation have been significantly disturbed
by grading, plowing, construction or other land-clearing activities. These
areas are dominated by non-native annual grasses and forbs that are
adapted to disturbances. This habitat is present in the Project area along,
benches, road shoulders, and other disturbed areas. Ruderal habitats
provide limited wildlife habitat and generally support only generalist, and
sometimes non-native wildlife species that are tolerant of human

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-65

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
presence and activities. Terrestrial wildlife species commonly associated
with ruderal habitats in the Project area may include western fence lizard,
California ground squirrel (Spermophilus beecheyi), Botta’s pocket
gopher (Thomomys bottae), white-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia
leucophrys), and European starlings. This habitat type is only found in
Reach 8 where approximately only 1 acre could be affected by Project
activities.
Upland Scrub
Upland habitat is dominated by shrubs with thick evergreen leaves
(CWHR 1988d).Typical vegetation associated with upland scrub include
annual grasses and upland forbs, such as wild oats (Avena barbata),
coyote brush (Baccharis pilularis), yellow star thistle, ceanothus
(Ceanothus spp.), Manzanita, and California buckeye and oaks. Upland
scrub habitats support many common wildlife species including California
towhee, California quail, California thrasher (Toxostoma redivivum), and
red-tailed hawk. Common mammals occurring within this habitat include
brush rabbit (Sylvilagus bachmani), black-tailed jackrabbit, and mule deer
(CDFG 2008a). Upland scrub habitat is only present in the downstream
portion of Reach 7A. This stretch of habitat is proposed for a new channel
that would connect West Little Llagas Creek to the mainsteam of Llagas
Creek. Less than 1 acre of this habitat type will be affected by Project
activities.

3.5.3.2 Special-Status Wildlife Species
For the purpose of this section, special-status species are wildlife species
that meet one or more of the definitions listed below.


Species listed or proposed for listing as threatened or endangered
under the federal ESA (50 CFR 17.11).



Species that are Candidates for possible future listing as
threatened or endangered under the federal ESA (61 FR 7591).



Species listed or proposed for listing by the State of California as
threatened or endangered under CESA (14 CCR 670.5).



Species that meet the definitions of rare or endangered under
CEQA Guidelines Section 15380.



Animals fully protected in California (CDFW Code, Section 3511,
4700, 5050, and 5515).



Animal species of special concern to CDFW (CDFW 2011a).

A list of special-status wildlife that are known to occur or potentially occur
in the vicinity of the Project area was compiled and evaluated for their
potential for occurrence within the Project area. This list is available in
Appendix I and provides each species’ scientific and common names,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-66

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
status, habitat, and potential to occur in the Project area. The list was
compiled based on a review of special-status species records from
CNDDB (CDFW 2012), USFWS online species list (USFWS 2012), and
literature resources. The CNDDB and USFWS database was reviewed for
special-status wildlife species that are known to occur or potentially occur
in the following U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5-minute topographic
quadrangles: Chittenden, Gilroy, Gilroy Hot Springs, Isabel Valley, Lick
Observatory, Loma Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Morgan Hill, Mt. Madonna,
Mt. Sizer, San Felipe, Santa Teresa Hill, and Watsonville East. The
CNDDB records of special-status wildlife within 5 miles of the Project area
were also reviewed and are shown in Figure 3.5-1.
There is federally designated Critical Habitat for special-status wildlife
within 2.5 miles of the Project area (USFWS 2013). Critical habitat for
California red-legged frog (CRLF [Rana aurora draytonii]) is located over
2.5 miles east of the Project area. Critical habitat for California tiger
salamander (CTS [Ambystoma californiense]) is located within 2.5 miles
and is located south and east of the Project area and southwest of
Reaches 5 and 6. Critical habitat for Bay checkerspot butterfly is located
within 2.5 miles of the Project area and is found east of Reach 14, north
of Reach 8, and west of Reach 6.
The 36 special-status wildlife species were evaluated for their potential to
occur in the Project area. Based on an analysis of distribution, known
occurrences, and habitat requirements, 17 of the 36 special-status wildlife
species evaluated have potential to occur in the Project area (Table 3.51). Species evaluated as being unlikely to occur within the Project area
are considered to be beyond their known range or to have low habitat
suitability for reproduction, cover, and/or foraging. These species are not
discussed further. Species without listing status are not discussed further.
Habitat assessments and field surveys for special-status wildlife have
been conducted in the Project area, and special-status wildlife was
observed during field surveys on November 24, 2009 (WRA 2010),
January 4-11, 2013 (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013e), and May 15 and
June 5 and 26, 2013 (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013f).
Species with potential to occur within the Project area, based on the
analysis presented in Table 3.5-1 are discussed in further detail below.
Based on USFWS and CNDDB information, 17 special-status wildlife
species or groups are known to occur, or potentially occur, in the vicinity
of the Project area including four mammals, six birds, two reptiles, three
amphibians and two invertebrates. These species are discussed below.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-67

December 2015

Chapter 3
Table 3.5-1

Affected Environment
Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the Project Area

Species

Status

Species

Status

Pallid bat
Antrozous pallida

CSC

San Joaquin kit fox
Vulpes macrotis mutica

FE, CT

San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat
Neotoma fuscipes annectens

CSC

American badger
Taxidea taxus

CSC

Western burrowing owl
Athene cunicularia

CSC

Tricolored blackbird
Agelaius tricolor

CSC

Least bell’s vireo
Vireo bellii pusillus

FE, CE

White-tailed kite
Elanus leucurus

FP

Bank swallow
Riparia riparia

CT

Yellow warbler
Dendroica petechial

CSC

CSC

Coast horned lizard
Phrynosoma blainvillii, formerly
P. coronatum frontale

CSC

California tiger salamander
Ambystoma californiense

FT, ST, CSC

Foothill yellow-legged frog
Rana boylii

CSC

California red-legged frog
Rana aurora draytonii

FT, CSC

Opler’s longhorn moth
Adela oplerella

FC

Mammals

Birds

Reptiles
Western pond turtle
Actinemys marmorata
Amphibians

Invertebrates
Bay checkerspot butterfly
Euphydryas editha bayensis

FT

Status Codes:
FE: Federally Endangered
FT: Federally listed as Threatened
FP: Fully Protected by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
FC: Federal Candidate; USFWS have enough information on biological vulnerability and threats to support a
proposal to list as endangered or threatened.
CT: State listed as Threatened in California CE: State listed as Endangered in California
CSC: California species of special concern

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-68

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus)
The pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus) is a California species of special
concern (CDFG 2011). This species ranges from western Canada to
central Mexico and is widely distributed at lower elevations in California
(Zeiner et al. 1990a). The pallid bat utilizes a variety of habitats, including
grasslands, shrublands, woodlands, and forests; although, it is most
commonly found in open habitats with rocky areas for roosting and
prefers to forage in the open (Zeiner et al. 1990a). Their day and night
roosts include crevices in rocky outcrops and cliffs, caves, mines, and
trees (Sherwin and Rimbaldini 2005). Roosts in trees include deciduous
trees in riparian areas, the bole cavities of oak (Quercus spp.) trees, and
exfoliating valley oak (Quercus lobata) bark (Sherwin and Rimbaldini
2005). Pallid bats also roost in human structures, such as bridges, barns,
bat boxes, and vacant to lightly used buildings (Sherwin and Rimbaldini
2005; Zeiner et al. 1990a). Pallid bats breed from late October through
February, and young are born from April through July (Zeiner et al.
1990a).
Review of the CNDDB indicates one occurrence of Pallid bat within 5
miles of the Project area. The occurrence is approximately 2 miles south
of Reach 4 near the intersection of Monterey Highway and 1st Street.
Based on surveys conducted in 2013 (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013e),
most of the bridges, culverts, and other structures within the Project area
do not provide potential habitat for roosting bat; however, Monterey Road
and UPRR has potential for roosting bats, but no evidence of roosting on
these structures was observed. Four structures in Reaches 4, 5, and 6
(Masten Avenue, U.S. 101 north and south, and Llagas Avenue) have
potential habitat and evidence that bat night-roost on the structure (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2013e). Moreover, two species of bats “regularly
night-roost during summer months in low numbers in” some of the
structures (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013e; SCVWD 2013d). The pallid
bat could potentially roost in these structures; although, no evidence of
presence has been documented (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013e).
Near Reach 7B and 8, the proposed tunnel in the Applicant’s Proposed
Action could provide potential bat roosting habitat and may be attractive
to two species of bats (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012a). Bats may roost
at the three planned access points in the tunnel, because the access
points would have warmer than ambient temperatures through the night
and bats are known to commonly forage along the Upper Llagas Creek
corridor (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012a). Additionally, appropriate
foraging and roosting habitat occurs in the immediate vicinity of the
Project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013e; SCVWD 2013d).
San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes annectens)
San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes annectens) is a
California species of special concern (CDFG 2011). This subspecies is
found on the Peninsula southward to Santa Cruz County and in the East
Bay hills. It is a medium-sized rodent. Dusky-footed woodrats are

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-69

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
widespread in chaparral, woodland, and forest habitats with welldeveloped undergrowth (Carraway and Verts 1991). Their stick houses
may be as much as 6 feet tall and contain multiple chambers used for
sleeping and food storage. Houses are usually occupied by single adults
or females with young and can be used by successive generations of
woodrats. Woodrat houses provide cover for many other animal species,
including small mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and arthropods (Cranford
1982; Vestal 1938). The reproductive season typically occurs between
December to September, with a peak in mid-spring (Zeiner et al. 1990b).
Carraway and Verts (1991) summarized data suggesting that breeding is
sometimes extended through September.
Although CNDDB records do not indicate occurrences within 5 miles of
the Project area, there is potentially suitable habitat for this species along
the mainstem of Llagas Creek and Lake Silveira (Balance Hydrologics et
al. 2012). The species could also utilize the riparian corridor along
Reach 6 and the mainstem above Monterey Road. Nests of this species
were observed along West Little Llagas Creek in the live oak riparian
habitat south of the Watsonville Road/Monterey Road intersection
(approximately 1,100 feet east of Reach 7A) (WRA 2010).
San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica)
The San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica) is federally listed as
endangered and is state-listed as threatened (USFWS 1967). No critical
habitat has been designated for the species.
Kit fox occur in annual grassland or mixed shrub/grassland habitats
throughout low, rolling hills and in the valleys (e.g., foothill annual
grassland, oak savannah, and agricultural areas). The San Joaquin kit fox
is active mostly at night. In the southern range, kit fox inhabit grassland
and scrubland communities, including those that have been modified by
development, such as with oil exploration, wind turbines, agricultural, and
grazing (USEPA 2010a). The San Joaquin kit fox will also utilize woody
croplands and remnant patches of scrubland in valley floor areas
(USFWS 1998a). The fox requires underground dens for shelter and
reproduction and will commonly modify and use dens constructed by
other animals and human-made structures, such as culverts, abandoned
pipelines, or banks in sumps or roadbeds (USFWS 1998a). Dens are
most often found in relatively level areas or gently sloped terrain, such as
washes and roadside berms (Morrell 1972; ICF International 2012b) on
loose-textured soils; however, the San Joaquin kit fox den characteristics
vary across the species geographic range (USFWS 1998a).
The San Joaquin kit fox has been cited in southern Santa Clara County
(Morell 1972 as cited in SCVWD 2011b). Although there are no record
occurrences within 5 miles of the Project area, there are two CNDDB
records for San Joaquin kit fox occurrence within 10 miles of the Project
area (north of Felipe and southeast of Coyote Reservoir). The CNDDB
occurrences are located within the distributional range of the species and
two individuals were documented near the town of Coyote in 1992 (WRA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-70

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
2010). Kit foxes are now generally acknowledged to be rare in Santa
Clara County and found only in areas adjacent to access from the Central
Valley populations centers (SCVWD 2011). Kit fox is expected only to
occur in the vicinity of Pacheco Creek and the uppermost portions of the
Pajaro River and would only be occasional dispersants in this area while
moving to breeding locations outside the county (SCVWD 2011).
According to an Independent Science Advisors report, although several
individual kit foxes have been observed as roadkill in the southernmost
portions of the county, no breeding population has been demonstrated
within Santa Clara County despite substantial survey efforts (CBI 2006).
The Science Advisors assumed that the southern Santa Clara Valley is
not an important area to the conservation of this species and that there is
little suitable habitat (CBI 2006) The Project area is surrounded by urban
and agricultural development and open habitat is fragmented and
disturbed. It is unlikely the San Joaquin kit fox would utilize the Project
area for breeding or hunting, although, it may occur within or adjacent to
the Project area during dispersal between areas of known habitat outside
of the Project area. The potential to occur within the Project Area is low or
unlikely.
American badger (Taxidea taxus)
American badger was listed as a CDFW Species of Special Concern in
1987. A member of the weasel family, American badger (Mustelidae), has
a wide distribution in North America, spanning from Alberta to Mexico and
from the Pacific Coast to the Great Lakes. With the exception of the
humid coastal forests of Del Norte County and the northwestern portion of
Humboldt County, the species is known to occur throughout California. In
California, the badger occupies a diversity of habitats, including
grasslands, savannas, chaparral, and riparian habitats, with typically less
than 50 percent plant cover. Badgers require friable soils for digging
burrows that are used for cover and reproduction (Zeiner et al. 1990).
Largely nocturnal, the American badger primarily feeds on burrowing
rodents, including gophers (Thomomys sp.), California ground squirrels,
and kangaroo rats (Dipodomys sp.) (Williams 1986).
Review of the CNDDB reported one occurrence of the species within 5
miles of the Project area and three occurrences of the species within 10
miles of the Project area. The nearest occurrence is approximately 2.8
miles southwest of Reach 4. There is low or unlikely potential for this
special-status ground dwelling mammal species to occur within the
Project area (SCVWD 2012c). Badgers are known to occur primarily in
foothill grasslands, but only occur occasionally on the valley floor primarily
during dispersal events (SCVWD 2011). The potential for occurrence is
low or unlikely, because (1) American badgers typically require large
expanses of open habitat which is not typically found along riparian edges
(SCVWD 2011; CBI. 2006); (2) low numbers of suitable denning burrows
were observed in the project area (Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012); (3)
the disturbed areas adjacent to the channel do not provide suitable
habitat for the species; and (4) there is habitat fragmentation between
known occurrences for this species. Although it is unlikely for the species

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-71

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
to occur, there are a few sections of Reach 5 that contain sandy, friable
soils preferred by this species that could provide habitat (Condor Country
Consulting, Inc. 2012a). American badger may occupy agricultural fields
adjacent to the Project area, particularly if the fields are pastured or
fallowed; intensively cultivated fields inhibit the permanent establishment
of dens. The species may also use agricultural fields adjacent to the
Project area for dispersal. However, its potential to occur within the
Project area is low or unlikely.
Western burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia)
The western burrowing owl (BUOW) is a California species of special
concern (CDFG 2011). Burrowing owls range throughout most of the
interior western United States, southern Canada, the Central Valley of
California, southern California, throughout Mexico into Central America,
and along the western half of Florida. Burrowing owls inhabit open, dry,
gently rolling to flat grasslands, scrublands, road and railway ROWs,
open urban habitats (i.e., airfields, campuses, and golf courses), and
agricultural lands. Essential habitat characteristics for the burrowing owl
are low-growing, sparse vegetation, and the occurrence of larger
burrowing rodents, such as ground squirrels and prairie dogs (CDFG
2012a). The nesting season for burrowing owls occurs from February
through August, with peak breeding occurring in April and May. Burrowing
owl occur year-round in Santa Clara Valley (Trulio 2007 as cited in
SCVWD 2011), and is commonly present in agricultural or grassland
habitat with small mammal burrows. Burrowing owls are more widespread
in the county in winter than during the breeding season; therefore, some
potential exists for use of the Project area as roosting and foraging habitat
(H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013f). This species has been increasingly
disappearing due to development along the valley floor and has
practically disappeared as a breeder from areas south of San Jose
(SCVWD 2011). The species exhibits high site fidelity and will attempt to
use an area even after the site has been developed (SCVWD 2011).
SCVWD performed surveys at 41 stream maintenance sites throughout
Santa Clara County in 1998, but did not detect burrowing owls, nor its
habitat (SCVWD 1998 as cited in SCVWD 2011). In 2007 and 2008, a
habitat assessment, burrow mapping study, and standardized breedingseason, protocol surveys for burrowing owl were conducted along
multiple sections of SCVWD managed waterways (EDAW 2008 as cited
in SCVWD 2011), including waterways in Santa Clara and Gilroy.
Surveys identified active burrowing owl activity at a few locations and
potential habitat for the species was determined to be present along a
number of creeks but not within the Llagas watershed (EDAW 2008 as
cited in SCVWD 2011).
A habitat assessment has been conducted by the SCVWD (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2013f). The survey results suggest that no breeding
owls are present in the Project area; however, suitable nesting and
roosting habitat is located along Reaches 6, 7A, and 14. There is
potential for this ground dwelling species to occur within the Project area
due to small mammal burrows observed within the Project area (Balance

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-72

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Hydrologics et al. 2012) and the adjacent agricultural land, particularly the
drier ruderal/annual grassland habitat adjacent to the channel; although,
generally disturbed, may provide suitable habitat for the species (WRA
2010). Review of the CNDDB found six occurrences of the species within
5 miles of the Project area. The closest reported occurrence is 0.5 mile
northeast of Reach 8. In 2012, the CDFW provided a guideline to
evaluate Project impacts (CDFW 2012). The three progressive steps of
the guideline assist in evaluating whether projects will result in impacts to
burrowing owls. The information, gained from the steps, inform any
subsequent avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures. The steps
for project impact evaluations are: (1) habitat assessment, (2) surveys,
and (3) impact assessment. Field surveys to determine if existing habitat
for BUOW exists adjacent to the Project area was performed by the
SCVWD between April and June of 2013. The results of the assessment
suggest that it is unlikely that burrowing owls breed anywhere in the
Project vicinity (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013f).
Least Bell’s Vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus)
Least Bell’s vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus) is federally and state listed as
endangered (Federal Register 1986; CDFG 2011). A draft recovery plan
has been completed for this species (USFWS 1998b). Critical habitat has
been designated for the least Bell’s vireo, but the Proposed Project is not
located within critical habitat area (Federal Register 1994). Least Bell’s
vireo is a neo-tropical migrant that historically nested from interior
northern California (Tehama County) to northwestern Baja California,
Mexico. When this subspecies was federally listed in 1986, the breeding
distribution was limited to scattered locations in southern California and
northwestern Baja California, Mexico. Although breeding pairs of the least
Bell’s vireo had long been absent from the Central Valley, a breeding pair
was observed in the San Joaquin Wildlife Refuge in Stanislaus County in
the summer of 2005 (Howell et al. 2010).
Habitat requirements for the least Bell’s vireo consist of dense riparian
willow thickets with well-developed understories, and low densities of
aquatic and herbaceous cover, in the immediate vicinity of watercourses.
The understory typically contains dense shrub thickets, consisting of
willow or mule fat. Foraging habitat includes both the riparian nesting
habitat and adjacent chaparral. The least Bell’s vireo arrives in its
breeding habitat in mid-March to early April. Although this vireo nests
primarily in willows, it also uses a variety of other shrubs, trees, and
vines. The least Bell’s vireo leaves its breeding grounds in late August
and September for its wintering range in Mexico (Federal Register 1986).
There is no evidence in the historical record or in any pattern of recent
occurrences of the species that the least Bell’s Vireo is likely to colonize
the Project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2011). The narrow nature of
the riparian corridor, along with encroachment by adjoining industrial,
commercial, and residential land uses, reduce the likelihood of use by the
least Bell’s vireo in most Project areas, even where vegetation is
considered potentially suitable, such as in Reach 6 (H.T. Harvey &

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-73

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Associates 2011). Breeding pairs of the least Bell’s vireo have long been
absent from central and northern coastal California; although, the most
recent sighting of a breeding pair in the Central Valley may indicate the
species is expanding its existing range. Based on CNDDB records, there
was only one occurrence of the least Bell’s vireo within 10 miles of the
Project area south of Reach 4, and a known nesting occurrence in a
reach south of the Project area for this species from a 2001 sighting (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2011).
Bank Swallow (Riparia riparia)
The bank swallow (Riparia riparia) is state listed as threatened (CDFG
2011). The bank swallow is found primarily in riparian and other lowland
habitats in California west of the desert. The bank swallow is a common
migrant within the interior of the state during the spring-through-fall
period, and less common along the coast. There are few records of the
bank swallow during the winter months for California. This species arrives
in California from South America in early March, and remains until early
August when colonies are abandoned and migration begins. During the
summer, the bank swallow is restricted to riparian, lacustrine, and coastal
areas with vertical banks, bluffs, and cliffs with fine-textured or sandy
soils. This swallow is a colonial breeder. Approximately 75 percent of the
current breeding population in California nests along the banks of the
Sacramento and Feather River in the northern Central Valley. The bank
swallow breeds from early May through July, digging horizontal nesting
tunnels and burrowing along the side of stream banks and cliffs. Most
colonies contain between 100 and 200 nesting pairs. The bank swallow
feeds predominantly over open riparian areas, but will also forage over
brushland, grassland, wetlands, water, and irrigated crop land. The bank
swallows’ diet includes a wide variety of aerial and terrestrial soft-bodied
insects, including flies, bees, and beetles (Zeiner et al. 1990a).
Review of CNDDB indicates no occurrences within 5 miles of the Project
area. The closest reported occurrence is 9.4 miles south of Reach 4.
There is potential for this species to occur in more open reaches during
fall and spring migrations due to the presence of suitable foraging
adjacent to the Project area (i.e., grassland, streams, and agricultural
areas). However, its potential for occurrence in the Project area is low, as
the species prefers to nest in areas with steep banks and this habitat
structure is not found within the Project area (Condor Country Consulting,
Inc. 2012a).
Tricolored Blackbird (Agelaius tricolor)
The tricolored blackbird (Agelaius tricolor) is a medium-sized passerine
bird, which is very similar in appearance to red-winged blackbird
(Agelaius phoeniceus). It is designated by the CDFW as a Species of
Special Concern (SSC) and is designated as a Bird of Conservation
Concern by the USFWS (USFWS 2008a; TBWG 2007). Nearly all
tricolored blackbird populations occur within California. While no major
changes in their overall geographic distribution have been noted, large

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-74

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
gaps in the occupied range now exist due to loss of habitat (e.g., Kings,
San Joaquin, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties) and populations
have significantly declined (BDCP 2013). This species typically breeds in
areas with access to open water and protected nesting sites, often
including flooded, thorny, or spiny vegetation. Tricolored blackbirds will
nest in freshwater marsh habitat in vegetation including tules, cattails,
willows, thistles, or nettles. Nests may also be concentrated in grain
fields, giant reed, and riparian scrubland and forest areas (BDCP 2013).
Birds may forage as much as 8 miles from nest sites (Beedy and
Hamilton 1999) in areas that support insect prey. Pasturelands, alfalfa,
dairies, grassland, and shrubland habitats may be used in lieu of natural
flooded habitat (CDFG 2008b).
Although no CNDDB occurrences for this species have been reported
within 5 miles of the Project area, there is potential for this species to
occur in the more open reaches and in adjacent agricultural fields, due to
the presence of suitable foraging habitat in the Project area, particularly in
reaches with perennial water that would support dense stands of
emergent wetland vegetation. In Reach 4, there is low potential for
tricolored blackbird to occur in the adjacent agricultural and naturalized
annual grassland areas (Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012a).
White-tailed Kite (Elanus leucurus)
The white-tailed kite (Elanus leucurus) is a fully protected species in
California (CDFG 2012b). Fully protected species may not be taken or
possessed at any time and no licenses or permits may be issued for their
take except for collecting these species for necessary scientific research
and relocation of the bird species for the protection of livestock (CDFG
2012b). This kite is a year-long resident in coastal and valley lowlands,
and is rarely found away from agricultural areas. This species is a
permanent resident in California and western Oregon.
Suitable habitat for white-tail kite consists of tree-dotted lowlands or
hillsides, ungrazed or fallowed grasslands, marshes, croplands,
savannas, and emergent wetlands. These areas provide foraging habitat
that is abundant with preferred food sources that include primarily voles
and other small diurnal mammals, occasionally birds, large insects,
reptiles, and amphibians. Nesting for the white-tailed kite takes place in
trees with nest placement well above the ground and within close
proximity to foraging sites. Breeding takes place from mid-March to early
April through late September (Zeiner et al. 1990b).
There is low potential for this species to occur due to suitable nesting
habitat and foraging habitat within and adjacent to the Project area.
Preferred nest trees are extremely variable, ranging from small shrubs
(less than 10 feet tall) to large trees (greater than 150 feet tall) (Dunk
1995). Fallow agricultural fields, orchards, and riparian habitat within and
adjacent to the Project area provide high quality foraging and nesting
habitat for this species (WRA 2010). The closest reported CNDDB
occurrence of white-tailed kite is 6.5 miles southwest of Reach 4,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-75

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
northwest of Gilroy. There is low potential for the species to occur in the
Project area.
Yellow Warbler (Dendroica petechial)
The yellow warbler (Dendroica petechial) is a state species of special
concern (CDFG 2011). Its breeding distribution ranges from northern
coastal Del Norte County, east to Modoc plateau, south to coastal
Ventura County, and along the western slope of the Sierra Nevada. The
species also breeds along the eastern side of California and in several
southern California mountain ranges, and is known to breed locally in
small numbers in Sonoma, Marin, Alameda, San Mateo, Santa Clara,
Santa Cruz, Monterey, and San Luis Obispo counties (Shuford and
Gardali 2008). Breeding occurrences in lowlands are in decline and it is
rare to uncommon in many lowland areas where it was formerly common
(CDFG 2005); however, small numbers of yellow warblers breed in
remnant riparian areas within Santa Clara County (Bousman 2007 as
cited in SCVWD 2011).
The yellow warbler breeds in riparian woodlands in close proximity to
water along streams and wet meadows, from coastal and desert lowlands
up to 8,000 feet, montane chaparral, and in open pine and mixed conifer
habitats with substantial amounts of brush (CDFG 2005; Shuford and
Gardali 2008). The species prefers riparian deciduous habitats consisting
of cottonwoods, willows, alders, and other small trees and shrubs typical
of low, open-canopy riparian woodland. In California, the species utilizes
numerous other species of riparian shrubs or trees and varies by
biogeographic region (Shuford and Gardali 2008). Tall trees provide
suitable foraging habitat and heavy brushy understories are used for
nesting; and the species shows a high degree of site fidelity. In migration,
the species will utilize riparian woodland, forest, and shrub habitats.
There is potential for this species to occur, particularly along parts of
Reach 6, due to suitable nesting habitat and foraging habitat within the
Project area. Although there are no recorded occurrences of the yellow
warbler within 10 miles of the Project area, the species may occasionally
move through the project area from other suitable locations. However, its
potential to occur within the Project area is low or unlikely.
Western Pond Turtle (Actinemys marmorata)
The western pond turtle (WPT [Actinemys marmorata]), a state species of
special concern (CDFG 2011), was found historically in most Pacific slope
drainages between the Oregon and Mexican borders. It is still found in
suitable habitats west of the Sierra-Cascade crest. Elevation range is
between sea level and approximately 4,700 feet (1,430 meters) (Jennings
and Hayes 1994).
WPT require some slow-water aquatic habitat and are uncommon in highgradient streams (Jennings and Hayes 1994). The banks of inhabited
waters usually have thick vegetation, but basking sites, such as logs,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-76

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
rocks, or open banks, must also be present (Zeiner et al. 1988).
Depending on the latitude, elevation, and habitat type, WPT may become
inactive over winter or remain active year-round. Nest sites are typically
on unshaded slopes with high clay or silt composition (Jennings and
Hayes 1994). Eggs are laid from March to August, depending on local
conditions, and incubation lasts from 73 to 80 days.
Potential habitat for the WPT is present within the Project area wherever
there are suitable perennial waters along the Project reaches, such as
pooled waters at Reach 6. All perennial creeks, many intermittent creeks,
and most ponds that are not completely isolated by development have
some potential to support the turtle; however, the loss of upland nesting
habitat because of development and construction of movement barriers
between the creeks and nesting areas have reduced the pond turtles
potential for occurrence (SCVWD 2011). The CNDDB lists several
records for WPT west of Reach 6 within 2.5 miles of the Project area
(CNDDB 2013; Figure 3.5-1).WPT are known to occur in Reaches 1 and
2 of Llagas Creek and Lake Silveira (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2010).
Therefore potential for the species to move in to the perennial segments
of the Project area is high.
Coast Horned Lizard (Phrynosoma blainvillii)
The Coast horned lizard (also known as Blainville’s horned lizard) is a
subspecies of the Coast horned lizard and is a California species of
special concern (CDFG 2011). It is uncommon to common in valleyfoothill hardwood, coniferous, and riparian habitats, as well as in pinecypress, juniper, and annual grassland habitats (Zeiner et al. 1988c). The
subspecies is endemic to California and ranges include: the Central
Valley from southern Tehama County south, the Sierra foothills from
Butte to Tulare counties below 4,000 feet, throughout the Coast Ranges
south from Sonoma County; and below 6,000 feet in the mountains of
southern California in northern Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles
counties (Jennings and Hayes 1994). The Coast horned lizard inhabits a
variety of open habitat, characterized by sandy loosely textured soil
areas, washes, flood plains, and wind-blown deposits. The species may
be found in chaparral, coastal scrub, annual grassland, and clearings in
riparian woodland (Jennings and Hayes 1994). The reproductive season
for the Coast horned lizard varies from year to year and geographically
depending on local conditions (Zeiner et al. 1988); however, reproductive
activity is conspicuous in April and May and hatchlings first appear in July
and August (Jennings and Hayes 1994).
Its numbers are declining due to habitat loss, extensive collecting on
wildlands near urban development, and the introduction of Argentine
“grease ants”, which eliminate the native ant species eaten by horned
lizards, harvester ants (Pogonomyrmex barbatus).
The Coast horned lizard is strongly associated with loose soils free of
plant debris, and with the presence of its primary food source. Review of
the CNDDB reported no occurrences of Coast horned lizard within 5 miles

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-77

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
of the Project area with the closest occurrences being recorded
approximately 7.25 miles from the Project area in an adjacent USGS 7.5
minute quad (Gilroy Hot Springs).There is no potential for occurrence
within the Project area due to unsuitable vegetation and lack of suitable
soils (Balance Hydrologics et al 2012); therefore, Coast horned lizard will
not be analyzed further.
California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense)
The CTS is federally and state listed as threatened (Federal Register
2004). Critical habitat has been designated in 19 counties in California.
The Project area does not include, or is located within designated critical
habitat or a recovery unit (Figure 3.5-1). Two critical habitat units, Lions
Peak 10a and 10b, are encompassed within the Llagas Creek watershed
and are located west of Reach 6. A third critical habitat unit, Cebata Flat
Unit 9, is located southeast of the Llagas Creek watershed and is east of
Reach 14.
The CTS historically ranged from Sonoma and Colusa counties to Tulare
and Santa Barbara counties. It is found in grasslands and lowest foothill
regions (Zeiner, at al. 1988). It migrates at night from its underground
refuges to breeding ponds, covering distances of as much as 1 mile. The
CTS breed and lay eggs in temporary rainwater ponds, reservoirs, and in
vernal pools, and may sometimes use human-made ponds if predatory
fish are absent (Zeiner et al. 1988). During non-breeding season, adult
CTS will remain in subterranean refugia, especially burrows of California
ground squirrels.
Although the likelihood of the species utilizing the Project area is very low,
there is potential for this species to occur in the Project area, due to the
presence of potentially suitable breeding habitat (i.e., ponded water,
suitable upland habitat adjacent to the channel) and dispersal habitat for
this species is present adjacent to the main channel of Upper Llagas
Creek; however, the habitat is fragmented by development (H.T. Harvey
& Associates 2012b; WRA 2010). The Project area is within the migration
range of potential breeding habitat, including designated critical habitat
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012).
The main channel of Upper Llagas Creek has low suitability for breeding
as streams are rarely used for reproduction (Zeiner et al. 1988) and the
presence of predators (i.e., bullfrogs and fish). However, percolation
ponds adjacent to the Project area provide marginal breeding habitat for
the species and the upland habitat adjacent to the main channel may be
used for subterranean refugia. Although potential suitable breeding
habitat exists adjacent to Upper Llagas Creek, there is very low likelihood
the species would occur within the Project area due primarily to distance
from potential breeding ponds and/or impediments to dispersal from
breeding ponds to the Project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012b).
Moreover, field studies report low number of small mammal burrows
necessary for CTS underground refugia (Condor County Consulting
2012b). Lake Silveira is hydrologically connected to Reach 7A and has

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-78

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
perennial surface, thus has the hydrology to support larval development
periods for CTS. Field studies, however, did not yield observations of
adult, larval, or egg masses of CTS during sampling at Lake Silveira
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012).
Nevertheless, the presence of CTS cannot be ruled out, as one CTS
juvenile was observed in 2010 at the Main Avenue Percolation Ponds
adjacent to the Project area (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012b); and there
is designated critical habitat for CTS approximately 1.5 miles to the west
of Reach 6 and approximately 2 miles east of Reach 14. Review of the
CNDDB found 79 occurrences within 10 miles and 26 occurrences of
CTS within 5 miles of the Project area. The closest reported occurrence is
0.01 mile west of Reach 8 along West Edmundson Avenue. The proximity
of the site to other records suggests the possibility that CTS from other
breeding sites could disperse into the Project area.
California Red-Legged Frog (Rana aurora draytonii)
The CRLF is federally listed as threatened (Federal Register 1996) and is
a California species of special concern. The USFWS made a final rule on
March 17, 2010 to designate Critical habitat (75 FR 12816) for this
species. The Project is located approximately 2.5 miles west of a
designated critical habitat unit. The USFWS released a recovery plan in
2002 (USFWS 2002).
Historically, the CRLF occurred in coastal mountains from Marin County
south to northern Baja California, and along the floor and foothills of the
Central Valley from about Shasta County south to Kern County (Jennings
and Hayes 1994). Currently, this subspecies generally only occurs in the
coastal portions of its historic range and is apparently extirpated from the
valley and foothills and in most of southern California south of Ventura
County. CRLF are usually confined to aquatic habitats, such as creeks,
streams, and ponds, and occur primarily in areas having pools
approximately 3 feet deep, with adjacent dense emergent or riparian
vegetation (Jennings and Hayes 1994). Adult frogs move seasonally
between their egg-laying sites and foraging habitat; but, generally, they
rarely move large distances from their aquatic habitat. CRLF breed from
November to March. Egg masses are attached to emergent vegetation
and eggs hatch within 6 to 14 days. Metamorphosis generally occurs
between July and September.
There is little or no potential for the occurrence of CRLF due to the
presence of barriers to migration into the Project area from known
occurrences and to habitat degradation. The closest occurrences are in
ponds at a golf course 2.2 miles east of Reach 7A, which are separated
from the Project area by farmland, urban development, and many roads,
including U.S. 101 (Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012). The nearest CRLF
population with a connection via aquatic habitat to Lake Silveira is more
than 5 miles upstream at Chesbro Reservoir, upstream of the dam and
reservoir. However, the presence of predatory fish and bullfrogs reduces
the potential for this species to breed successfully in Lake Silveira or the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-79

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
neighboring stream channels, even if they were able to reach the lake.
The only suitable upland habitat is located in the immediate project area,
and the banks upstream of Lake Silveira have been cleared of understory
vegetation. The areas outside the project area have degraded habitat
(from urbanization and agriculture) that is unsuitable for this species. The
nearest designated critical habitat for the CRLF is approximately 4 miles
to the east of Lake Silveira, in the foothills of the Diablo Range (75 FR
12816). This critical habitat unit is separated from Lake Silveira by
farmlands, urban development, and many roads, including U.S. 101
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012). The next closest critical habitat unit is
over 15 miles away, west of Watsonville. The reach of Llagas Creek that
includes Lake Silveira historically supported savanna or was unvegetated
(SFEI 2008). Where Llagas Creek emerged from the hills onto the alluvial
plain, it was a non-perennial channel with a braided morphology and was
much less incised (SFEI 2008). Thus it is unlikely that this reach
supported CRLF historically. Review of the CNDDB found 101
occurrences of the CRLF within 10 miles and 18 occurrences within 5
miles of the Project area, the latest of which was documented in 2007 at
Coyote Creek Dam. However, surveys in the Project area and vicinity
indicate that CRLF no longer occurs in the lowlands of the valley (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 1997) and the Project area is within a region in
which the CRLF is presumed to be extinct (SCVWD 2011b). Focused
surveys were conducted in the spring of 2012 of the project area at Lake
Silveira and no frogs at any life stage were found (Balance Hydrologics et
al. 2012).
Foothill Yellow-Legged Frog (Rana boylii)
The foothill yellow-legged frog (FYLF [Rana boylii]) is a California species
of special concern. In California, this frog occurs in the Coast Range from
Oregon to San Luis Obispo County and into the western foothills of the
Sierra Nevada. The FYLF was historically distributed throughout the
foothills of a majority of the Pacific drainages from the northern Oregon to
the San Gabriel River, while populations have been greatly decreased in
its southern reaches. This species has been found at elevations from sea
level up to 6,500 feet in the Sierra Nevada (Zeiner et. al. 1988).
The FYLF can be found in partly shaded or near clear, cool rocky streams
in a variety of habitats (Jennings and Hayes 1994). They occur in a range
of stream habitats from small intermittent creeks to large river systems.
They require shallow, slow-flowing water in streams with some cobblesized substrate. Adults are usually found near water and prefer some riffle
habitat or cascade and pool areas with rocky banks (Zeiner et. al. 1988).
Breeding occurs between mid-March and May.
There is little or no potential for the occurrence of FYLF due to the
presence of barriers to migration into the Project area from known
occurrences and habitat degradation. Review of the CNDDB found two
occurrences of the FYLF within 5 miles of the Project area; the closest of
which was documented in 2003 west of Chesbro Reservoir along Oak
Glen Avenue (CNDDB 2013). However, the nearest occurrence with a

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-80

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
connection via aquatic habitat to Lake Silveira is more than 5 miles
upstream at Chesbro Reservoir, upstream of the dam and reservoir. The
presence of predatory fish and bullfrogs reduces the potential for these
species to breed successfully in Lake Silveira or the neighboring stream
channels, even if they were able to reach the Lake (Balance Hydrologics
et al. 2012). The only suitable upland habitat is located in the immediate
project area, and the banks upstream of Lake Silveira have been cleared
of understory vegetation. The areas outside of the project area have
degraded habitat (from urbanization and agriculture) that is unsuitable for
FYLF. The reach of Llagas Creek that includes Lake Silveira historically
supported savanna or was unvegetated (SFEI 2008). Where Llagas
Creek emerged from the hills onto the alluvial plain, it was a nonperennial channel with a braided morphology and was much less incised
(SFEI 2008). Thus it is unlikely that this reach supported FYLFs
historically. No FYLFs at any life stage were found during spring surveys
of the project area in 2012 at Lake Silveira (Balance Hydrologics et al.
2012).
Bay Checkerspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha bayensis)
Bay checkerspot butterfly is federally listed as threatened (USFWS 1987).
The only known populations of this species occur in San Mateo and
Santa Clara counties; although, the species historically was found in
many other counties around the San Francisco Bay Area. The current
known range has been reduced to Santa Clara County, where patches of
the species’ habitat are still present (USFWS 2008b). Critical habitat was
designated for this species in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties, but
after a final rule in 2008, was reduced (USFWS 2008b). Three of this
species’ critical habitat units occur adjacent to the Project area; however,
the Project area does not include critical habitat for Bay checkerspot
butterfly (USFWS 2013). The distribution of the Bay checkerspot butterfly
adjacent to the Project area is well represented by critical habitat; this
distribution and designated critical habitat are shown in Figure 3.5-1.
These areas contain serpentine grassland that provide suitable habitat
and conditions of the species primary larval host plant, dwarf plantain
(Plantago erecta), secondary host plants for both larvae and adults purple
owl’s clover (Castilleja densiflora), and exserted paintbrush (Castilleja
exserta) (Black and Vaughn 2005 as cited in SCVWD 2011).
The lifecycle of the butterfly is closely associated with native grasslands
on serpentine soils or similar infertile soils and its primary larval host
plant. Pupae emerge as butterflies between late February and early May,
correlating with the blooming of their nectar plants for feeding. Following
the emergence is the active portion of their life-cycle with feeding, mating,
and egg laying occurring over the course of 4 to 6 weeks. In dry years,
larvae can continue diapause until the following spring when conditions
have potentially improved (USEPA 2010b). Populations of the Bay
checkerspot butterfly are restricted to areas with serpentine soils that
have substantial populations of dwarf plantain.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-81

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Relative to the location of the Project area, the Bay checkerspot butterfly
is likely to occur very infrequently (e.g., only in or following years of high
population size), or only as a migrant through the Project area because of
unsuitability of habitat. Designated critical habitat is west and northwest of
Reaches 6 and 8, respectively; Reach 6 is within 2 miles of critical
habitat. There is low potential for the butterfly to move through the Project
area, particularly through those reaches, as it migrates to more suitable
habitat. Review of the CNDDB found five occurrences of Bay checkerspot
butterfly within 5 miles of the Project area with the closest occurrence at
0.7 mile west of Reach 8 northwest of Morgan Hill. The Project area lies
in between USFWS designated critical habitat units for the species and is
within dispersal distance for the species. Previous field survey efforts
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012) to document existing vegetation and
habitat conditions around the Project area were completed during a
season in which the native plants were not in bloom, thus the absence of
the butterflies’ host plant cannot be ruled out. Although the likelihood of
the species utilizing the Project area is low, a spring botanical survey for
the three annual native food plant species (i.e., dwarf plantain, purple
owl’s clover, and exserted paintbrush) will be performed by a qualified
botanist prior to construction and throughout the blooming season to
determine whether there is any potential habitat for the Bay checkerspot
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012).
Opler’s Longhorn Moth (Adela oplerella)
Opler’s longhorn moth (Adela oplerella) is a candidate species to be
federally listed as threatened or endangered. In California, this species
has been found along the west side of San Francisco Bay, Alameda
County, Marin County, Sonoma County, Santa Cruz County, Santa Clara
County, and the inner Coast Ranges (WRA 2003) on both serpentine and
possibly non-serpentine grassland. The documented presence of a
population of this species on non-serpentine soils in Santa Cruz County
suggests the species is not a serpentine obligate (USFWS 1998c).
Habitat for the Opler’s longhorn moth includes serpentine, or similar soils,
that support the moth’s host plant, cream cups (Platystemon californicus);
however, the species may also be found on potential nectar plants, such
as goldfields (Lastehenia spp.), tidy tips (Layia sp.), and Linanthus
(Linanthus sp.) (USFWS 1988c). This moth completes the active portions
of its life cycle during the winter-spring wet season, laying eggs between
mid-March and April. Eggs are deposited into unopened flowers of the
host plant and larvae feed on developing seeds prior to emergence.
Relative to the location of the Project area, the Opler’s longhorn moth is
likely to occur very infrequently (e.g., only in or following years of high
population size), or only as a migrant through the Project area because of
unsuitability of habitat. However, populations of the Opler’s longhorn moth
have been recorded in Santa Clara County (USFWS 1998c), and the
moth may potentially occur in the Project area if it’s host plant is present,
especially on serpentine-dominated grasslands. Review of the CNDDB
indicates four occurrences of Opler’s longhorn moth within 5 miles of the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-82

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Project area. The closest occurrence of this species was found 0.7 mile
west of Reach 8 northwest of Morgan Hill. Previous field survey efforts
(Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012) to document existing vegetation and
habitat conditions around the Project area were completed during a
season in which the native plants were not in bloom, thus the absence of
the moth’s host plant cannot be ruled out. Although the likelihood of the
species utilizing the Project area is low, a spring botanical survey for the
annual native food plants species (i.e., California creamcups, goldfields,
tidy tips, etc.) will be performed by a qualified botanist prior to
construction and throughout the blooming season to determine whether
there is any potential habitat for the Opler’s Longhorn moth.
Other Bats
Natural communities in the proposed Project area may support suitable
roosting habitat for special-status bats. Bats generally exhibit a wide
range of habitat usage depending on the species, season, time of day,
availability of resources, and level of disturbance; however, bats often
exhibit high site fidelity and specificity for roost selection. Roost sites
consist of maternity (nursery colonies), bachelor, day, night, and feeding
sites within caves, mines, cliffs, rock crevices, tree hollows, loose tree
bark, foliage, and in man- made structures, such as buildings and
bridges. Some species of bats have complex habitat requirements that
vary seasonally. Generally, bat habitat should be managed on a temporal
and spatial scale that accounts for each species’ specific habitat
requirements, resource availability, and sensitivity to disturbance (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2004).
Appendix M, Special-status Wildlife Species Potentially Occurring in the
Project Vicinity, identifies three bat species with potential to roost or
forage in the Proposed Project area. One of these species, pallid bat, is
discussed above. The other two species, hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus)
and Yuma myotis (Myotis yumaensis), are not federally or state listed, nor
are they categorized as state species of special concern. Potential
roosting and foraging habitat for the following bats is present in the
Project area.
Hoary Bat (Lasiurus cinerus)
Hoary bat (Lasiurus cinerus) is found in any location in California;
although, distribution is patchy in southeastern deserts (Zeiner et al.
1990a). This solitary species winters along the coast and in southern
California, breeding inland and north of its winter range. Suitable habitat
includes all woodlands and forests with medium to large-size trees and
dense foliage (Zeiner et al. 1990a). Hoary bat are solitary roosters and
roost in dense foliage of both coniferous and deciduous trees, near the
end of branches (Bolster 2005); preferred sites are hidden from above,
with few branches below, and have ground cover of low reflectivity, 3–13
meters above ground (Bolster 2005; Zeiner et al. 1990a). Roosts are
usually at the edge of a clearing (Bolster 2005).The species prefers open
habitats or habitat mosaics, with access to trees for cover and open areas

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-83

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
or habitat edges for feeding. Breeding occurs in the autumn, followed by
delayed fertilization. Young are born from mid-May through early July
(Zeiner et al. 1990a).
Review of the CNDDB found two occurrences of hoary bat within 5 miles
of the Project area, the latest of which was documented in 1938. The
closest reported occurrence is 1.7 miles south of Reach 4 near the
intersection of Monterey Highway and 1st Street.
Yuma Myotis (Myotis yumanensis)
Yuma myotis (Myotis yumanensis) is common and widespread in
California and found in a variety of habitats including riparian, arid
scrubland and deserts, and forests (Bogan et al. 2005); optimal habitats
in open forest and woodlands with sources of water (CDFG 1990). The
bat roosts in buildings, mines, caves, or rock crevices; the species also
roosts in abandoned swallow nests, trees, and under bridges (Bogan et
al. 2005). Separate, more open night roosts may be used (CDFG 1990).
Maternity colonies are found in buildings, caves, mines, and under
bridges. Yuma myotis feed over water sources, such as ponds, streams,
and stock tanks. The species breeds in the fall and young are born from
late May to mid- June with a peak in early June (CDFG 1990).
Suitable habitat for this species is present in the Project area and the
potential for occurrence in the Project area is moderate. The closest
reported occurrence of this species is 1.9 miles northwest of Reach 8;
and Yuma myotis could potentially roost at future access points to the
proposed tunnel (Tunnel Alternative, Applicant’s Proposed Action)
(SCVWD 2013d).
Raptors and Migratory Birds
Trees and other vegetation, as well as man-made structures, such as
bridges that span within and adjacent to the Project area, provide
potential nest sites for common raptors that could also forage within the
area. Migratory birds also forage and nest in a variety of habitats,
including riparian and coastal scrub regions and man-made structures,
such as bridges. Active bird nests potentially found within the Project area
are protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) and Section
3503.5 of the Fish and Game Code, which prohibits their disturbance or
destruction.

3.6

AQUATIC RESOURCES
3.6.1

Introduction
This section describes the aquatic wildlife resources of the Project and discusses
Project impacts to aquatic wildlife and habitats that occur within the Project area,
including special-status species. In cases where potential impacts have been
determined to be “significant”, mitigation measures have been proposed to
reduce these impacts to less-than-significant levels. Section 3.6.3, Environmental

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-84

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Setting, describes the regulations and ordinances that would apply to aquatic
wildlife resources.
Baseline information on aquatic wildlife resources in the Project area, including
special-status species and their habitats, was compiled from existing published
and unpublished literature describing aquatic resources in the region,
environmental database searches, consultation with local wildlife professionals,
and information provided by staff from the SCVWD. Primary data sources include
the following:

3.6.2



Casagrande, J. 2011. Uvas Creek steelhead distribution, density, growth,
and habitat use, 2010. Prepared for the California Department of Fish and
Game. 30 pp.



Casagrande, J. 2012. Uvas and Llagas Creek juvenile steelhead
distribution and abundance, 2011. Prepared for the California Department
of Fish and Game. 49 pp.



Smith, J. J. 2007. Steelhead distribution and ecology in the upper Pajaro
River system and mainstem Pajaro River (and stream descriptions,
habitat quality ratings and limiting factors by reach for the Pajaro River
and for the upper Pajaro River tributaries). Unpublished Report,
Department of Biology, San José State University, 07 November 2007.
38 pp.



U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2003. Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Act Report for the Llagas Creek Flood Control Project,
Santa Clara County, California. Prepared for U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, San Francisco District, 211 p.

Project Area
The project area for aquatic resources is any area that would be directly,
permanently, or temporarily affected by the construction and maintenance
activities associated with all the Project alternatives. The Project consists of
seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas
Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek from just downstream of Buena Vista
Avenue. The project area is approximately 13.9 miles long and includes 6.1 miles
of the main branch of Llagas Creek (from Monterey Road downstream to a 1000
feet downstream of Buena Vista Avenue, 2.8 miles along West Little Llagas
Creek, 3.4 miles of East Little Llagas Creek (a tributary of Llagas Creek), and 1.6
miles of a new bypass that would be constructed along West Little Llagas Creek
to Llagas Creek.

3.6.3

Environmental Setting
The environmental setting for aquatic resources includes all areas that could be
affected by modifying the channel within the Project area, including reaches
within the Project area, reaches immediately upstream and downstream of the
Project area that could be affected by Project actions, and tributaries that enter
within the Project area, and in upstream and downstream reaches. Channel

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-85

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
modifications within the Project area include Llagas Creek from 1,000 feet
downstream of Buena Vista Avenue to Monterey Highway, West Little Llagas
Creek from Monterey Highway upstream through Llagas Road, and East Little
Llagas Creek from the Llagas Creek confluence to just downstream of the
Corralitos Creek confluence. Potentially affected areas upstream of the Project
area include Llagas Creek upstream of Monterey Highway to Olive Avenue and
West little Llagas Creek upstream of Hillwood Lane; downstream areas include
Llagas Creek downstream to the confluence with the Pajaro River.
The Llagas Creek watershed drains an area of 104 square miles before joining
the Pajaro River, which drains into the Monterey Bay near Watsonville. Llagas
Creek originates in the Santa Cruz Mountains, near the Loma Prieta Mountain
Range close to the border of Santa Clara and Santa Cruz counties, at an
elevation of approximately 3,000 feet. The creek flows approximately 6 miles
from its headwaters to Chesbro Reservoir, then 5 miles from Chesbro Reservoir
to the Project area, which begins near the intersection with Monterey Highway.
Llagas Creek then flows 5.7 miles through the Project area to the downstream
boundary 1,000 feet downstream of Buena Vista Avenue (Figure 2.2-1) and,
thereafter, 13 miles downstream to the confluence with the Pajaro River.
Several tributaries enter Llagas Creek within the Project area and just upstream
of the Project area. From its headwaters, West Little Llagas Creek flows through
Morgan Hill before turning, generally, southeast at Watsonville Road toward U.S.
101. It joins with East Little Llagas Creek near U.S. 101, just upstream of East
Middle Avenue. East Little Llagas Creek within the Project area begins just
upstream of East Middle Avenue and flows southeast within a channelized
section to its confluence with Llagas Creek between Church Avenue and Masten
Avenue. Tributaries entering West Little Llagas Creek upstream of the Project
area include DeWitt and Edmundsen creeks. Other tributaries entering upstream
of the Project area along Llagas Creek below Chesbro Reservoir include
Paradise, Machado, Hayes creeks, and numerous ephemeral tributaries.

Aquatic Habitat
Reaches 4 and 5
Reach 4 is the downstream-most reach of Llagas Creek within the Project area. It
is an earthen channel, extending approximately 2.4 miles from just downstream
of Buena Vista Avenue in the south (downstream) to the East Little Llagas
Creek/Llagas Creek confluence in the north (upstream; the intersection of
Reaches 4, 5, and 14) (Figures 2.2-7 and 3.6-1). The channel is composed of
cobbles, pebbles and sand with some silt/clay, and is largely unshaded with
almost no overhanging riparian trees or shrubs. The reach typically dries in late
spring and remains as such until early fall or the onset of precipitation. The reach
is dry except during and just after significant rainfall (USFWS 2003). The
relatively low-gradient reach (<0.3%) is sinuous, containing large bends near
Masten and Buena Vista avenues.
Reach 5 is a relatively short (0.5 mile) earthen channel extending west
(upstream) from the Llagas Creek/East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14)
confluence to 700 feet upstream of U.S. 101, where it connects with Reach 6
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-86

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
(Figures 2.2-6 and 3.6-2). Similar to Reach 4, Reach 5 is typically dry from late
spring to early fall, and is largely unshaded by riparian trees or shrubs. The
channel is made up of sand, gravel with some clay/silt, but has few bedforms or
discernible aquatic habitat features (e.g., pools and riffles).
Smith (2007) evaluated portions of Reaches 4 and 5 (Llagas Creek from
Highway 152 to Church Avenue, which encompasses Reaches 4 and 5) to
describe potential steelhead habitat. He concluded that the most limiting factor to
steelhead production was spring stream flows to allow smolt outmigration. Smith
(2007) noted the presence of grade control structures with fish ladders between
Highway 152 and Leavesley Avenue (downstream of the Project area),
potentially improving access by reducing the amount of stream flow necessary to
allow fish passage. He estimated that adults could, likely, migrate downstream at
flows of 10 cubic feet per second (cfs) and smolts could probably emigrate
downstream at flows of 3–5 cfs.
USFWS (2003) evaluated riparian and stream habitat within the Project area
using a Habitat Evaluation Procedure to develop a Habitat Suitability Index (HSI)
for habitat within each reach. The primary components of the stream habitat
evaluated were overhead (riparian cover) (percent vegetation overhanging
stream), instream cover (percent in-water cover features and type in-water
cover), substrate type and condition (streambed particle size and percent
embeddedness), and general stream habitat type and condition (sinuosity and
number of pools/mile; refer to USFWS [2003] for a complete description of the
procedure).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-87

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.6-1 Reach 4 Looking Downstream from the Intersection of Reaches 5
and 14 (Picture taken January 15, 2013)

Figure 3.6-2 Reach 5 Looking Upstream from the Intersection of Reaches 4 and
14 (Picture taken January 15, 2013)

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-88

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
USFWS (2003) evaluated Reaches 4 and 5. In Reach 4, they found that the
stream channel was poorly defined, wide, and shallow, with abundant cobble and
gravel. They found relatively good overhead cover from mature trees and a
moderate number of pools within the reach. The reach did not have significant
spawning area and little potential for such in the future. Reach 5 had very little
channel meander and sinuosity, as relatively straight with only two noticeable
turns. The reach had a moderate amount of pools (14 observed; 34/mile), but
they were not large or deep. They assumed that Reach 5 was not a significant
spawning area for native fishes, such as steelhead, and had little potential for
use in the future. They noted that in recent years, the upstream half of Reach 5
had intermittent flow. USFWS (2003) concluded that all components of stream
habitat within Reaches 4 and 5 were of high value, with the exception of
substrate, which was of medium-to-high value.
Reach 6
Reach 6 is an earthen channel made up of silt, sand, and gravel extending 3.2
miles from 700 feet upstream of U.S. 101 in the south (downstream) to Monterey
Road in the north (upstream) (Figure 2.2-5). The upstream (northern) portion of
the reach, from Monterey Road to San Martin Avenue (approximately 7,000 feet),
is typically perennial, maintained by Chesbro Dam releases. The downstream
(southern) portion, to the intersection with Reaches 4 and 5 (approximately
10,650 feet), is intermittent depending on flow conditions as substantial
percolation occurs within the reach. Stream flow of 6–8 cfs at the upstream end
of the reach can be reduced to <0.5 cfs at the downstream end (Smith 2007).
USFWS (2003) and Smith (2007) evaluated aquatic habitat in portions of Reach
6. USFWS (2003) found high habitat diversity, including pool density (>45/mile)
and relatively high-stream substrate usability and condition. The gravel and
cobble within the site could potentially provide present and future spawning
opportunities. They concluded that all components of stream habitat within
Reach 6 were of high value; the highest set of ratings for the entire Project area.
Smith (2007) evaluated Llagas Creek from Church Avenue to Silveira Lake,
roughly corresponding to Reach 6 to describe potential steelhead habitat. He
observed infrequent riffles along the reach made up of fine and coarse gravel
and other habitat types composed of silt, sand, and fine gravel. Potential
spawning habitat and pools were also infrequent (contrary to USFWS 2003).
Spawning patches were relatively sandy, while pools were less than 2-feet deep.
Smith (2007) also observed high summer water temperatures within Reach 6
(68–79°F) and concluded that the factors most limiting steelhead were water
temperature and fast-water feeding habitat for juvenile steelhead, which declined
downstream with gradually, decreasing stream flows and channel gradient.
Reach 7A and 7B
Reach 7A extends approximately 1.5 miles upstream from Reach 6, just
upstream of the Monterey Road Bridge, to South La Crosse Drive. The majority
of Reach 7A is currently agricultural fields (Figure 2.2-4); there is no existing
channel here except for a short 0.3-mile length of trapezoidal shaped constructed
channel at the upstream end of the reach. Each of the alternatives would
excavate a proposed channel (either an earthen channel [with portions culverted]

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-89

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
or a tunnel) approximately 1.5 miles long through Reach 7A to divert flows from
West Little Llagas Creek upstream of Watsonville Road to Llagas Creek
downstream of Lake Silveira at Monterey Road. Reach 7A does not currently
support any fisheries resources, nor is there any CDFW record for threatened or
endangered fish species (including South Central California Coast steelhead)
(CDFW 2012).
Reach 7B is an earthen channel, approximately 1.4 miles long, containing West
Little Llagas Creek in an urban, and residential suburban, area of Morgan Hill
between South La Crosse Drive in the south, and West Dunne Avenue in the
north (Figure 2.1-3). West Little Llagas Creek is ephemeral, fed in the summer by
agricultural and urban runoff, and composed of gravel, sand, silt and clay. The
stream channel flows through a suburban area with the channel in the southern
half of the reach averaging 75 feet in width, and the northern half (north of
Tennant Avenue) averaging 15 feet in width. In the northern portion, the stream
channel is adjacent to small businesses and is in an underground culvert for the
last 650 feet on the northend. Similar to downstream reaches (Reaches 4 and 5),
Reach 7B dries in late summer to early fall, unable to support steelhead rearing.
There is no CDFW record for threatened or endangered fish species (including
South Central California Coast steelhead) occurring within Reach 7B (CDFW
2012), nor is there any account within the literature reviewed for this EIS.
USFWS (2003) did not evaluate Reach 7A for stream habitat characteristics, but
did evaluate Reach 7B and found a poorly defined streambed or stream channel,
rather it was a series of swales, depressions, with perennially wet and seasonally
moist areas. The upstream third of the Reach 7B more resembled a functioning
stream system (albeit marginal) with a well-defined, but shallow streambed with
low banks. They did not expect steelhead to use this reach after construction of
Reach 7A connected Reach 7B to Reach 6. They found that most of the reach
currently consisted of fine sediment, with no gravel or cobble substrates. USFWS
(2003) concluded that all components of stream habitat within Reach 7B were of
medium to high value.
Reach 8
Reach 8 is also a portion of West Little Llagas Creek, extending 1.5 miles
upstream from Reach 7B through downtown Morgan Hill from West Dunne
Avenue in the south (downstream) through Llagas Road in the north (upstream,
Figure 2.2-2). The reach is a trapezoidal channel (Figure 3.6-3) for most of its
length, with two 250-foot sections passing underground through concrete box
culverts. Flow within the reach is intermittent and the channel is gravel, sand, silt,
and clay, running through a heavily urbanized area with businesses, residential
areas, and roads abutting many portions of the top of the channel bank. There is
no CDFW record for threatened or endangered fish species (including South
Central California Coast steelhead) occurring within Reach 8 (CDFW 2012), nor
is there any account within the literature reviewed for this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-90

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.6-3 Reach 8 Looking Upstream from Wright Avenue (Picture taken
January 15, 2013)
USFWS (2003) found that Reach 8 was the most highly urbanized section of the
Project area, more indicative of an engineered flood control channel than a
functioning stream ecosystem. Still, the report noted the presence of five distinct,
large pools, likely fed by urban runoff, occurring in the above-ground portion of
the reach that supported fish, including possibly some native minnows and
related aquatic organisms. USFWS (2003) concluded that all components of
stream habitat within Reach 8 were of medium-to-high value.
Reach 14
Reach 14 is a constructed channel that is a portion of East Little Llagas Creek,
which runs parallel to U.S. 101. The reach extends 3.4 miles downstream from
near Corralitos Creek to the confluence with Llagas Creek at the intersection of
Reaches 4 and 5 (Figure 2.2-8). The channel was straightened in the 1970s by
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), and several portions are
maintained under the SCVWD’s countywide SMP. The channel is made up of silt,
sand, gravel, and cobble and the banks are lined with grass and some sections
of rip-rap (Figure 3.6-4).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-91

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.6-4 Reach 14 Looking Upstream from the Intersection of Reaches 4 and
5 (Picture taken January 15, 2013)
USFWS (2003) evaluated Reach 14 and found the downstream end from Church
Avenue to the confluence Llagas Creek a barren landscape with little or no vegetation,
no low-flow channel, and very low or non-existent stream habitat value. The area is an
engineered channel with little or no aquatic ecosystem attributes or functioning. The
streambed was fair to poor habitat, with few pools and low diversity of habitat types; but
there were some sections with unembedded gravel and cobble. The upstream section of
Reach 14 “began to look like a stream” with fair-to-good gravel with several pools. They
observed 27–35 existing pools within the entire reach. USFWS (2003) concluded that all
components of stream habitat within Reach 14 were of medium-to-high value.
The reach is hydrologically connected to West Little Llagas Creek and a portion of
Reach 7B (Figure 2.2-3). Reach 7B terminates just south of La Crosse Drive, where
West Little Llagas Creek flows generally southeast through urban and agricultural land
before becoming East Little Llagas Creek on the east side of U.S. 101. As with
downstream (Reaches 4 and 5) and adjacent (Reach 6) reaches, the channel is
extremely porous and surface water generally percolates to an aquifer, leaving a dry
channel for much of the year. The reach does not currently support any fisheries
resources, nor is there any CDFW record for threatened or endangered fish species
(including South Central California Coast steelhead) (CDFW 2012).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-92

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Llagas Creek Downstream of Chesbro Dam to Monterey Road
Habitat below Chesbro Dam is maintained by nearly year round by flow releases from
the dam to provide groundwater recharge via percolation. Releases are left instream to
percolate into the channel bed or are diverted to percolation ponds near Church Avenue.
The percolation ponds are also operated and managed in conjunction with flow releases
from Uvas Reservoir, which are transferred through a 2-mile- long pipeline to Llagas
Creek near Santa Teresa Boulevard (USFWS 2003). A relatively small amount of water
is transferred from Uvas Reservoir to Llagas Creek, most water from the reservoir is
currently allocated to maintain flow for steelhead within Uvas Creek. The reach from
Chesbro Dam to Monterey Road contains the highest quality remaining habitat for native
fish within Project area, as it has the most suitable water temperatures, areas with
cobble and gravel substrate, and likely supports occasional steelhead spawning and
rearing. This section of Llagas Creek, with the exception of a small portion just upstream
of Monterey Road, is upstream of the Project area; and the Project would not affect
hydrology or habitat therein.
From Chesbro Reservoir downstream to the Uvas pipeline, Llagas Creek is relatively
steep and well shaded by riparian vegetation (willows, sycamores, and oaks), with a
channel composed of cobble and gravel in riffles and silty sand and gravel within pools
(Smith 2007). Smith (2007) examined habitat within this portion of Llagas Creek and
found that, in general, spawning gravel is sparse, especially just downstream of the dam;
although, it did occur in the middle of the reach, albeit containing substantial amounts of
sand and silt. He observed frequent deep pools with substantial cover in the form of
undercut banks and overhanging vegetation, and riffles, runs, and heads of pools
(steelhead fast-water feeding habitat) made up 15 percent of the aquatic habitat. Smith
(2007) also noted the presence of a concrete pad and culvert about 0.3-mile
downstream of the dam as a passage barrier to adult steelhead at most stream flows.
Steelhead limiting factors were summer streamflow and late summer water
temperatures, food production, fast-water feeding habitat, and lack of spawning habitat
near the dam.
Downstream of the Uvas Creek pipeline, flow can be substantially higher in Llagas
Creek (Smith 2007). The reach is shaded by dense riparian vegetation (willows,
sycamore) and is moderately entrenched with silty gravels and sand. Smith (2007) found
that spawning gravel was sparse and usually intruded with sand and silt, and that pools
>3 feet depth were frequent with substantial escape cover form overhanging vegetation
(willows and blackberry). Riffles, runs, and pools made up less than 25 percent of the
habitat and summer water temperatures were moderately warm, but dependent on the
depth of Uvas Reservoir at the time of the release to Llagas Creek. He recorded midJuly and late-September water temperatures of 60–62 and 67–69°F above the pipeline
and 60–64 and 64–73°F below. There are no significant tributaries to Llagas Creek
downstream of Chesbro Dam that maintains perennial stream flow or supports steelhead
or other fisheries (Smith 2007).
Lake Silveira
Llagas Creek continues upstream to Chesbro Reservoir from the upstream end of Reach
6 at the intersection of Reaches 6 and 7A. The most downstream end of this reach is
occupied by Lake Silveira, which is an on-channel lake created in the 1980s when a
landowner removed a berm between a former gravel quarry and Llagas Creek (Smith
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-93

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

2007). Llagas Creek currently flows through Silveira Lake, leaving the former channel as
a dry, abandoned streambed, except during flood periods (Harvey and Stanley
Associates 1988). Balance Hydrologics (2012) surveyed the bathymetry of Lake Silveira
in 2012 and recorded a maximum depth of 10.4 feet and a total area of 8 acres at the
surveyed water surface elevation of 304.1 feet (NAVD88). They found physical
conditions broadly similar to USFWS (2003), who noted a relatively uniform depth with
little nearshore aquatic emergent vegetation. Harvey and Stanley Associates (1988)
noted that low dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations (<3 mg/L) probably occur below
7 feet; and Moore (Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012) recorded 40–60 percent DO
saturation within the lake below the hypolimnion, versus >80 percent upstream and
downstream (see below for temperature monitoring results) in Lake Silveira. The DO
levels within the lake did not meet water quality objectives established by the Regional
Water Quality Control Board (Central Coast Region) Water Quality Control Plan (Basin
Plan) for the Llagas Creek watershed (RWQCB 2011) that state “for waters not
mentioned by a specific beneficial use, DO concentration shall not be reduced below 5.0
mg/L at any time. Median values should not fall below 85 percent saturation as a result
of controllable water quality conditions. Harvey and Stanley Associates (1988) also
noted that the lake contains sufficient nutrients to sustain phytoplankton blooms. Smith
(2007) notes that factors limiting steelhead within Lake Silveira are water temperature,
competition for food with warm water fishes, and potential predation of juveniles (De
Haven [2003] also notes that sunfish and avian predators may threaten migrating
steelhead), suggesting the presence of the lake, and slack water habitat, negatively
affect steelhead populations.
USFWS (2003) proposed restoring 1,980-linear feet of Llagas Creek around Lake
Silveira, and filling portions of the lake with borrow excavated from Reach 7A. The
mitigation proposal called for planting emergent species to create a mosaic of cattails
and bulrushes and shallow, open-water habitat. The mitigation would provide thermal
benefits for steelhead rearing and migration by removing the lake, which increases
surface water temperatures by 3–6°F through increased hydraulic residence time and
insolation, and by providing a source of cool water to downstream reaches, (Reach 6),
where rearing and downstream migration may occur in the Project area.
Temperature
In addition to channel drying, water temperature can influence the distribution of aquatic
resources within the Project area. Systech Engineering, Inc. (2004) summarized
temperature data collected in Reach 6, and upstream of the Project area in Llagas Creek
downstream of Chesbro Reservoir. Results from 2000 and 2001 show daily average
temperatures during the summer ranged from 70–75°F in Reach 6 above the Church
Avenue percolation ponds; at San Martin Avenue and downstream of Llagas Avenue;
and from 61–66°F below Santa Teresa Boulevard on Llagas Creek. Systech
Engineering, Inc. (2004) used a model to estimate temperatures under high, medium,
and low flow and different levels of shading (20% overhead riparian canopy and 0
percent overhead riparian canopy) in Reach 6. They compared the average annual
temperature for each scenario and found that shading could potentially reduce average
annual stream temperature by up to 5°F (from 68–63°F). Systech Engineering, Inc.
(2004) did not simulate continuous summer-water temperatures or present an average
seasonal temperature (i.e., an average temperature for spring, summer, fall, and winter).
The report concluded that under conditions of higher flow, which reduced hydraulic
residence time, and increased riparian canopy, which reduced insolation of the water
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-94

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

surface, there could be lower water temperatures in Reach 6. Smith (2007) observed
high summer-water temperatures within Reach 6 (68–79°F). He also recorded mid-July
and late-September water temperatures of 60–62 and 67–69°F upstream of the Uvas
Creek pipeline to Llagas Creek and 60–64 and 64–73°F downstream of the pipeline.
Moore (2012) examined temperature within Lake Silveira to assess the lake’s impact
and potential stress to the fluvial system. The study measured continuous water
temperature upstream, within, and downstream of the lake, with probes measuring at 15minute intervals during spring (May 24 to June 2, 2011), summer (August 1 to August 8,
2011), and winter (January 25 to February 1, 2012). Moore (2012) found that
temperature was consistently higher downstream (ranging from 73–77°F), with the effect
most pronounced in the summer, varying from 9–14°F greater than upstream (ranging
from 63–68°F), in some cases exceeding water quality objectives established by the
Regional Water Quality Control Board (Central Coast Region) Water Quality Control
Plan (Basin Plan) for the Llagas Creek watershed (RWQCB 2011) stating “at no time or
place shall the temperature of any water be increased by more than 5°F above natural
receiving temperature”. The study concluded that warming within Lake Silveira raises
downstream temperatures above optimal temperature range for juvenile steelhead (59–
65°F). Daily average temperatures in late August exceeded 75°F, which are stressful
and potentially lethal to rearing juvenile steelhead.
Aquatic Species Known to Occur in the Llagas Creek Watershed
A mixture of native and non-native fish species are known to occur in the Project area
and upstream of the Project area in Lake Silveira, Llagas Creek below Chesbro
Reservoir, and Chesbro Reservoir. USFWS (2003) observed that fishes of Llagas Creek
had not recently been inventoried, and besides steelhead (see below), the creek may
contain species known to occur within Chesbro Reservoir or downstream in the Pajaro
River. Fish known to occur downstream in the Pajaro River include Sacramento
blackfish (Orthodon microlepidotus), Carp (Cyprinus carpio), goldfish, (Carassius
auratys), mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis), Sacramento sucker (Catostomus
occidentalis), hitch (Lavinia exilicauda), Sacramento pikeminnow (Ptychocheilus
grandis), Golden shiner (Notemigonus crysoleucas), prickly sculpin (Cottus asper), and
three-spine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) (USFWS 2003; Smith 2007).
Casagrande (2012) sampled a section of Llagas Creek within Reach 6 downstream of
Lake Silveira and Monterey Road in 2011 and found a mixture of native and non-native
fish: Sacramento pikeminnow, Sacramento sucker, hitch, prickly sculpin, and common
carp. USFWS (2003) recorded the presence of several pools in Reach 8 that supported
fish, including possibly native minnows; although, this was a personal observation by the
report author and not the result of sampling. The only native minnow reported within
Llagas Creek below Chesbro Dam is California roach, but Smith (2007) reported that
these fish were extirpated during the 1977 drought and have not recolonized; although,
they are abundant upstream of the dam. Moyle et al. (1995) concluded that recent
losses of roach populations throughout California have occurred when drought
eliminated isolated populations. As such, small fish may occur in some portions of
Reach 8, but are likely non-native, such as mosquitofish. No fish species have been
reported to occur in Reaches 7A, 7B, and 14.
The fish population of Lake Silveira likely favors non-native sunfish species and catfish,
which are both suited to lake environments (USFWS 2003). Harvey and Stanley
Associates (1988) conducted limited gill net sampling of the lake and found hitch,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-95

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Sacramento blackfish, Sacramento squawfish (Ptychocheilus grandis), goldfish, carp,
and Sacramento sucker, and noted that Pacific lamprey (Entosphenus tridentatus)
prickly sculpin, largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), bluegill (Lepomis
macrochirus), and black crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus) were probably present.
Smith (2007) also noted that large pikeminnows are common in the lake and could prey
on migrating steelhead smolts. Moore (2012b) also found a native freshwater mussel,
the California floater (Anodonta californiensis), at the inflow of Lake Silveira in 3 feet of
water in April 2012.
Upstream of the Project area, Sacramento suckers are common throughout the reach
below Chesbro Dam, as are Sacramento pikeminnow and hitch. These species likely
occur primarily downstream of Watsonville Road (Smith 2007). Prickly sculpin are
present, but scarce, primarily downstream of the pipeline from Uvas Reservoir and may
come through the pipeline. Pacific lamprey have occasionally been found near Santa
Teresa Boulevard.
Chesbro Reservoir likely supports most of the species seen downstream, plus western
roach, catfish (bullhead), various sunfish species, largemouth bass, bluegill, and crappie
(USFWS 2003). Surveys by Anderson (1976) and Hunter (1980) observed the following
non-special-status fish species within Chesbro Reservoir: largemouth bass, bluegill,
black crappie, brown bullhead catfish (Ameiurus nebulosus), white catfish (Ameiurus
catus), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), threadfin shad (Dorosoma petenense),
carp, sucker (Catostomus spp.), hitch, sculpin (Cottus spp.), redear sunfish (Lepomis
microlophus), green sunfish (Lepomis cyanellus), and golden shiner.
Special-Status Aquatic Species
A review of available studies (Hunter 1980; Smith 2007; Casagrande 2011, 2012; and
Balance Hydrologics et al. 2012) and the California Natural Diversity Database (CDFW
2012) indicates the occurrence of one special-status species within the Project area
(Table 3.6-1).
Table 3.6-1

Threatened or Endangered Fish Species, and Associated Critical Habitat,
Potentially Occurring Within the Project Area

Scientific Name

Common Name

Status 1

Critical Habitat in or near
Project Area?

Oncorhynchus mykiss

South-central California steelhead

FT

Yes

1

FE= Federally Endangered, FT = Federally Threatened, SE=State of California Endangered, ST = State of California Threatened

South-Central California Coast Steelhead (S-CCC)
The South-Central California Coast Steelhead (S-CCC) ESU is federally listed as
threatened (Federal Register 2006). Steelhead trout utilizing the Pajaro River system are
considered to be the northern-most component within the S-CCC ESU, as designated by
the NMFS (2004). Steelhead within the S-CCC ESU were listed by NMFS as
“threatened” on August 18, 1997. The listing was reaffirmed on January 5, 2006. All
steelhead within this ESU are considered “winter steelhead” (NMFS 2004) based on
their migratory timing and behavior; ascending streams during the winter when winter
rainfall results in suitable flow and temperature (Moyle 2002).
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-96

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Steelhead are the anadromous form of rainbow trout that migrate to the ocean as
juveniles and return to inland waters as adults to spawn. Steelhead in the Pajaro River
and tributaries (including Llagas Creek) are considered winter (ocean maturing)
steelhead, based on the timing of their return to freshwater and the fact that they tend to
be sexually mature when reentering freshwater. Winter steelhead generally enter fresh
water between November and April when flow and temperatures are suitable, and
spawn soon after arriving at their spawning grounds (Moyle 2002). Migrating adults must
have sufficient depths and suitable water velocities to facilitate their upstream migration
to suitable spawning grounds. Pools with low velocities in association with instream and
near stream cover, such as large woody debris (LWD), undercut banks, or submerged or
overhanging vegetation, can provide desirable resting areas for migrating adult
steelhead. After reaching their spawning areas, redds (nests) are excavated by adult
females in suitable gravel substrate, and spawning occurs soon after. Steelhead are
unique among Pacific salmonids in that they can be iteroparous; that is, given the right
conditions, they may be able to return to the ocean and then spawn again in one or more
subsequent years. Steelhead fry emergence from gravel redds occurs in late spring, and
steelhead fry rear for 1 to 3 years in fresh water before migrating to the ocean (Moyle
2002). Steelhead generally spend 2 years in the ocean before returning to freshwater to
spawn. However, some individuals might spend 1 to 4 years at sea before reaching
sexual maturity (Barnhart 1986).
Like other salmonids, steelhead spawning generally occurs in swift, relatively shallow
riffles, pool tailouts, or along the edges of fast runs where an abundance of loose gravel
exists. Substrate composition is a critical factor determining the suitability of spawning
habitat. They require clean, loose gravel that will remain stable during incubation and
emergence. Substrate composition must be low in sand and fines, so that water can flow
through the gravel, carrying oxygen to the eggs, and carrying waste products away from
the eggs. This process allows successful incubation and emergence of the juveniles
(Bjornn and Reiser 1991). Eggs are adversely affected if fine sediments fill the interstitial
spaces in the gravel. Accumulation of fine sediments or coarse sand can also cause fry
to have difficulty emerging from the redd.
After emergence, steelhead fry tend to select shallow water habitat, such as glides and
riffles for rearing, usually near some form of cover. Large rocks, root wads, woody
debris, and undercut banks can provide suitable cover. Densities of juvenile steelhead in
streams are greatest where instream cover and their invertebrate food source are
diverse and abundant. The distribution and abundance of rearing juveniles is influenced
by food availability, predation and competition, and the quantity and quality of suitable
habitat (Bjornn and Reiser 1991). As fish grow, they move into faster, deeper habitats.
During the winter, when water temperatures cool and the metabolic rate of the fish
decrease, fish move into pools with ample cover. Temperature is also an important
factor for juvenile rearing conditions. In general, water temperatures less than 59°F are
suitable for summer rearing of juvenile steelhead, while temperatures greater than 77°F
are potentially lethal, and temperatures above 72°C may affect feeding and fitness
(Bjornn and Reiser 1991; NMFS 2011).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-97

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

After 1 to 3 years of rearing in freshwater, most juvenile steelhead begin the process of
smoltification1 and proceed to migrate downstream toward the ocean. Steelhead smolts
may immigrate to the ocean from January through June on the receding limb of the
winter hydrograph. These fish may reside in the ocean for between 2 and 4 years
(Barnhart 1986; Moyle 2002) prior to returning to spawn.
Habitat needs in the Project area for emigrating steelhead (smolts) are similar to those
for rearing juvenile steelhead. Migrating smolts are particularly vulnerable to predation,
and physical structure and cover (refugia) are important for survival of this life stage.
Similar to rearing juveniles, outmigrants rely on the presence of adequate food and
suitable resting pools. Lagoons and estuaries at the river mouth are often very important
for the rearing of larger juveniles and may provide essential feeding opportunities for
smolts prior to entering the ocean (Smith 2002).
Returning adult steelhead are likely to enter the Pajaro River watershed from December
through April (Moyle 2002), based on freshwater outflow and temperature. To reach the
spawning areas in the upper watershed, adults must enter the Pajaro River/lagoon after
the seasonal sandbar has been breached. During periods of low stream flows or
droughts, the onset of the steelhead spawning migration can be delayed until breaching
of the lagoon sandbar occurs.
Critical habitat2 for South-Central California Coast steelhead is present in the Project
area from Reach 4 (Llagas Creek at Buena Vista Avenue) through Reach 6 (Llagas
Creek at Monterey Road), and upstream (Llagas Creek from Monterey Road to Chesbro
Dam) and downstream of the Project area (Llagas Creek from Monterey Road to the
Pajaro River and stream reaches of the Pajaro River basin to, but not including, the
Santa Maria River (NMFS 2005a). Llagas Creek is part of the Pajaro River Subbasin
Hydrologic Unit (HU) 3305 and within the South Santa Clara Valley Hydrologic Subarea
(HSA) 330530 (NMFS 2005b). CDFW (2013) shows that the segment of Llagas Creek
from Monterey Road to Southside Drive, which encompasses Reaches 4, 5, and 6,
contains fair spawning habitat, no rearing habitat, and poor migration habitat. The
primary constituent elements of South-Central California Coast steelhead critical habitat
are: (1) spawning habitat, including spawning substrate and adequate water quantity and
quality; (2) freshwater rearing habitat including floodplain connectivity and natural
escape and velocity cover; (3) freshwater migration corridors free of obstructions, with
water quantity and quality conditions that allow movement; (4) estuarine areas with
adequate water quality and quantity to supporting juvenile and adult physiological
transitions between fresh and salt water; (5) Nearshore marine areas free of obstruction
with water quality and quantity conditions and forage, including aquatic invertebrates and
fishes, supporting growth and maturation; and (6) offshore marine areas with water
quality conditions and forage, including aquatic invertebrates and fishes, supporting
growth and maturation (NMFS 2005a).

1

A process whereby physiological and behavioral changes prepare the juvenile steelhead for the marine
environment.

2

Section 3 of the ESA (16 U.S.C. 1532(5)) defines critical habitat as ‘‘(i) the specific areas within the
geographical area occupied by the species, at the time it is listed on which are found those physical or
biological features (I) essential to the conservation of the species and (II) which may require special
management considerations or protection; and (ii) specific areas outside the geographical area occupied
by the species at the time it is listed

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-98

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Steelhead or possibly rainbow trout have been observed upstream of the Project in
Llagas Creek between Monterey Road and Chesbro Dam. Smith (2007) sampled four
sites along this reach in 1997 and found seven juvenile steelhead at the Llagas Road
Bridge, just downstream of Chesbro Dam. In 2005, eight juvenile steelhead were found
along the same reach. Casagrande (2012) sampled five sites in November 2011 and
found a total of ten juvenile steelhead captured at two sites. Seven were captured at
near the Llagas Road Bridge, the greatest amount observed since 2005. The remaining
steelhead were found near Paradise Land and Bowden Court (upstream of Watsonville
Road). All were captured in fast-water habitats (runs and heads of pools). All steelhead
observed at the Llagas Road site in 2011 by Casagrande (2012) were young of the year
(YOY), ranging in size from 4 to 6 inches (standard length). Yearling steelhead were
captured near Bowden Court and were near 9 inches (standard length); and scale
samples indicated substantial growth between their first and second years. Casagrande
(2011) also observed five YOY near the Llagas Road Bridge (downstream of Chesbro
Reservoir) in 2010. The Llagas Road Bridge site has the best observed habitat
conditions (substrate quality, abundance of riffles, runs, and heads of pools), and scale
samples indicated substantial growth for YOY. Moore (2012b) captured a YOY
steelhead in a shallow riffle in Llagas Creek just upstream of the inflow to Lake Silveira
in May of 2012.
It is uncertain whether steelhead captured in Llagas Creek near Chesbro Dam were
progeny of anadromous steelhead or rainbow trout. Smith (2007) notes the presence of
a concrete pad and culvert about 0.3 mile downstream of the dam as a passage barrier
to adult steelhead at most stream flows. Genetic analyses conducted on individuals
captured in 1997 (described in Smith [2007]) showed low genetic variation, suggesting
samples came from a single spawning pair. Smith (2007) concludes that the present
steelhead run in Llagas Creek is likely only a few adult fish, possibly strays that only
occur in wetter years. Further, it is possible that fish found in Llagas Creek below
Chesbro Dam are also resident trout replenished from Chesbro Reservoir. Hunter (1980)
noted that Llagas Creek historically sustained steelhead trout, although construction of
Chesbro Dam and channelization of lower stream reaches, restricted steelhead
spawning and rearing to the 5-mile reach from Chesbro Dam downstream to Santa
Teresa Boulevard. As a consequence of the cumulative adverse impacts of channel
modifications, streamflow regulation and the severe 1976–1977 drought, spawning had
not occurred since 1975 (observation made in 1980). Hunter (1980) further noted that
the 1974-year class was the last successful production in Llagas Creek and that summer
sampling through 1980 failed to reveal the presence of juvenile steelhead. These
observations led to the conclusion the steelhead population in Llagas Creek is greatly
diminished and may not be self-sustaining.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-99

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-100

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.7

Affected Environment

AGRICULTURAL AND FOREST RESOURCES
3.7.1

Introduction
The potential impact of the various alternatives, including the No Project
Alternative, on agricultural and forest resources is considered in this section. The
focus of this section is on agricultural lands as the project area is not forested
and impacts to forest resources are not anticipated. There are no forestlands in
the vicinity of the project area.
The major resource documents used to complete this section are listed here:

3.7.2



California Department of Conservation. 2010. Santa Clara County
Important Farmland (Map). Sacramento, California.



City of Gilroy. 2002. City of Gilroy General Plan 2002 to 2020. Adopted
June 2010. Gilroy, California.
Available online at:
http://www.cityofgilroy.org/cityofgilroy/city_hall/community_development/
planning/general_plan/defaul t.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.



City of Morgan Hill. 2010a. Morgan Hill General Plan – Revised 2010.
Morgan Hill, California.
Available online at: http://www.morgan-hill.ca.gov/index.aspx?NID=75.
Accessed on February 15, 2013.



Santa Clara County. 1994. Santa Clara County General Plan, 1995–
2010. Adopted December 20. County of Santa Clara, California.
Available online at: http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/Plans%20%20Programs/General%20Plan/Pages/General- Plan.aspx.
Accessed on February 15, 2103.



Santa Clara County, Division of Agriculture. 2012. 2011 Santa Clara Crop
Report. Santa Clara County, California.

Project Area
Countywide, the region had been in a near constant transition in the post-war
period from an agricultural area to a region driven by technology and subsequent
growth and suburbanization. Most of the agricultural land in the northern end of
the Santa Clara Valley has already been converted due to urbanization.
However, the southern end of the Valley (including areas in vicinity of the Project
area) continues to have an active agricultural industry. Generally, the agricultural
lands are along the southern portion of the Project along Reaches 7A, 6, 5, 4 and
14. Reaches 8 and 7B are within Morgan Hill and are, for the most part,
urbanized.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-101

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

3.7.3

Environmental Setting
Agricultural Resources
Countywide Agricultural Production Statistics
The County of Santa Clara, Division of Agriculture (2012), provides
annual statistics on agricultural output countywide. In 2011, over 233,000
acres of land were harvested in the county; over 90 percent of the lands
were in field crops. The top five crops by acreage are as follows:
1.

hay-grain (3,508 acres);

2.

wine grapes (1,546 acres);

3.

bell peppers (1,466 acres);

4.

lettuce (1,244 acres); and

5.

corn (1,202 acres).

Countywide, total gross value produced in 2011 was $247,993,900. The
top six crops in the county based on gross value rounded to the nearest
million, are as followed:
1.

nursery crops ($86 million);

2.

mushrooms ($62 million);

3.

bell peppers ($11 million);

4.

fresh tomatoes ($9 million);

5.

wine grapes ($7 million); and

6.

wax and chili peppers ($7 million).

Important Farmlands and Williams Act Lands
The state’s Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP)
produces maps and statistics to assist in analyzing potential impacts to
agricultural resources. Table 3.7-1 provides acreages and descriptions of
the types of Important Farmlands in Santa Clara County and within the
Project footprint. Figures 3.7-1a-c map series shows the location of
Important Farmlands and Williamson Act Lands in the vicinity of the
project area. The figures also show areas only within the Project footprint
where growers reported planting crops in 2013 to the county. It should be
noted that the Williamson Act Lands, shown in the figures, are from 2009.
A new map was developed for 2012–2013; however, GIS files were not
available at the time the figures were being finalized. Therefore, the 2009

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-102

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

data was georeferenced with the most recent data, and no differences
within the Project footprint or within the flooding extents were found.
Table 3.7-1

Summary of Important Farmlands in Santa Clara County and Within Project
Footprint (2010)

Countywide
Acreage1.2

Number of Acres Within
Project Footprint
(% of Countywide Total)3
Permanent
Temporary

Classification

Description

Prime Farmland

Best combination of physical and chemical
features able to sustain long-term agricultural
production. This land has the soil quality,
growing season, and moisture supply needed
to produce sustained high yields. Land must
have been used for irrigated agricultural
production at some time during the 4 years
prior to the mapping date.

17,270

34 (0.2%)

17 (0.1%)

Farmland of
Statewide
Importance

Farmland of Statewide Importance is similar
to Prime Farmland, but with minor
shortcomings, such as greater slopes or less
ability to store soil moisture. Land must have
been used for irrigated agricultural production
at some time during the 4 years prior to the
mapping date.

3,630

2 (0.1%)

1(<0.1%)

Unique
Farmland

Unique Farmland consists of lesser quality
soils used for the production of the state's
leading agricultural crops. This land is usually
irrigated, but may include non-irrigated
orchards or vineyards, as found in some
climatic zones in California. Land must have
been cropped at some time during the
4 years prior to the mapping date.

2,523

14 (0.6%)

1 (<0.1%)

Farmland
of Local
Importance

Small orchards and vineyards primarily in the
foothill areas. Also, land cultivated as dry
cropland for grains and hay.

4,328

Less than
0.5 acre
(<0.1%)

0

1

California Department of Conservation (2010) Santa Clara County Important Farmland GIS Data Layer.

2

Grazing land, urban and built up land, other land, and water are not included in the table.

3

Acreages were calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint on Important Farmlands (California
Department of Conservation 2010).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-103

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

As of 2010, there were 17,270 acres of Prime Farmland, 3,630 acres of Farmland of Statewide
Importance, and 2,523 acres of Unique Farmland in the county. The majority of these farmlands
are in South Santa Clara County. The Project footprint includes areas subject to both permanent
and temporary conversion. There are 34 acres of Prime Farmland, 2 acres of Farmland of
Statewide Importance, and 14 acres of Unique Farmland subject to permanent conversion
within the Project footprint. In general, there is less land subject to temporary conversion (during
construction) compared to permanent. It should be noted that the amount of acreage subject to
conversion does vary by alternative. Tables 3.7-2 and 3.7-3 show the Important Farmlands
within the Project footprint subject to permanent and temporary conversion, respectively by
reach. Reach 14 has the most Important Farmlands subject to permanent conversion and
Reaches 7B and 8 have no lands designated as Important Farmlands.
Table 3.7-2

Important Farmlands Within Project Footprint by Reach 1,2
Reach (acres)
4

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

Total within
Project
Footprint

8.0

2.8

1.6

7.7

--

--

13.8

33.9

--

--

--

0.5

--

--

1.4

1.9

5.6

3.7

3.4

--

--

--

1.2

13.9

--

--

--

--

--

--

0.3

0.3

Total By Reach

13.6

6.5

5.0

8.2

--

--

16.7

50.0

Prime Farmland

6.3

--

1.6

4.4

--

--

4.4

16.7

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

0.1

0.3

--

--

--

--

0.7

1.1

--

--

--

1.1

--

--

-

1.1

6.5

0.3

1.6

5.5

--

--

5.1

19.0

Subject to Conversion

Temporary

Permanent

Prime Farmland
Farmland of Statewide Importance
Unique Farmland
Farmland of Local Importance

Farmland of Statewide Importance
Unique Farmland
Farmland of Local Importance
Total By Reach

1 Acreages were calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint on Important Farmlands map
(California Department of Conservation 2010).
2 Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding.

Table 3.7-3

Williamson Act Lands Within Project Footprint by Reach 1,2
Reach (acres)
4

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

Total within
Project
Footprint

Permanent

2.2

2.6

10.8

1.0

--

--

0.2

16.8

Temporary

0.8

0.3

0.2

--

--

--

0.1

1.4

Total by Reach

3.0

2.9

11.0

1.0

--

--

0.3

18.2

Subject to Conversion

1 Acreages were calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint on the Williamson Act GIS data
layer.
2 Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-104

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Currently, over 360,000 acres of land in the county were covered under the Williamson Act
(Santa Clara County 2013); these lands may also be for open space and not necessarily for
agricultural purposes. There are 18.2 acres of Williamson Act Lands in the Project footprint and
most (16.8 acres) of these are within the area subject to permanent conversion. Table 3.7-3
shows the amount of lands designated under the Williamson Act within the Project footprint
(subject to both temporary and permanent conversion) by reach. For areas subject to
permanent conversion, over half (10.8 acres) of the Williamson Act Lands are along Reach 6.
Williamson Act Lands are not mutually exclusive from other Important Farmlands; about 5 acres
of the Williamson Act Lands within the Project footprint are also classified as Important
Farmlands. These include 3 acres also classified as Prime Farmland and about 2 acres
classified as Unique Farmland. For example, Farmlands of Statewide Importance may also be
enrolled in Williamson Act contracts. Zoning within the project area is discussed in greater detail
in Section 3.8, Land Use and Planning; the City of Morgan Hill and the County of Santa Clara
are responsible for zoning in the project area. Lands zoned specifically for agriculture are
primarily along Reaches 4, 6, and 14. It should be noted that FFMP lands are also within lands
zoned as Variable Density Rural Residential. Therefore, it should not be anticipated that the
acres of land zoned, or designated specifically for agricultural use, would be equal to the FMMP
lands.
Croplands within the Project Footprint
Growers in Santa Clara County, who apply pesticides, are required to
obtain permits from the county to apply these to the croplands. The
permits require growers to provide the crops that they are planning to
cultivate in the treated areas. The data shown in Table 3.7-4 reflects
crops expected to be grown within the portion of the Project footprint
subject to permanent conversion. For 2013, the most reported land under
cultivation was along Reach 6 (12.1 acres). The crops shown, as
provided by the Santa Clara County Department of Agriculture (2013), do
not include fallow fields that are not being treated with pesticides in 2013
and fields where organic crops are being grown, if any. The table includes
only those plots were more than 0.25 acre are within the Project footprint
It is common that some lands produce more than one harvest per year;
therefore, the acreages associated with the individual crops are not
reported, as they may be misleading.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-105

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.7-4

Summary of Crops Grown in Project Footprint Subject to Permanent
Conversion (2013) 1

Reach

Reported Land Under
Cultivation in 2013

Crops 2

4

12.1

Barley; Wheat; Oats; Dried Beans; Pumpkin; Corn; Tomatillo; Cucumber;

5

1.4

Flowering Plant; Celery; Broccoli; Chive; Pea; Chinese Greens

6

0.5

Bak Choy; Gai Choy; Gai Lon (Chinese Broccoli); Chrysanthemum; Flowering
Plants; Napa Cabbage

7A

6.8

Dried Beans; Corn; Outdoor Flowers; Peppers

7B

0

No crops reported

8

0

No crops reported

14

<0.1

No crops were on an area within the footprint larger than 0.003 acre

1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Santa Clara County Growers Data GIS Layer on the Project footprint. Organic
crops, if any, and unreported uncultivated land are not included but the totals do include uncultivated areas reported to
county.

2

Listed in descending order based on size of field; some fields have multiple crops so acreages are not shown. Crops grown
on fields with less than 0.25 acre within the Project footprint are not shown.

The County Department of Agriculture (2013) also provided grower information for the bypass,
as proposed in the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. There are currently, per county records, no
crops being grown on any of the properties adjacent to the lands necessary to complete the
bypass. However, there are some abandoned greenhouses and a business that ships flowers.
It is worth noting, that some of the Important Farmlands within the Project footprint do not
appear to be actively farmed in 2013. In fact, about 27 acres of the Important Farmlands in the
Project footprint (both lands subject to permanent and temporary conversion) are being
cultivated; and about 42 acres do not include lands where growers reported crops in 2013.
Although the exact acreage cannot be determined, some lands are possibly being farmed using
organic practices or are being fallowed and not being treated with pesticides in 2013.
Regardless, the results suggest the possibility that some of the designated Important Farmlands
are not being farmed.
Forest Resources
There are no forest resources in the vicinity of the Project project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-106

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.7-1a Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-107

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-108

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.7-1b Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-109

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-110

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.7-1c Agriculture in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-111

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-112

Chapter 3

3.8

Affected Environment

LAND USE AND PLANNING
3.8.1

Introduction
In this section, existing land uses and zoning categories within the project area
for the Project along with applicable planning regulations are provided and then
reviewed for potential impacts or conflicts with aspects of the various
alternatives.

3.8.2

Project Area
Overall, the project area is roughly 20–25 miles southeast of San Jose in the
southern end of Santa Clara County. The northern portion (Reaches 8, 7B, and
portions of 7A) is within the City of Morgan Hill; a portion of Reach 7A is within
unincorporated Santa Clara County, but within Morgan Hill’s SOI. Reaches 6, 5,
and 14 are within the San Martin planning area and a portion of Reach 4 (north of
Masten Avenue) is also in the San Martin planning area. The southern portion of
Reach 4 is within unincorporated Santa Clara County and within the City of
Gilroy’s SOI. In general, the project area has a wide range of land uses as it
passes through urbanized areas within Morgan Hill and agricultural areas
primarily in the southern reaches. Land uses within the Project area include open
space and public facilities along with agricultural, residential, and commercial
uses. In general, land uses within the Gilroy SOI are agricultural. The project
area is also within the jurisdiction of the SCVWD, which is authorized to provide
comprehensive water resource planning for beneficial use and protect Santa
Clara County from flooding.

3.8.3

Environmental Setting
The Figures 3.8-1a–c show land uses in and around the Project footprint. The
figures combine land use designations from both the City of Morgan Hill and
Santa Clara County. Residential land uses were combined for the maps, as were
the commercial categories. Figures 3.8-2a–c shows the zoning designations in
and around the Project footprint. The Project footprint is divided into areas to be
permanently and temporarily converted. One example of an area subject to
temporary conversion would be a construction staging area to be used during the
construction period, but not after the built features have been completed. Tables
3.8-1 and 3.8-2 show land uses subject to permanent and temporary conversion,
respectively, under the various alternatives. Tables 3.8-3 and 3.8-4 show the
zoning classifications for areas subject to permanent and temporary conversion
respectively by acres within the Project footprint by reach. The area within the
Project footprint subject to conversion varies by alternative. A wide range of land
uses and zoning classifications exist within the Project footprint. In general, the
northern portion of the project area is urbanized while the southern portion is
more agricultural and rural. Potential impacts to agricultural resources are
addressed in Section 3.7, Agricultural and Forest Resources. It should be noted
that acreages attributed to agricultural use vary based on the source. Land uses
and zoning are generated at the county and city level, while Important Farmlands
were mapped by the California Department of Conservation. For example, Prime
Farmland (as identified in Section 3.7) is present not only in areas with land use

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-113

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
designated for agriculture, but also in areas designated as open space and
residential. Therefore, it is not expected that the Important Farmlands totals
would match either the land use totals for agriculture or areas zoned for
agriculture.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-114

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-1a Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-115

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-116

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-1b Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-117

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-118

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-1c Land Use in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-119

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-120

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-2a Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 1 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-121

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-122

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-2b Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 2 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-123

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-124

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.8-2c Zoning in the Project Vicinity, Map 3 of 3

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-125

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-126

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.8-1

Land Uses Within Project Footprint Subject to Permanent Conversion by
Reach in Acres 1,2,3
Reach

Land Use

Total Within
Project
Footprint 5

44

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

Agriculture

43.2

-

-

-

-

-

-

43.2

Residential 6

14.6

14.1

58.3

13.3

1.7

5.9

41.9

149.7

Commercial 7

--

--

--

-<0.1

4.9

--

--

4.9

Mixed Use

--

--

--

--

--

<0.1

--

<0.1

Open Space

--

54.0

23.5

--

--

90.6

Public Facilities

--

--

Major Gas and Electric Utilities

--

--

3.2

9.9

1.6

<0.1

0.6

--

--

0.6

--

--

--

--

1.6

1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint on Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill land use maps;
the totals do not include areas classified as roads under designated land uses or streets under the Project footprint
designation (about
11 acres). The amount of land converted would vary by alternative.
2

No lands were designated for industrial.

3

Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill Land Use categories were combined.

4

Most of the Agricultural lands along Reach 4 are within the Gilroy SOI.

5

Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding.

6

Includes Rural Residential, Multi and Single Family Low and Medium Density Residential, and Residential Estate.

7

Includes Commercial and Non-retail Commercial.

Table 3.8-2

Land Uses Within Project Footprint Subject to Temporary Conversion by
Reach in Acres 1,2,3
Reach

Land Use

Agriculture
Residential

5

Commercial

4

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

5.7

--

--

--

--

--

--

6.6

<0.1

4.8

2.4
6

Open Space

---

1.6
-0.1

9.0
-0.2

12.7

Total Within
Project
Footprint 4
5.7
37.1

--

1.2

--

--

1.2

1.7

0.1

--

--

2.0

1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint on Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill land use maps;
the totals do not include roads (less than 0.25 acre).
2

No lands were designated for industrial, mixed use, public facilities, or major gas and electric utilities.

3

Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill Land Use categories were combined.

4

Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding.

5

Includes Rural Residential, Multi and Single Family Low and Medium Density Residential, and Residential Estate.

6

Includes Commercial and Non-retail Commercial.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-127

December 2015

Chapter 3

Table 3.8-3

Affected Environment

Zoning within Project Footprint Subject to Permanent Conversion by Reach
in Acres 1,2
Reach

Zoning Classification

Total
Within
Project
Footprint4

43

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

40.8

--

--

9.3

--

--

--

50.1

--

--

42.4

--

--

--

8.9

51.2

17.0

17.3

26.1

7.6

--

--

33.0

100.1

Central Commercial,
Residential District

--

--

--

--

-

0.2

--

0.2

General Commercial District

--

--

--

--

7.1

--

--

7.1

General Commercial District
(Conditional Zoning)

--

--

--

--

0.3

--

--

0.3

Light Commercial Residential
District

--

--

--

--

2.3

--

--

2.3

Medium Density Residential
District

--

--

--

3.4

2.3

0.7

--

6.4

Medium Density Residential
District, (Commercial Use
Overlay)

--

--

--

--

0.5

--

--

0.5

Medium Density Residential
District, Residential Planned
Development Overlay District

--

--

--

2.1

0.2

2.4

--

4.8

Single Family District

--

--

--

1.2

2.5

--

--

4.8

Single Family District,
Residential Planned
Development Overlay District

--

--

--

<0.1

--

--

--

<0.1

Open Space

--

--

<0.1

18.1

5.6

--

--

23.6

Planned Unit Development
District

--

--

--

1.3

<0.1

--

--

1.3

Public Facilities District

--

--

--

--

0.5

--

--

0.5

Santa Clara County
Exclusive Agricultural
Residential and Agricultural
Variable Density Rural
Residential
City of Morgan Hill

1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint with Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill zoning
maps. Roughly 4.5 acres of area classified as streets are not included in the totals.
2

Unclassified areas within the Project footprint include 1.9 acres of Reach 6 and 2.5 acres of Reach 7A.

3

The areas zoned for Exclusive Agriculture along Reach 4 are within the Gilroy SOI.

4

Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding; also, total acreages may not match those from Land Use, because the
Land Use tables do not include roads.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-128

December 2015

Chapter 3

Table 3.8-4

Affected Environment

Zoning within Project Footprint Subject to Temporary Conversion by Reach
in Acres 1,2
Reach

Zoning Classification

Total
Within
Project
Footprint4

43

5

6

7A

7B

8

14

5.7

--

--

6.8

--

--

--

12.5

--

--

4.4

--

--

--

5.4

9.7

2.4

1.7

4.7

--

--

--

7.3

16.1

Light Commercial Residential
District

--

--

--

--

0.6

--

--

0.6

Medium Density Residential
District

--

--

--

0.9

0.1

1.1

--

2.0

Medium Density Residential
District, Residential Planned
Development Overlay District

--

--

--

--

--

1.1

--

1.1

Single Family District

--

--

--

<0.1

<0.1

1.9

--

1.9

Single Family District, Residential
Planned Development Overlay
District

--

--

--

--

--

0.7

--

0.7

Planned Unit Development
District

--

--

--

1.3

<0.1

--

--

1.3

Santa Clara County
Exclusive Agricultural
Residential and Agricultural
Variable Density Rural
Residential
City of Morgan Hill

1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Project footprint with Santa Clara County and City of Morgan Hill zoning maps.

2

Unclassified areas include 0.1 acre along Reach 6.

3

The areas zoned for Exclusive Agriculture along Reach 4 are within the Gilroy SOI.

4

Totals may not match those in the row due to rounding; also, total acreages may not match those from Land Use, because the
Land Use tables do not include roads.

3.9

CULTURAL RESOURCES
3.9.1

Introduction
This section describes the existing regulatory and environmental conditions and
the consequences of implementing the Project on cultural resources. Where
impacts are identified, mitigation measures are proposed to reduce those impacts
to less-than significant levels.
Cultural resources are defined as buildings, sites, structures, or objects, each of
which may have historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural, or scientific
importance. The California Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) defines a
cultural resource as “any physical evidence of human activities over 45 years
old…” (1995: 2).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-129

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
The two primary federal cultural resources statutes applicable to the Llagas
Creek project are the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)and the
Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act. The National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (NHPA) established the National Register of Historic Places
(National Register), a listing of prehistoric and historic archaeological sites,
buildings, districts, structures and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture.
Section 106 of the NHPA requires federal agencies to “take into account” the
effects of a proposed project on National Register-listed cultural resources as
well as on those determined eligible for listing in the National Register through a
process of the Federal agency consulting with Native American tribes and the
State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO). Such cultural resources may be of
local, regional, state or national significance, and are referred to as “historic
properties.” Taking into account a project's effects typically involves identifying
cultural resources, determining whether they meet the criteria of the National
Register, and, if eligible, mitigate any adverse effects caused by project
construction. This process of implementing the provisions of Section 106,
outlined in regulations issued by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
(36 C.F.R. Part 800), involves participation by the Federal Agency, the SHPO,
tribes, and possibly other parties interested in or have a concern about cultural
resources.
The Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974 (AHPA) provides for
the preservation of historic and archaeological data that might otherwise be lost
or destroyed as a result of any Federal construction project or federally licensed
or assisted undertaking. The AHPA authorizes the lead Federal agency of a
project, or the Secretary of the Interior, to undertake recovery or preservation of
significant data. Federal project funds, up to one percent of the project cost, may
be used, or the agency may request the Secretary of the Interior to conduct the
desired measures.
Some of the information presented below is drawn from the following report:


3.9.2

Upper Llagas Creek Cultural Resources Inventory Report—Cardno
ENTRIX Inc. February 2012, prepared for the Santa Clara Valley Water
District.

Project Area
The project area for the cultural resources analysis encompasses about 13.9
miles (500 feet on center channel) along Llagas Creek, West Little Llagas Creek
and the East Little Llagas Creek, a tributary of Llagas Creek. On the north, the
physical limits of the Project area at the creek’s intersection with Llagas Road on
West Little Llagas Creek in Morgan Hill; and in the south, 1,000 feet downstream
of Buena Vista Avenue in Gilroy. See Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, for
greater detail on the Project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-130

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.9.3

Affected Environment

Environmental Setting

Prehistory
Scant archaeological work was conducted in the Santa Clara Valley until
relatively recently. Past research tended to overlook interior areas in favor of
coastal areas, such as Monterey Bay, where large shellmounds were relatively
easily identified on the landscape. Archaeological research in the Monterey Bay
is relevant to the prehistory of the Santa Clara Valley and is discussed in further
detail below to provide context to understanding the prehistoric and
environmental setting of the Project area.
Archaeological research in the vicinity of Monterey Bay dates back to 1875, when
scientist, W.E. Saxe, tested the Sand Hill Bluff site, CA-SCR-7, just north of
Santa Cruz (Saxe 1875). Early research was continued by Kroeber (1915), who
recorded nine sites near Monterey Bay and by Golomshtok (1922), Hill (1929),
and Wood (1930) all of whom conducted surveys near Elkhorn Slough. Following
this early work, virtually no archaeological research was conducted in the area
again until the late 1940s and 1950s. Research during this period is highlighted
by the work of: Pilling (1948), who identified numerous archaeological sites in
Monterey County and, specifically, Elkhorn Slough; Greengo (1951), who
sampled shellmounds near Elkhorn Slough; and Broadbent (1951a, 1951b), who
tested the Berwick Park site, CA- MNT-107.
Recent archaeological work in the Monterey Bay involved the development of
regional chronologies and models of culture change for the Bay and its
immediate environs. Significant contributions in this regard have been presented
by: Breschini (1983); Breschini et al. (1983); Breschini and Haversat (1992);
Cartier (1993); Dietz (1985); Dietz et al. (1988); Dietz and Jackson (1981);
Hildebrandt and Mikkelsen (1993); Jones and Hylkema (1988); Jones (1993);
Jones et al. (1992); Jones and Jones (1992); and Patch and Jones (1984).
Relatively recent archaeological investigations in the Santa Clara Valley have
also generated models of regional chronology and culture change (cf., King and
Hickman 1973b; Bergthold 1982; Elsasser 1986; and Hidlebrandt and Mikkelsen
1993).
The USACE - San Francisco District archaeologist conducted the cultural
resources study in two phases. Phase I consisted of research of archaeological
records and literature on file with the State of California and in the project files of
the USACE office. Phase II consisted of an archaeological survey to identify
and, as necessary, evaluate cultural resources for their eligibility for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places. The records search and survey was
conducted to comply with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 (PL89-665, as amended) to consider the effects upon historic properties
and historic properties eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP).
The USACE delineated the Area of Potential Effects (APE), defined as the
geographical area within which a project may cause changes, directly or
indirectly, in the character or use of historic properties located in the APE. The
APE for this project is comprised of the six reaches, totaling approximately 12.7
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-131

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
miles, situated on the main branch of Llagas Creek, West Little Llagas Creek,
and East Little Llagas Creek. It encompassed the stream channels and strips of
land running parallel on both sides of the streams.
SCL-400:

The Corps found most of the area within the previously mapped site
boundaries was planted with dense row crops, and thus only the soils
in the farm-vehicle paths surrounding the fields were visible.
Nonetheless, no prehistoric cultural materials were observed.
Sparsely scattered glass and ceramic fragments were found on the
surface, consistent with information in the previous site record. To the
north of the mapped site boundaries there was a fallow field between
Church Creek and Llagas Creek that afforded very good soil visibility.
Angular sandstone cobbles were common occurrences, and several
pieces of chert were noted; however, none of the items exhibited
obvious traits commonly found on cultural materials from prehistoric
sites in the vicinity.

SCL-401:

The examination of SCL-401 by the Corps verified the previous
findings: no evidence of surface prehistoric cultural materials was noted
on the floodplain terrace nor in the creek banks. There was very good
soil visibility within a landscaped area adjacent to a residence.
Historical materials along Llagas Creek associated with past farming
activities were described and photographed: a capped well-head, a
gas-powered pump ("Continental Motors"), and sections of iron pipe.
The farming materials probably date to pre-1950s.

SCL-402:

The site was situated in an agricultural field, uncultivated at the time of
the survey, and thus the entire recorded site area was bare ground.
The surface soils within the mapped site area did not appear to be
darker than the surrounding soils. At least 50 pieces of angular
sandstone were observed within the recorded site boundaries. None of
them exhibited distinct evidence of having been burned. Intuitively
selected soil samples (50 x 50 centimeters square and 2-3 centimeters
deep) from three areas were screened through 1/4" hardware mesh
without recovering any lithics, shell, or other cultural materials
commonly found at sites in the region.

SCL-452:

The Corps’ observations of SCL-452 did not reveal the array of cultural
materials previously observed at the site. The sparse vegetation along
the creek banks afforded good soil visibility. One chert flake and one
piece of ground-stone were observed on the west side of the channel,
likely outside the footprint of the flood protection measures. The
Corps’s observations supported the report that SCL-452 was severely
damaged by the past channel construction, and may have been
bisected by channel excavation and/or realignment.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-132

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Llagas 3:

This site was situated in a field of clover that had been harvested, thus
providing unobstructed inspection of surface soils of the mapped site
boundaries. In addition, gopher activity had brought up subsurface
soils in five locations; these soils were screened through 1/4" hardware
mesh. The creek-side soils were nearly vegetation free. No prehistoric
cultural materials were noted in the surface and screened soils. Two
fragments of turquoise colored bottle glass and several pieces of rusted
metal were noted near an operating well-pump.

The Paleo-Indian and Milling Stone periods are identified as local expressions of
the Paleo-Coastal Tradition (Jones et al. 1996). The Early Period is best
represented at CA-MNT-391, and is characterized by Class L Olivella beads
(thick and rectangular), contracting stem Rossi Square-stemmed projectile
points, mortars and pestles, and handstones and milling slabs (Cartier 1993).
The Middle Period is represented at CA-SCR-9, and is characterized by Class
G2 Olivella beads, Ańo Nuevo Long-stemmed and contracting stem Rossi
Square-stemmed projectile points, mortars and pestles, and handstones and
milling slabs (Hylkema 1991). The Late Period has been difficult to define in the
Monterey Bay area. Sites CA-MNT-1485/H and -1486/H, however, represent this
period and are characterized by Class E, K, and M Olivella beads, Desert Sidenotched projectile points, bedrock mortars, and pestles (Breschini and Haversat
1992).
Hildebrandt and Mikkelsen (1993) investigated the relationship between coastal
and inland sites in the southern Santa Clara Valley and present a
settlement/subsistence model for the area. They suggest that Early Period (3,000
B.C.-500 B.C.) sites in the valley are characterized by hunting, minimal use of
wetland resources, and exploitation of marine resources, which implies that
regular trips were made to the coast; Middle Period (500 B.C.-A.D. 1150) sites in
the valley highlight occupation of the area by less mobile populations and a
reduction in the use marine resources from the coast; and Late Period (A.D.
1150-1769) sites in the valley that highlight a further reduction in the mobility of
local populations, an abandonment of marine resources, and increased
exploitation of lacustrine resources (e.g., waterfowl, turtles, fresh water mussel,
and fish). This model suggests that the Santa Clara Valley was inhabited at an
early date by populations that split time between the interior and the coast, and
that these populations eventually abandoned use of the coast, concentrating on
lacustrine resources in the valley.

Ethnography
At the time of Euroamerican contact (ca. 1769) Native American groups of the
Costanoan language family occupied the area from San Francisco Bay to
southern Monterey Bay and the lower Salinas River. The Costanoan language
family consists of eight separate and distinct languages, and approximately
50 tribelets (Levy 1978). The Santa Clara Valley and surrounding area was
primarily occupied by speakers of three different Costanoan languages:
Awaswas speakers occupied northern Monterey Bay near Aptos; Mutsun
speakers occupied the Pajaro River drainage; and Tamyen speakers occupied
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-133

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
the south end of San Francisco Bay and the Santa Clara Valley. The tribelets of
Matalan, Pitac, and Chitactac occupied the Santa Clara Valley and the area
around the City of Morgan Hill (City of Morgan Hill General Plan EIR 2010a).
Unfortunately, Costanoan culture was dramatically affected by missionization,
and information (e.g., mission records and travelers logs) regarding its precontact organization is incomplete and inconsistent. In fact, Costanoan
languages were probably extinct by 1935; and in 1971, the remaining Costanoan
descendants united as a corporate entity identified as the Ohlone Indian Tribe
(Levy 1978).
Costanoans lived in an area extending from San Francisco Bay to Monterey Bay.
This large area was subdivided among several individual tribelets occupying
specific territories. Each tribelet consisted of approximately 200 individuals, who
were grouped into clans and moieties, usually controlled by a headman
(Harrington 1933, 1942; Levy 1978). The position of headman was passed
patrilineally, usually from father to son, with succession being subject to approval
by the community. If no suitable male heir was available, a woman could also
assume the role of headman. Tribelet political organization also included a
council of elders, official speakers, and shamans (Levy 1978).
A wide variety of ecological zones, including foothills, valleys, sloughs, and
coastal areas, were exploited by Costanoans to obtain subsistence resources.
These resources included various seeds, nuts (e.g., acorn, buckeye, laurel, and
hazelnuts), berries, grasses, corms, roots, insects, birds (e.g., geese, mallard,
and coot), fish (e.g., steelhead, salmon, and sturgeon), shellfish (e.g., abalone,
mussel and clam), and both marine and terrestrial mammals (e.g., sea otter, sea
lion, harbor seal, deer, elk, grizzly bear, rabbits, antelope, raccoon, and squirrels)
(Levy 1978).

History
The conquistador Sebastian Vizcaino’s landing at present day Monterey in 1602
is the earliest documented contact with Native Americans in the area. Following
Vizcaino’s landing, other Spanish ships may have stopped at Monterey, but
contact was minimal until the initial overland exploration of the area
by Spanish soldier Gaspar de Portolá in 1769 (Hoover et al. 1990). Portolá’s
expedition followed the coast, while subsequent exploration of the region by
soldier and explorer Pedro Fages in 1770 and 1772, soldier Fernando Javier de
Rivera in 1774, and soldier and statesman Juan Bautista de Anza in 1776
traveled on the east side of the Santa Cruz Mountains through the Santa Clara
Valley, and along a route that became known as El Camino Real (Beck and
Haase 1974).
The Mexican Period (ca. 1821-1848) in California is an outgrowth of the Mexican
Revolution, and its accompanying social and political views affected the mission
system. In 1833, the missions were secularized and their lands divided among
the Californios as land grants called ranchos. These ranchos facilitated the
growth of a semi-aristocratic group that controlled the larger ranchos. Owners of
ranchos used local populations, including Native Americans, essentially as forced
labor to accomplish work on their large tracts of land. Consequently, Costanoans,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-134

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
and other Native American groups across California, were forced into a
marginalized existence as peons or vaqueros on the large ranchos. Ranchos in
the general Project area include: San Francisco de las Llagas, de Laguna Seca,
San Ysidro, Ojo de Agua de la Coche, and Las Animas (Beck and Haase 1974).
The latter half of the 19th century witnessed an ongoing and growing immigration
of Euroamericans into the area, which was also accompanied by regional cultural
and economic changes. Euroamerican culture expanded at the expense of
Hispanic culture. Dispersed farmsteads slowly replaced the immense Mexican
ranchos, and the farming of various crops slowly replaced cattle ranching as the
primary economic activity in the region. The advent of the railroad in the area in
the late 1800s, and the mechanization of farming with steam-driven machinery,
once again, altered the economy of the region. For example, larger and larger
tracts of land were opened for farming. Some of this land consisted of areas
reclaimed from sloughs and lowlands, but corporations specializing in crops
grown for export soon purchased many of these farms. These agricultural
developments demanded a large labor force and sparked a new wave of
immigration into the region. Groups of Chinese were the first new immigrants in
the area and were followed by Japanese, Filipino, and Mexican laborers.

History of the Project Area-Morgan Hill and Surrounding Areas
The Spanish established settlements at San Jose and Monterey by the late
1700s. The road that connected these two settlements passed through the Santa
Clara Valley and was identified as Monterey Road. The road is still identified
today as Monterey Road in the City of Morgan Hill. The earliest settlements in the
Santa Clara Valley were established along Monterey Road and included
Madrone. Madrone was located in vicinity of the current intersection of Peebles
Avenue and Monterey Road in Morgan Hill. The growth of Madrone, and the
Santa Clara Valley in general, was accelerated by the construction of a railroad
line between San Jose and Gilroy in 1868–1869 (City of Morgan Hill General
Plan, EIR 2010a). The founding and growth of Morgan Hill typify the development
of the area.
Rancho Ojo de Agua de la Coche, one of the original Mexican land grants in the
area, was purchased by Martin Murphy, Sr. in 1835. In the 1880s, Murphy’s
granddaughter, Diana Murphy, married Hiram Morgan Hill, and the couple took
up residence on the rancho. The rancho soon became known as Morgan Hill
Ranch, and Hiram and Diana built a home, “Villa Mira Monte” on the ranch in
1884. Trains passing through Santa Clara Valley would stop at the ranch to let off
visitors and soon a depot and town were established near the Morgan Hill Ranch.
The train stop was identified as Morgan Hill, and as a town grew around the
depot, it retained the name of Morgan Hill.
The town of Morgan Hill expanded rapidly in the late 1800s and was incorporated
as a city in 1906, with a population of approximately 600 (City of Morgan Hill
General Plan, EIR 2010a). Development of the area peaked in the early 1900s
and remained relatively stagnant until the 1970s–1980s when U.S. 101 was
opened, linking the area to San Jose. At this time, there was a dramatic increase
in the population and development of the City of Morgan Hill and the surrounding
area. The population and economic development in the City of Morgan Hill and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-135

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
the surrounding area has continued to the present; and it is changing from
agricultural area to a suburban residential area.

3.10

TRAFFIC AND CIRCULATION
3.10.1 Introduction
This section presents an analysis of transportation conditions on roads, transit
routes, and bicycle and pedestrian facilities in the Project area that would be
modified by the Project or used by construction traffic. The analysis of traffic
conditions is focused primarily on construction-related effects, such as road
closures, detours, deterioration of road conditions related to construction and
hauling, and interruptions in transit service. Operations and maintenance related
traffic effects after construction is completed are also discussed and addressed.
3.10.2 Project Area
The Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action) and other action
alternatives (Project) are located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately
25 miles southeast of San Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin,
and Gilroy. The Project consists of the upper seven reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8,
and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek
above Buena Vista Avenue (see Figures 2.2-1 through 2.2-8).
The total length of the Project area, which includes all action alternatives, is
approximately 13.9 miles; 6.1 miles of which are along the main branch of Llagas
Creek, 2.8 miles along West Little Llagas Creek; and 3.4 miles along a tributary
of Llagas Creek, known as East Little Llagas Creek. An additional 1.6 miles of
new bypass channel would also be constructed along West Little Llagas Creek to
Llagas Creek. To the north, the physical limits of the Project are at the
intersection of Llagas Creek Drive and Llagas Road on West Little Llagas Creek
in Morgan Hill, and the southern limit is 1,000 feet downstream of Buena Vista
Avenue in Gilroy.
3.10.3 Environmental Setting
Roadways
The following major roadways are potentially affected by construction or
construction traffic related to all Project alternatives, which are described by
reach from south to north. The major preferred haul routes during construction of
the Project are depicted in Figure 3.10-1.
All Reaches


U.S. 101 runs generally parallel to the Project through all the reaches
and crosses Reach 5. It is the major north-south freeway through the
Project area. On- and off-ramps for U.S. 101 are located at E. Dunne
Avenue, Tennant Avenue, San Martin Avenue, and Masten Avenue.
U.S. 101 has three lanes in each direction in the Project area and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-136

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
widens to four lanes in each direction north of Cochrane Road in
Morgan Hill.


Cochrane Road is located north of the Project area and will be a primary
haul route for excavated soils from most reaches. It runs generally south
to north from Monterey Road under U.S. 101 and then bends east-west
to Anderson Dam. Cochrane Road is a four-lane road that runs under
U.S. 101 and then turns into a two-lane road at the intersection of
Mission View Drive.

Reach 4


Masten Avenue intersects Reach 4 and is a two-lane rural roadway
with unpaved shoulders. It extends between Monterey Road and
Center Avenue in unincorporated Santa Clara County. The speed
limit is 45 miles per hour (mph), and adjacent land uses are
agricultural. Masten Avenue provides access onto U.S. 101.



Rucker Avenue will be used as a primary haul route in Reach 4 and
runs east to west in the Project area and intersects Reach 4 at
approximately its half way mark. It is a two-lane road that runs from
Monterey Road at its western terminus to New Avenue east of Reach
4 at its eastern terminus.



Denio Avenue will be used as a primary haul route in Reach 4 and
runs east to west in the southern Project area and intersects Reach 4
towards its southern end. It is a two-lane road that runs from No
Name Uno at its western terminus and ends at an agricultural field
southwest of Reach 4 at its eastern terminus.



No Name Uno will be used as a primary haul route in Reach 4 and is
located in the southern Project area and runs parallel as a frontage
road to U.S. 101 in Reach 4. It runs from Las Animas Road and ends
at Lena Avenue to the North. It is a two-lane road, which intersects
with Masten Avenue at its northern end.



Buena Vista Avenue is located at the southern end of Reach 4. It is a
two-lane rural roadway with unpaved shoulders and a posted speed
limit of 35 mph. It extends between Monterey Road and New Avenue
in unincorporated Santa Clara County just north of Gilroy. Buena
Vista Avenue crosses, but does not provide access, onto U.S. 101.

Reach 6


San Martin Avenue intersects Reach 6 and is a two-lane rural
roadway with unpaved shoulders. The speed limit is 35 mph. San
Martin Avenue provides access to U.S. 101 and extends through the
unincorporated community of San Martin, connecting Monterey Road
and Santa Teresa Boulevard. It reaches east to New Avenue outside
of San Martin. Outside of the San Martin community, land uses along
San Martin Avenue are primarily agricultural.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-137

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Llagas Avenue runs along mostly the west side of Reach 6 and is a twolane north-south roadway. The speed limit on Llagas Avenue is 25 mph in
the residential area and 35 mph in other areas. Large garbage trucks use
this roadway to access a waste disposal site to the north.



The interface with Monterey Road begins at Reach 6 and runs generally
north-south along Reach 6 and intersects at the north end of Reach 6 and
Reach 7A and then continues to run alongside Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8.
Monterey Road is the major north-south arterial road between Gilroy and
Morgan Hill and is the designated U.S. 101 Business Route. Monterey
Road generally has two lanes in each direction with a center turning lane.
The speed limit is 35 mph within Morgan Hill city limits, and 45 mph south
of Morgan Hill. Land uses along the developed portions of Monterey Road
are primarily commercial/shopping centers. South of Morgan Hill,
Monterey Road extends along undeveloped and agricultural lands.



The character of Monterey Road changes as it extends through
downtown Morgan Hill between Dunne Avenue (described in Reach
8) and Main Street. Along this segment, Monterey Road is fronted on
both sides by downtown commercial uses. The roadway has two
lanes in each direction with a landscaped center median. Parallel
parking pockets are present on both sides of the roadway.

Reach 7A


Watsonville Road intersects Reach 7A, which extends west off
Monterey Road and connects south to Hecker Pass Highway (State
Route 152) outside of Gilroy. Watsonville Road has one through lane
in each direction, with an intermittent left-turn lane and bike lanes on
the portion between Santa Teresa Boulevard and Monterey Road.
Watsonville Road serves as a north-south alternate to U.S. 101 for
residents west of the Santa Teresa corridor. Within Morgan Hill,
Watsonville Road serves a large residential area west of Monterey
Road.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-138

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.10-1 - Upper Llagas Creek Major Road Segments

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-139

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-140

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 7B


Tennant Avenue intersects Reach 7B and is an east-west arterial in
the southern part of Morgan Hill, with a 40 mph speed limit. West of
U.S. 101, Tennant Avenue has two lanes in each direction with a
center turn lane. East of U.S. 101, Tennant Avenue is a two-lane
rural roadway and has bike lanes. Adjacent land uses are primarily
commercial (shopping centers). Tennant Avenue becomes
Edmundson Avenue west of Monterey Road.



West of Monterey Road, Tennant Avenue becomes Edmundson
Avenue. Edmundson Avenue extends west of the City of Morgan Hill
into unincorporated Santa Clara County as a mostly two-lane rural
roadway. Edmundson Avenue is a four-lane divided roadway near
Monterey Road, and transitions to a two-lane undivided roadway
west of Olympic Drive with a posted speed limit of 35 mph.



Butterfield Boulevard is located east of Reaches 7B and 8 and is a
four-lane north-south roadway parallel to Monterey Road. Butterfield
Boulevard is located just east of the railroad. Commercial and
residential uses are served by Butterfield Boulevard. The speed limit
on Butterfield Boulevard is 45 mph and is under the jurisdiction of the
City of Morgan Hill.

Reach 8


At Dunne Avenue, Reach 7B ends, and Reach 8 begins. Dunne
Avenue provides access between U.S. 101 and downtown Morgan
Hill. East of Monterey Road, Dunne Avenue has a speed limit of 35
mph and two lanes in each direction with a center median. Bike lanes
are present on this segment of Dunne Avenue.



Main Street intersects Reach 8 and is a two-lane east-west roadway
within the City of Morgan Hill.



The speed limit on Main Street is 30 mph. A Valley Transportation
Authority (VTA) transit center is located near the intersection of Main
Street and Hale Avenue.



Hale Avenue is located in Reach 8 and is a two-lane north-south
roadway with a paved shoulder.



Residential uses are located along the west side of Hale Avenue.
Llagas Creek runs in an open channel along the east side of Hale
between Wright Avenue and Main Street. The speed limit on Hale
Avenue is 40 mph north of Wright Avenue and 35 mph south of
Wright Avenue. Hale Avenue is under the jurisdiction of Morgan Hill
and Santa Clara County south of the city boundary.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-141

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 14


Center Avenue is a preferred haul route, which is located to the east
of Reach 14 and the northern end of Reach 4. Center Avenue runs
north to south and is a two-lane road in the Project area.



Sycamore Avenue is a preferred haul route, which is located to the
west of Reach 14 and the northern end of Reach 4. Sycamore
Avenue is a two-lane road in the Project area and runs north to south
and parallels U.S. 101.



San Martin Avenue (described under Reach 6) also intersects Reach
14 on the east side of U.S. 101.

Traffic Volumes
Existing average daily traffic (ADT) volumes are summarized in Table 3.10-1 for
major roadways within the Project alternatives area.
Table 3.10-1 Existing Daily Traffic Volumes on Project Area Roadways
Roadway

Segment

Number
of Lanes

Average Daily
Traffic Volume

Reach

Monterey Rd

Burnett Ave to Cochrane Rd

4

16,410

8

Monterey Rd

Cochrane Rd to Old Monterey Rd

3

15,560

8

Monterey Rd

Old Monterey Rd to Main Ave

4

15,880

8

Monterey Rd

Main Ave to Dunne Ave

4

17,780

8

Monterey Rd

Dunne Ave to Tennant Ave

4

21,900

7B

Monterey Rd

Tennant Ave to Watsonville Rd

4

23,430

7A, 7B

Monterey Rd

Watsonville Rd to San Martin Ave

4

15,270

6, 7A

Monterey Rd

San Martin Ave to Masten Ave

4

10,600

6

Butterfield Blvd

Cochrane Rd to Main Ave

4

13,270

8

Butterfield Blvd

Main Ave to Dunne Ave

4

13,210

8

Butterfield Blvd

Dunne Ave to Tennant Ave

4

7,970

7B

Cochrane Rd

Monterey Rd to Madrone
Parkway

4

16,040

8 (haul route to
Anderson Dam)

Cochrane Rd

Madrone Parkway to U.S. 101

5

32,150

8 (haul route to
Anderson Dam)

Cochrane Rd

U.S. 101 to St. Louise Dr

4

12,180

8 (haul route to
Anderson Dam)

Dunne Ave

Monterey Rd to Peak Ave

2

6,580

West of reaches at
beginning of Reach 8
and end of Reach 7B

Dunne Ave

Monterey Rd to Butterfield Blvd

4

17,170

East of reaches at
beginning of Reach 8
and end of Reach 7B

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-142

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Roadway

Segment

Number
of Lanes

Average Daily
Traffic Volume

Dunne Ave

Butterfield Blvd to U.S. 101

4

27,510

Farther East of
reaches at beginning
of Reach 8 and end of
Reach 7B

Dunne Ave

U.S. 101 to Condit Rd

5

22,080

East of U.S. 101, at
beginning of Reach 8
and end of Reach 7B

Tennant Ave

Monterey Rd to Butterfield Blvd

4

29,010

East of Reach 7B

Tennant Ave

Butterfield Blvd to U.S. 101

4

27,340

Farther east of
Reach 7B

Tennant Ave

U.S. 101 to Condit Rd

4

10,450

Farther east of Reach
7B, east of U.S. 101

Main Ave

Hale Ave to Monterey Rd

2

8,940

From slightly west to
east of Reach 8

Main Ave

Butterfield Blvd to Condit Rd

2

6,130

Farther east of Reach
8, to east of U.S. 101

Hale Ave

Llagas Rd to Main St

2

6,210

Parallel to Reach 8

Sycamore Ave

Middle Ave to San Martin Ave

2

970

Northern Reach 14

Watsonville Rd

Sunnyside Ave to Monterey Rd

2

9,900

Intersecting Reach 7A
from the west to the
east

U.S. 101

Cochrane Rd to Dunne Ave
Dunne Ave to Tennant Ave
Tennant Ave to San Martin Ave
San Martin Ave to Masten Ave

6
6
6
6

125,000
118,000
112,000
109,000

Reach 8
Reach 7B
Reaches 7B, 7A, and
14
Reaches 6 and 14

U.S. 101

Masten Ave to State Route 152
West

6

98,000

Reach 4

Reach

Source: Alta Planning and Design (2013)

Sidewalks
Sidewalks are present along most of the streets within portions of the Project
area located in the City of Morgan Hill. Generally, the rural roads within the
unincorporated portions of the Project area lack sidewalks and paved shoulders,
but have unpaved shoulder areas. The sidewalks in the Project area vary in width
from 4 to 6 feet.
Bicycle Facilities
Class I bicycle facilities, or off-street shared-use pathways, are present in the
following locations within the Project area, listed from south to north:


Along West Little Llagas Creek in Reach 7B, west embankment between
Spring Avenue and La Crosse Drive (south);

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-143

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Along both embankments of West Little Llagas Creek from La Crosse
Drive (south) to Watsonville Road in Reach 7A. This multi-use path
segment is directly adjacent to construction activities planned as part of
the Project, which will be widened to accommodate maintenance vehicles
for the Project;



Among the neighborhoods surrounding Paradise Park and Morgan Hill
Community Park near Reach 7B; and



Near Reach 8, along the northbound side of Butterfield Boulevard
between Central Avenue and San Pedro Avenue.

Signed and striped bike lanes (i.e., Class II facilities) are present on the following
roadways within the Project area listed from south to north:


Sunnyside Avenue between Watsonville Road and Via Del Castille
(Reach 7A);



Watsonville Road between Calle Enrique and Sunnyside Avenue (Reach
7A);



Monterey Road between Tilton Avenue and Main Avenue in the northern
portion of the Project area, and between Dunne Avenue and Middle
Avenue in the southern portion of the Project area (Reaches 7A, 7B, and
8);



Vineyard Boulevard between Monterey Road and Tennant Avenue
(Reach 7B);



Edmundson Avenue between Piazza Way and Monterey Road (Reach
7B);



Tennant Avenue between Monterey Road and U.S. 101 (Reach 7B);



Olympic Drive between Denali Drive and Edmundson Avenue (Reach
7B);



Butterfield Boulevard between Cochrane Road and Tennant Avenue
(Reaches 7B and 8);



An 1,100-foot portion of Walnut Grove Drive north of San Pedro Avenue
behind the Home Depot (Reach 7B);



Along Dunne Avenue between Monterey Road and Gallop Drive, which
intersects the beginning of Reach 8 and the end of Reach 7B (Reach 7B);



Main Avenue between De Witt Avenue and Butterfield Boulevard in the
west, and between Laurel Road and Live Oak High School in the east,
and Vineyard Boulevard between Monterey Road and Tennant Avenue
(Reach 8);

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-144

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Peak Avenue between Wright Avenue and Main Avenue (Reach 8);



Hill Road (southbound side only) between Dunne Avenue and Diana
Avenue (Reach 8);



Sutter Boulevard between Butterfield Boulevard and Cochrane Road
(Reach 8);



Cochrane Road between Monterey Road and San Rafael Street
(Reach 8).
Additionally, bicyclists are permitted to ride on all roadways within the
Project area with the exception of U.S. 101.

Parking Conditions
On-street parking is permitted on a number of the major urbanized roadways
within the Project area, including Monterey Road, E. Dunne Avenue, Tennant
Avenue, Wright Avenue, Main Street, Hale Avenue, and on the local residential
streets.
On the rural roads within unincorporated Santa Clara County, on-street parking is
generally not available, as the roads are two lanes with narrow or unpaved
shoulders. Some informal parking was observed in the unpaved shoulder areas
where sufficient width was available to pull completely off the road.
Transit Service
Transit service in the Project area is provided by the VTA. VTA routes that utilize
roadways within the Project area include the following, listed by the number that
correlates with local to express service:


Route 16. Categorized by VTA as Community Bus Service, the Morgan
Hill Civic Center – Burnett Avenue line. Within the Project area, Route 16
utilizes Main Street.



Route 68. Categorized by VTA as Regular Bus Service, the Gilroy Transit
Center-San Jose Caltrain at Diridon Transit Center line. Within the Project
area, Route 68 utilizes Monterey Road, Main Street, and Hale Street.



Route 121. Categorized by VTA as Express Bus Service, the Gilroy
Transit Center – Lockheed Martin Transit Center/Moffett Industrial Park
line. Within the Project area, Route 121 Express utilizes Monterey Road
and E. Dunne Avenue.



Route 168. Categorized by VTA as Express Bus Service, the Gilroy
Transit Center – San Jose Diridon Transit Center line. Within the Project
area, Route 168 Express utilizes Monterey Road, E. Dunne Avenue,
Butterfield Boulevard, and Cochrane Avenue.



Caltrain commuter rail serves Morgan Hill and San Martin. The San

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-145

December 2015

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Martin Caltrain Station is located on Monterey Road at San Martin
Avenue. The station is served by VTA bus routes 68, 121, and 168. The
Morgan Hill station is located on Depot Street at E. 3rd Street. The
Morgan Hill station is served by VTA Bus Routes 121 and 168.
VTA offers paratransit service to persons who are unable to independently use
the bus or light rail services due to a physical or cognitive disability. A brokerage
contractor, Outreach and Escort Inc., manages the paratransit service through
agreements with sedan, accessible van, and taxi providers.
Airports
South County Airport is the closest airport within the Project area. South County
Airport is adjacent to Reach 6 and is located between U.S. 101 and Reach 6.
Reach 14 also runs parallel to the airport on the east side of U.S. 101. At the
nearest point, Reach 6 is 0.10 mile from South County Airport. South County
Airport is a public airport located at 13030 Murphy Avenue in San Martin (AirNav
2013) and is also referred to as South County Airport of Santa Clara County.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

3-146

December 2015

Chapter 3

3.11

Affected Environment

AIR QUALITY AND GREENHOUSE GASES
3.11.1 Introduction
California state and U.S. federal law defines criteria emissions to include the
following: reactive or volatile organic compounds (ROCs or VOCs) as ozone
(O3) precursors, nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2), carbon monoxide (CO),
sulfur dioxide (SO2), respirable particulate matter (PM10), and fine particulate
matter (PM2.5). Elimination of tetraethyl lead in motor gasoline has
eliminated emissions of lead (Pb) from vehicles and portable equipment,
although tetraethyl lead is still used in some types of aviation gasoline.
Principal greenhouse gases (GHGs) include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane
(CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons
(PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), and other fluorinated gases including
nitrogen trifluoride and hydrofluorinated ethers.
During construction activities, the Project would cause criteria and GHG
emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels (i.e., gasoline and diesel) used
to operate off-road equipment, portable equipment, and vehicles in the
vicinity of Morgan Hill and San Martin located in southern Santa Clara
County. In addition, fugitive dust (as PM10 and PM2.5) would be generated
by earthmoving tasks. This section evaluates Project emissions to determine
overall effects of the four variants—Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action), NRCS Alternative, Culvert/Channel Alternative, or Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative—in relation to established thresholds of significance.
3.11.2 Project Area
The Project area (Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) is entirely within Santa
Clara County, which is part of the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin
(SFBAAB), under the jurisdiction of the Bay Area Air Quality Management
District (BAAQMD).
3.11.3 Environmental Setting
Air districts in California are required to monitor air pollutant levels to assure
that National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) and California
Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS) are met and, in the event that they
are not, to develop strategies to meet these standards. If the standards are
met, the local air basin is classified as being in “attainment”; if the standards
are exceeded, it is classified as “nonattainment.” Where insufficient data
exist to make a determination, an area is deemed “unclassified”.
The SFBAAB is designated as nonattainment for the state 1-hour, state 8hour, and federal 8-hour ozone (O3) standards; and nonattainment for all
state PM10 and PM2.5 (i.e., respirable particulate matter with an
aerodynamic diameter of 10 and 2.5 micrometers or less) standards. The
SFBAAB is also designated unclassified for the 24-hour federal PM10

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-147

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
standard, and nonattainment and attainment for the federal 24-hour and
annual PM2.5 standards, respectively. For all other pollutants and standards,
the SFBAAB is designated as either attainment or unclassified status
(BAAQMD 2012a, CARB 2012b, USEPA 2012a, see Table 3.11-1).
Table 3.11-1 Ambient Air Quality Standards
California Standards

Pollutant

Averaging Time

3

ppmv

µg/m

Federal Standards
ppmv

µg/m3

1-hour

0.09

177

―

―

8-hour

0.07

137

0.075

147

1-hour

0.18

338

0.100

188

Annual

0.03

56

0.053

100

1-hour

0.25

655

0.075

196

―

―

0.50

1,309

24-hour

0.04

105

―

―

1-hour

20

22,898

35

40,071

8-hour

9

10,304

9

10,304

Lake Tahoe (8-hr)

6

6,869

―

―

24-hour

―

50

―

150

Annual

―

20

―

―

24-hour

―

―

―

35

Annual Primary

―

12

―

12

Annual Secondary

―

―

―

15

30-day

―

1.5

―

―

3-month (rolling)

―

―

―

0.15

Sulfates (as SO4)

24-hour

―

25

―

―

Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S)

1-hour

0.03

42

―

―

Vinyl Chloride (C2H3Cl)

24-hour

0.01

26

―

―

―

―

Ozone (O3)

Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)

Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)

Carbon Monoxide (CO)

Particulates (as PM10)

Particulates (as PM2.5)

Lead (Pb)

Visibility Reducing Particles

3-hour Secondary

8-hour

Extinction coefficient of 0.23 per
km; visibility of 10 miles or more
(0.07 to 30 miles or more for
Lake Tahoe) due to particles
when relative humidity is less
than 70%.

ppmv = parts per million by volume
3

µg/m = micrograms per cubic meter
3

3

The 1.5 µg/m federal quarterly lead standard applied until 2008; 0.15 µg/m rolling 3-month average thereafter
3

For gases, µg /m calculated from ppmv based on molecular weight and standard conditions
Standard Temperature 25 deg. C
Standard Molar Volume 24.465 liter/g-mole
Sources: CARB 2012a, USEPA 2011a

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-148

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

3.11.3.1 Meteorology and Climate
The Project area climate is characterized by moderately wet winters and
dry summers. About 90 percent of the annual total rainfall is received in
the November through April period. Between June and September,
normal rainfall is typically less than 0.6 inch (1.5 centimeters).
Temperatures in the Project area average about 60°F (15°C) annually,
with average summer highs in the 80 to 90°F (27 to 32°C) range and
average winter lows in the 35 to 40°F (2 to 4°C) range. Precipitation
averages about 21 inches (53 centimeters) per year, although annual
precipitation can vary significantly from year-to-year. Annual average
wind speeds in the Project area are about 6 to 8 MPH (2.7 to 3.6 meters
per second). The predominant direction of air pollution transport in the
Project area is inland from the coastal areas (BAAQMD 2010b; WC
2013; NOAA 2008).
3.11.3.2 Criteria air Pollutants
A criteria or regulated air pollutant is any air pollutant for which ambient
air quality standards have been set by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) or the California Air Resources Board
(CARB). Primary air quality standards are established to protect human
(public) health. Secondary air quality standards are designed to protect
public welfare from effects, such as diminished production and quality of
agricultural crops, reduced visibility, degraded soils, materials and
infrastructure damage, and damaged vegetation. Criteria pollutants
include ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), carbon monoxide (CO),
sulfur dioxide (SO2), respirable particulate matter (PM10), and fine
particulate matter (PM2.5). These six most prevalent criteria pollutants
and their potential health effects are described below.
Ozone (O3)
Ground-level O3 is a secondary pollutant formed in the atmosphere by a
series of complex chemical reactions and transformations in the
presence of sunlight above urban areas due to the mixing effects of
temperature inversions. Nitrogen oxides (NOX) and reactive organic
gases (ROGs) 1 are the principal constituents in these reactions. NOX
and ROG emissions are predominantly attributed to mobile sources (onroad motor vehicles and other mobile sources). Thus, regulation and
control of NOX and ROGs from these sources is essential to reduce the
formation of ground-level O3.
Ozone (O3) is a strong irritating gas that can chemically burn and cause
narrowing of airways, forcing the lungs and heart to work harder to
provide oxygen to the body. A powerful oxidant, O3 is capable of
destroying organic matter, including human lung and airway tissue; it
essentially burns through cell walls. O3 damages cells in the lungs,
making the passages inflamed and swollen. O3 also causes shortness
of breath, nasal congestion, coughing, eye irritation, sore throat,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-149

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
headache, chest discomfort, breathing pain, throat dryness, wheezing,
fatigue, and nausea. It can damage alveoli, the individual air sacs in the
lungs where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged. O3 has been
associated with a decrease in resistance to infections. People most
likely to be affected by O3 include the elderly, the young, and athletes.
O3 may pose its worst health threat to people who already suffer from
respiratory diseases, such as asthma, emphysema, and chronic
bronchitis (VCAPCD 2003).
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
Nitrogen dioxide is formed in the atmosphere primarily by the rapid
reaction of the colorless gas nitric oxide (NO) with atmospheric oxygen.
It is a reddish-brown gas with an odor similar to that of bleach. NO2
participates in the photochemical reactions that result in O3. The
greatest source of NO, and subsequently NO2, is the high-temperature
combustion of fossil fuels, such as in motor vehicle engines and power
plant boilers. NO2 and NO are referred to collectively as NOX. NO2 can
irritate and damage the lungs, cause bronchitis and pneumonia, and
lower resistance to respiratory infections, such as influenza.
Researchers have identified harmful effects, similar to those caused by
O3, with progressive changes over 4 hours of exposure causing
impaired pulmonary function, increased incidence of acute respiratory
disease, and difficult breathing for both bronchitis sufferers and healthy
persons (VCAPCD 2003).
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a common, colorless, odorless, highly toxic
gas. It is produced by natural and anthropogenic (caused by human
activity) combustion processes. The major source of CO in urban areas
is incomplete combustion of carbon-containing fuels (primarily gasoline,
diesel fuel, and natural gas). However, it also results from combustion
processes including forest fires and agricultural burning. Ambient CO
concentrations are generally higher in the winter, usually on cold, clear
days and nights with little or no wind. Low wind speeds inhibit horizontal
dispersion and surface inversions inhibit vertical mixing. Trafficcongested intersections have the potential to result in localized high CO
levels.

1 Also referred to as reactive organic compounds (ROCs) or volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-150

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
When inhaled, CO does not directly harm the lungs. The impact from
CO is on oxygenation of the entire body. CO combines chemically with
hemoglobin, the oxygen-transporting component of blood. This
diminishes the ability of blood to carry oxygen to the brain, heart, and
other vital organs. Red blood cells have 220 times the attraction for CO
as for oxygen. This affinity interferes with movement of oxygen to the
body’s tissues. Effects from CO exposure include headaches, nausea,
and death. People with heart ailments are at risk from low-level
exposure to CO. Also sensitive are people with chronic respiratory
disease, the elderly, infants and fetuses, and people suffering from
anemia and other conditions that affect the oxygen-carrying capacity of
blood. High CO levels in a concentrated area can result in asphyxiation.
Studies show a synergistic negative health effect when CO and O3 are
combined in ambient air, such as in urban environments, where
respiratory distress is heightened in the presence of both pollutants.
(VCAPCD 2003)
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is a colorless gas with a sharp, irritating odor. It can
react in the atmosphere to produce sulfuric acid and sulfates, which
contribute to acid deposition and atmospheric visibility reduction. It also
contributes to the formation of PM10. Most of the SO2 emitted into the
atmosphere is from burning sulfur-containing fossil fuels by mobile
sources, such as marine vessels and farm equipment and stationary
fuel combustion. SO2 irritates the mucous membranes of the eyes and
nose and may also affect the mouth, trachea, and lungs. Healthy people
may experience sore throats, coughing, and breathing difficulties when
exposed to high concentrations. SO2 causes constriction of the airways
and poses a health hazard to asthmatics, which are very sensitive to
SO2. Children often experience more respiratory tract infections when
they are exposed to SO2 (VCAPCD 2003).
Respirable Particulate Matter, 10 Microns (PM10)
Respirable particulate matter, 10 microns consists of particulate matter,
fine dusts and aerosols, 10 microns or smaller in diameter. When
inhaled, particles larger than 10 microns generally are caught in the
nose and throat and do not enter the lungs. PM10 can enter the large
upper branches of the lungs just below the throat, where they are
caught and removed (by coughing, spitting, or swallowing).
The primary sources of PM10 include dust from paved and unpaved
roads and construction and demolition operations. Lesser sources of
PM10 include wind erosion, agricultural operations, residential wood
combustion, smoke, tailpipe emissions, and industrial sources. These
sources have different constituents and, therefore, varying effects on
health. Road dust is composed of many particles other than soil dust. It
also includes engine exhaust, tire rubber, oil, and truck load spills.
Diesel particulate matter (DPM) contains many toxic particle and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-151

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
elemental carbon (soot), and is considered a toxic air contaminant in
California. Airborne particles absorb and adsorb toxic substances and
can be inhaled and lodged in the lungs. Once in the lungs, the toxic
substances can be absorbed into the bloodstream and carried
throughout the body. Concentrations of PM10 tend to be lower during the
winter months, because weather greatly affects PM10 concentrations.
During rain, concentrations are relatively low; and on windy days, PM10
levels can be high. Photochemical aerosols, formed by chemical
reactions with manmade emissions, may also influence PM10
concentrations.
Elevated ambient particulate levels are associated with premature
death, an increased number of asthma attacks, reduced lung function,
aggravation of bronchitis, respiratory disease, cancer, and other serious
health effects. Short-term exposure to particulates can lead to coughing,
minor throat irritation, and a reduction in lung function. Long-term
exposure can be more harmful. The USEPA estimates that 8 percent of
urban nonsmoker lung cancer risk is due to PM10 in soot from diesel
trucks, buses, and cars. Additional studies by USEPA and the Harvard
School of Public Health estimate that 50,000 to 60,000 deaths per year
in the United States are caused by particulates. Particles of PM10
collect in the upper portion of the respiratory system, affecting the
bronchial tubes, nose, and throat. They contribute to aggravation of
asthma, premature death, increased number of asthma attacks,
bronchitis, reduced lung function, respiratory disease, aggravation of
respiratory and cardiovascular disease, alteration of lung tissue and
structure, changes in respiratory defense mechanisms, and cancer
(VCAPCD 2003).
Fine Particulate Matter, 2.5 Microns (PM2.5)
Fine particulate matter, 2.5 microns (PM2.5) is a mixture of particulate
matter fine dusts and aerosols 2.5 microns or smaller in aerodynamic
diameter. Particles of PM2.5 can enter the deepest portions of the lungs
where gas exchange occurs between the air and the blood stream.
These are the most dangerous particles, because the lungs have no
efficient mechanisms for removing them. If these particles are soluble in
water, they pass directly into the blood stream within minutes. If they are
not soluble in water, they are retained deep in the lungs and can remain
there permanently. This increases the risks of long- term disease
including chronic respiratory disease, cancer, and increased and
premature death. Other effects include increased respiratory stress and
disease, decreased lung function, alterations in lung tissue and
structure, and alterations in respiratory tract defense mechanisms.
Particles of PM2.5 are emitted from activities, such as industrial and
residential combustion processes, wood burning, and from diesel and
gasoline-powered vehicles. They are also formed in the atmosphere
from gases, such as SO2, NOX, ammonia, and VOCs that are emitted
from combustion activities and then become particles as a result of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-152

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
chemical transformations in the air (secondary particles) (VCAPCD
2003).
3.11.3.3 Sources of Air Pollutants
The most significant regional sources of O3, NO2, and CO in ambient air
are automobiles, trucks, and other on-road vehicles, along with trains,
vessels, and aircraft. Ozone is not directly emitted; rather,
photochemical O3 is formed by the atmospheric reaction of VOCs and
NOX in sunlight. Gasoline and diesel engines emit VOCs and NOX as
combustion products, as does natural gas-fired equipment (stationary
sources), such as pump engines, gas turbine generators, process
heaters, and steam boilers.
Local emissions of PM10 are primarily the result of fugitive dust from
travel on unpaved roads, as well as construction and agricultural
activities. Coarser particles also may be emitted from activities that
disturb the topsoil. Other sources include wind-blown dust, pollen, salts,
brake dust, and tire wear. Although PM2.5 is a subset of PM10, it differs
from the rest of PM10. While most of the ambient PM10 results from direct
emissions of the pollutant, a significant amount of the ambient PM2.5
results from transformation of precursors and condensing of gaseous
pollutants in the atmosphere. Other than direct PM2.5 emissions, the key
pollutants contributing to PM2.5 concentrations in the atmosphere are
SO2, NOX, VOCs, and ammonia (CARB 2005).
The Project would cause emissions of criteria pollutants: VOC, CO,
NOX, SO2, PM10, and PM2.5, primarily in diesel engine exhaust (off-road
equipment, portable equipment, and larger trucks), and also in gasoline
engine exhaust (small equipment and worker vehicles). Earthmoving
activities would also generate emissions of fugitive dust as PM10 and
PM2.5.
3.11.3.4 Ambient Air Quality
Air quality is affected by a variety of sources in the general vicinity of the
Project area. Large stationary sources, such as oil refineries and power
plants emit substantial amounts of NOX and ROCs, along with PM10 and
PM2.5. Light motor vehicles, diesel powered construction equipment, and
commercial trucks used in the Project area would be another source of
these pollutants. Noncombustion sources of PM10 and PM2.5 include
fugitive dust from roads, construction, demolition, and earthmoving.
Finally, commercial and general aviation aircraft generate emissions
that affect air quality.
The major sources of O3 precursors NOX and VOC in the Bay Area are
motor vehicles and other mobile equipment (including agricultural
equipment), solvent use, petroleum industry activities, nonelectric
agricultural water pumping, and electric utilities operation.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-153

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
BAAQMD operates an extensive regional air monitoring network
comprised of monitoring stations (sites) that collectively measure the
ambient concentrations of six criteria air pollutants: O3, NO2, CO, SO2,
PM10, and PM2.5. Not all monitoring stations are fully instrumented for
these pollutants, while some sites have not been operating for adequate
periods of time to provide representative data for characterization of
attainment status.
Monitoring stations within or near the Project area are San Martin (O3
only), Gilroy (O3 and PM2.5), and San Jose (O3, NO2, CO, SO2, PM10,
and PM2.5); there is no monitoring station in Morgan Hill. A 3-year (2009
through 2011) summary of ambient air quality monitored at these sites
is presented in Section 3.11-3, Regulatory Setting. In general, air quality
in the Project area is good with occasional exceedences of O3 and PM2.5
ambient air quality standards.
3.11.3.5 Sensitive Receptors
Certain population groups are considered more sensitive to air pollution
and odors than others; in particular, children, elderly, and acutely ill and
chronically ill persons, especially those with cardio respiratory diseases,
such as asthma and bronchitis. Sensitive receptors (land uses) indicate
locations where such individuals are typically found, namely schools,
daycare centers, hospitals, convalescent homes, residences of sensitive
persons, and parks with active recreational uses, such as youth sports.
Persons engaged in strenuous work or physical exercise also have
increased sensitivity to poor air quality. Residential areas are
considered more sensitive to air quality conditions than commercial and
industrial areas, because people generally spend longer periods of time
at their residences, resulting in greater exposure to ambient air quality
conditions. Recreational uses, such as parks, are also considered
sensitive, due to the greater exposure to ambient air quality conditions
and because the presence of pollution detracts from the recreational
experience.
A project with the potential to expose sensitive receptors (including
residential areas) or the general public to substantial levels of toxic air
contaminants, as designated by CARB under 17 California Code of
Regulations (CCR) Subchapter 7, Sections 93000 and 93001, would be
deemed to have a significant impact. Air toxics are pollutants that may
result in an increase in mortality or serious illness, or that may pose a
present or potential hazard to human health. Health effects of air toxics
include cancer, birth defects, neurological damage, damage to the
body’s natural defense system, and diseases that can lead to premature
death.
DPM is considered a carcinogenic air toxic in California (§93000). At the
federal level, Title III of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 identifies
188 pollutants as Hazardous Air Pollutants (HAPs), the federal term for
air toxics. In 2001, the USEPA identified 21 HAPs as mobile source air

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-154

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
toxics (MSATs), six of which are designated priority pollutants (66
Federal Register 17235): acetaldehyde, acrolein, benzene,1,3butadiene, diesel exhaust (particulate matter and organic gases), and
formaldehyde. The California Office of Environmental Health Hazard
Assessment ([OEHHA] 2009) has published a cancer Unit Risk Value
(URV) for DPM, which aggregates the individual URVs for the principal
hazardous constituents of DPM, including aromatic hydrocarbons
(benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes – BETX), carbonyls (acrolein,
acetaldehyde, formaldehyde), and PAHs (polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons).
A screening-level Health Risk Assessment (HRA) for DPM was
performed using conservative methodology for maximum excavation
activity levels and timeframes. Conservative methodology overestimates
impacts; thus, actual impacts would be lower. Detailed quantitative
results of the HRA are presented in Sections 3.11.5 and 3.11.6. In
general, due to the broad geographic dispersion of Project activities and
their short-term temporary nature at any particular location, no
significant risk to sensitive receptors or the general public would be
posed by Project-related engine exhaust.

3.12

NOISE
3.12.1 Introduction
This section describes the general characteristics of noise and discusses the
existing noise environment in southern Santa Clara County, the cities of
Morgan Hill and Gilroy, the community of San Martin, and surrounding
Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and West Little Llagas Creek in
relation to the Project.
This section also identifies applicable noise and vibration regulations,
analyzes potential impacts, and provides mitigation measures associated
with the implementation of the alternatives. Specifically, this section analyzes
the potential noise and vibration impacts stemming from the proposed flood
risk management and improvements in the project area, relative to
applicable noise and vibration criteria and the existing ambient oise
environment.
3.12.2 Project Area
The Project area is located in southern Santa Clara County, with portions
located within the jurisdictions of the City of Morgan Hill, and the
unincorporated town of San Martin. The project area includes lands
bordering Reaches 4, 5, and 6 on Llagas Creek, Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 on
West Little Llagas Creek, and Reach 14 on East Little Llagas Creek.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-155

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Fundamental Concepts of Environmental Noise
Sound is mechanical energy transmitted by pressure waves in a
compressible or incompressible medium, such as air or water, respectively
(U.S. Department of Transportation [DOT], Federal Transit Administration
[FTA] 2006a). Sound is a fluctuation of air pressure, and the number of times
the fluctuation occurs in a second is known as frequency. Some sounds, like
whistles, are associated with a single frequency and known as a “pure tone.”
Usually, sound is made up of many frequencies, all blended together. When
sound becomes excessive, annoying, or unwanted, it is referred to as noise.
Noise may be continuous (constant noise with a steady decibel level), steady
(constant noise with a fluctuating decibel level), impulsive (having a high
peak of short duration), stationary (occurring from a fixed source),
intermittent (occurring at the same rate), or transient (occurring at different
rates). Noise levels are quantified using units of decibels (dB). The decibel is
defined as ten times the base 10 logarithm (an exponent used in
mathematical calculations to depict the perceived levels of variable
quantities, such as visible light energy, electromagnetic field strength, and
sound intensity) of the ratio between the two quantities of sound pressure
squared. Sound pressure level attenuates (reduces with increased distance
from the noise source), with respect to the inverse distance law, where
sound pressure is inversely proportional to the distance from the noise
source (USEPA 1974 and Plog 1988). Table 3.12-1 provides the dB of some
common sound levels.
Two measurements used by local, state, and federal agencies, which relate
the time-varying quality of environmental noise to its known effect on people
are (1) the 24-hour equivalent sound level (LEQ(24)); and (2) the day-night
sound level (LDN). The LEQ(24) is the level of sound with the same energy
as the time-varying sound of interest, averaged over a 24-hour period. The
LDN is the LEQ(24) with 10 decibels on the A-weighted decibel scale (dBA)
(the equivalent constant sound level for a varying sound level measured over
a period of time) added to nighttime sound levels between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to account for people’s greater sensitivity to sound during
nighttime hours. The 10th percentile-exceeded sound level, L10, is the Aweighted sound level, which happens 10 percent or more of the time of the
measurement (USEPA 1974). Other measures include L50 and L90, which
represent 50 percent and 90 percent of the case, respectively.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-156

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.12-1 Typical Sound Level Characteristics
Level dB

Sound Level Characteristic

160

Rocket Launch

150

Military Jet Plane Takeoff

140

Threshold of Pain

130

Commercial Jet Plane Takeoff

120

Industrial Chipper or Punch Press

110

Loud Automobile Horn

100

Passing Diesel Truck

90

Factory - Heavy Manufacturing

80

Factory - Light Manufacturing

70

Open Floor Office - Cubicles

60

Conversational Speech

50

Private Office - Walled

40

Residence in Daytime

30

Bedroom at Night

20

Recording or Broadcasting Studio

10

Threshold of Good Hearing - Adult

0
Source: Plog 1988

Threshold of Excellent Hearing – Child

Noise Levels, Perception, and Sources
In 1974, the USEPA published Information on Levels of Environmental Noise
Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of
Safety. This document provides information for state and local agencies to
use in developing their ambient noise standards.
In the EPA document, the agency identified outdoor and indoor noise levels
to protect public health and welfare. A LEQ(24) of 70 dBA was identified as
the level of environmental noise that would not result in any measurable
hearing loss over a lifetime. A LDN of 55 dBA outdoors and a LDN of 45 dBA
indoors were identified as noise thresholds that would prevent activity
interference or annoyance. These levels are not “peak” levels but are 24hour averages over several years. Occasional high levels of noise may
occur. A LDN of 55 dBA is equivalent to a continuous noise level of 48.6
dBA. Examples of typical noise levels measured at a typical distance (within
50 feet) from the source are as follows (USEPA 1974):


Quiet room: 28–33 dBA;



Computer room: 37–45 dBA;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-157

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Refrigerator: 40–43 dBA;



Forced hot air heating system: 42–52 dBA;



Microwave oven: 55–59 dBA;



Clothes dryer: 56–58 dBA;



Clothes washer: 65–70 dBA;



Telephone ringer: 66–75 dBA;



Garbage disposal: 76–83 dBA;



Hair dryer: 80-95 dBA; and



Grass trimmer: 94–96 dBA.

The following relationships occur with regard to increases in noise measured
on the A-weighted decibel scale (USEPA 1974):


A change of 1 dBA cannot be perceived by humans, except in carefully
controlled laboratory environments;



Outside of the laboratory, a 3 dBA change is considered a justperceivable difference by humans;



A change in level of at least 5 dBA is required before any noticeable
change in human response would be expected; and



A 10 dBA change is subjectively heard as approximately a doubling in
loudness and can cause an adverse response.

In most areas, transportation sources, such as automobiles, trucks, trains,
and aircraft are the principal sources of ambient noise. Industrial and
commercial equipment operations and wind-related sounds also contribute to
the ambient noise environment in their vicinities. According to the National
Institutes of Health, National Institute on Deafness and Communication
Disorder (NIDCD), Noise-Induced Hearing Loss (NIHL) can occur when one
is exposed to harmful noise. Brief exposure to sounds that are very loud, or
longer-term exposure to fairly loud sounds can cause damage to the
sensitive structures of the inner ear, called hair cells, in the cochlea (auditory
portion of the inner ear). Once damaged, the hair cells cannot grow back,
resulting in permanent NIHL (NIDCD 2008).
Sources of noise that can cause NIHL include loud motorcycles,
firecrackers, and small firearms, all emitting sounds from 120 to 150 dBA. In
addition, long or repeated exposure to sounds at or above 85 dBA can cause
hearing loss, such as in an industrial setting. The louder the sound, the
shorter the time period for NIHL to occur. Sounds of less than 75 dBA, even
after long exposure, are unlikely to cause significant hearing loss. In
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-158

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
populated areas, excessive noise levels of 90 to 110 dBA, which are typical
during jet flyovers at 1,000 feet or a diesel truck at 50 feet, commonly result
in complaints to civic authorities. Although being aware of decibel levels is an
important factor in protecting one’s hearing, distance from the source of the
sound and duration of exposure to the sound are equally important (NIDCD
2008).
Noise also varies with distance. As an example, typical highway traffic 50
feet from a receptor typically produces sound levels of approximately 70
dBA. The same highway noise measures 66 dBA at a distance of 100 feet,
assuming soft ground conditions (as opposed to hard surface such as rock).
This decrease is known as attenuation. The outdoor attenuation rate for line
sources, such as traffic, is a decrease of approximately 4.5 dBA (for soft
ground) for every doubling of distance between the source of noise and the
receptor (for hard ground the outdoor drop-off rate is 3 dBA for line sources).
Assuming soft ground, for point sources, such as amplified music or speech,
the outdoor attenuation rate is a decrease of approximately 7.5 dBA for
every doubling of distance between the noise source and receptor (for hard
ground the outdoor attenuation rate is 6 dBA for point sources).
Vibration
Vibrations are energy transmitted in waves through soil. These energy waves
dissipate with distance from the vibration source (e.g. pile driving). Since
energy is lost during the transfer of energy from one particle to another,
vibration that is distant from the source is usually less perceptible than
vibration closer to the source. However, actual human and structure
response to different vibration levels is influenced by a combination of
factors, including soil type, distance between the source and receptor,
duration, and the number of perceived events.
If great enough, the energy transmitted through the ground as vibration can
result in structural damage. To assess the potential for structural damage
associated with vibration, the vibratory ground motion in the vicinity of the
affected structure is measured in terms of peak particle velocity (PPV) in the
vertical and horizontal directions (vector sum), typically in units of inches per
second. A freight train passing at 100 feet can cause peak particle velocities
of 0.1 inch per second, while a strong earthquake can produce peak particle
velocities in the range of 10 inches per second. Minor cosmetic damage to
buildings can begin in the range of 0.5 inch per second.
Ground-borne vibration consists of rapidly fluctuating motions within the
ground that have a net motion of zero. The effects of ground-borne vibrations
typically cause a nuisance only to people, but at extreme vibration levels,
damage to buildings may occur. Although ground-borne vibration can be felt
outdoors, it is typically an annoyance only to people indoors, where the
associated effects of the shaking of a building can be notable and because
people are moving around less indoors (e.g., seated). Induced ground-borne
noise is an effect of ground-borne vibration and only exists indoors, since it is
produced from noise radiated from the motion of the walls and floors of a
room and may consist of the rattling of windows or dishes on shelves.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-159

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Although the perceptibility threshold is about 65 VdB (vibration decibels),
human response to vibration is not usually significant unless the vibration
exceeds 70 VdB with the threshold of potential architectural damage to
fragile (e.g., old masonry) structures at about 100 VdB. Human response to
different levels of ground-borne noise and vibration are as follows (FTA
2006a,b):


65 VdB produces a noise level between 25 (low frequency) and 40 dBA
(high frequency) and is the approximate threshold of perception for many
humans. Low-frequency sound is usually inaudible, mid-frequency sound
can be excessive for quiet sleeping areas;



75 VdB produces a noise level between 35 (low frequency) and 50 dBA
(high frequency). Approximate dividing line between barely perceptible
and distinctly perceptible. Many people find transit vibration (e.g., passing
trains) at this level annoying. Low-frequency noise acceptable for sleeping
areas, mid-frequency noise annoying in most quiet occupied areas; and



85 VdB produces a noise level between 45 (low frequency) and 60 dBA
(high frequency). Vibration acceptable only if there are an infrequent
number of events per day. Low-frequency noise annoying for sleeping
areas, mid-frequency noise annoying even for infrequent events with
institutional land uses, such as schools and churches.

Blasting Airblast and Vibration
The two primary environmental effects of blasting are ground vibration
(discussed above) and airblast. The following is a brief discussion of the two
types of airblast.
Airblast
Energy released in an explosion creates an air overpressure, commonly
called an airblast in the form of a propagating wave. If the receiver is close
enough to the blast, the overpressure can be felt as the pressure front of the
airblast passes. The accompanying booming sound lasts for only a few
seconds. The explosive charges used in mining and mass grading are
typically wholly contained in the ground, resulting in an airblast with
frequency content below about 250 cycles per second, or hertz (Hz).
Because an airblast lasts for only a few seconds, use of LEQ, a measure of
sound level averaged over a specified period of time, to describe blast noise
is inappropriate. Airblast is properly measured and described as a linear
peak air overpressure (i.e., an increase above atmospheric pressure) in
pounds per square inch (psi). Modern blast monitoring equipment is also
capable of measuring peak overpressure data in terms of unweighted dB.
Decibels, as used to describe airblast, should not be confused with or
compared to dBA, which are commonly used to describe relatively steadystate noise levels. An airblast with a peak overpressure of 130 dB can be
described as being mildly unpleasant, whereas exposure to jet aircraft noise
at a level of 130 dBA would be painful and deafening.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-160

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Human Response to Airblast and Ground Vibration
Human response to blast vibration and airblast is difficult to quantify.
Vibration and airblast can be felt or heard well below the levels that produce
any damage to structures. The duration of the event has an effect on human
response, as does blast frequency. Blast events are relatively short, on the
order of several seconds for sequentially delayed blasts. Generally, as blast
duration and vibration frequency increase, the potential for adverse human
response increases. Studies have shown that a few blasts of longer duration
produce a less adverse human response than short blasts that occur more
often.
The average human response to ground vibration and airblast that may be
anticipated when a person is at rest in quiet surroundings is listed below. If
the person is engaged in any type of physical activity, the level required for
the responses indicated would be increased considerably.


Barely to distinctly perceptible—0.02 to 0.10 PPV;50 to 70 dB;



Distinctly perceptible to strongly perceptible—0.10 to 0.50; 70 to 90 dB;



Strongly perceptible to mildly unpleasant—0.50 to 1.00; 90 to 120 dB;



Mildly unpleasant to distinctly unpleasant—1.00–2.00; 120 to 140 dB; and



Distinctly unpleasant to intolerable—2.00 to 10.00; 140 to 170 dB

It is important to understand that the foregoing describes the responses of
average individuals. Individual responses can fall anywhere within the full
range of the human response spectrum.
Sensitive Receptors
Some land uses are generally regarded as being more sensitive to noise
and vibration than others due to the types of population groups or activities
involved. Sensitive population groups generally include children and the
elderly. Noise sensitive land uses typically include all residential uses
(single- and multi- family, mobile homes, dormitories, and similar uses),
hospitals, nursing homes, schools, and parks.
Sensitive land uses are present along all proposed reaches, with the densest
residential area in Morgan Hill along Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8, but more rural
residences occurring along all reaches. The closest hospitals to the Project
area are located north of Reach 8 in San Jose and south of Reach 4 in
Gilroy. The closest nursing homes are along Reaches 6, 7B, and 8. The
closest schools and parks are along Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-161

Chapter 3

Affected Environment
Table 3.12-2 lists the nearest residential receptors to each reach, while Table
3.12-3 summarizes the non-residential sensitive receptors closest to the Project
area.
Table 3.12-2 Nearest Residential Sensitive Receptors
Reach

Distance to Nearest Receptor

4

40 feet

5

100 feet

6

50 feet

7A

50 feet

7B

40 feet

8

25 feet

14

85 feet

Table 3.12-3 Nearest Sensitive Receptors (Non-Residential)
Receptor

Reach

Distance and Direction

St Louise Regional Hospital

4

4,500 feet south

South County Retirement Home

6

750 feet east

Pacific Hills Manor/Morgan Hill Villa

8

1,500 feet west

Britton Middle School

8

50 feet east

Crossroads Christian Center School

8

400 feet east

Oakwood School

7A

250 feet east

San Martin/Gwinn Elementary School

6

650 feet west

Paradise Valley Elementary School

7B

900 feet west

PA Walsh Elementary School

8

950 feet west

Kiddie Academy of Morgan Hill

7A/7B

1,150 feet east

Stratford School Morgan Hill

8

900 feet north

Rucker Elementary School

5

3,300 feet west

Galvan Park

8

200 feet west

Morgan Hill Community Park/Dog Park

7B

800 feet west

Paradise Park

7B

1,100 feet west

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-162

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

3.12.3 Environmental Setting
This section describes the existing noise setting by Project reach as
described in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives.
Noise Setting
Noise measurements were collected at seven locations in the Project area in
November and December 2011 to determine baseline noise levels for
existing noise sources. Below is a description of the primary noise sources
by reach and the estimated noise levels from the 2011 measurements. This
information is summarized in Table 3.12-4. All measurements were taken on
Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday; and 1 hour measurements were taken in
late morning. Automobile traffic was the dominant noise source observed at
all locations. Other sources of detectable noises included landscaping (lawn
mowers, hedge trimmers, and leaf cutters), pedestrian traffic, and vegetation
blowing during gusts of wind. Figure 3.12-1 shows the locations of the seven
measurement sites. Appendix L, ULC Baseline Noise Measurements,
includes noise measurement data and observations.
Table 3.12-4 Baseline Noise Measurement Locations

Site No.

Reach

Location

Duration

Average
Noise
Level (dB LEQ)

Primary Noise
Sources
Observed

1

14

Amistad Lane/ Church Avenue, San
Martin

24-hr

63.6

traffic

2

6

Spring Street/Llagas Avenue, San
Martin

24-hr

55.4

traffic, airport

3

7A

Watsonville Road/La Jolla Drive,
Morgan Hill

24-hr

63.3

traffic

4

8

Warren/Hale Avenue, Morgan Hill.

24-hr

49.5

landscaping

5

8

Del Monte Avenue between Dunne
Avenue/5th Street, Morgan Hill

24-hr

53.5

traffic

6

4

Rucker Avenue/Borges Court south of
San Martin

1-hr

60.1

traffic

7

7B

Monterey Road/Spring Avenue, Morgan
Hill

1-hr

62.1

traffic

Reach 4
Reach 4 is a semi-urban area with residential, agricultural, and commercial
uses along the stream banks. A 1-hour noise measurement (Site 6) was
collected along Reach 4, near Rucker Avenue and Borges Court south of
San Martin on November 17, 2011. The LEQ was 60.1 dB. Primary sources
of noise observed during measurements included light traffic along Rucker
Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-163

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 5
Reach 5 is a semi-urban area with residential, agricultural, and commercial
uses along the stream banks. The closest noise measurement to Reach 5
was Site 1 along Reach 14, approximately 0.5 mile from Reach 5. A 24-hour
noise measurement was collected at Amistad Lane and Church Avenue in
San Martin on November 22, 2011. The LEQ was 63.6 dB. Primary sources
of noise observed during measurements included light vehicle traffic along
Church Avenue, agricultural vehicle traffic in fields to the west, minor noise
from the South County Airport west of U.S. 101 and minor levels of U.S. 101
freeway traffic.
Reach 6
Reach 6 is a semi-urban area with residential, agricultural, and commercial
uses along the stream banks and the South County Airport to the east. A 24hour noise measurement (Site 2) was collected along Reach 6 near Spring
Street and Llagas Avenue in San Martin on November 30, 2011. The LEQ
was 55.4 dB. Primary sources of noise observed during measurements
included noise along Llagas Avenue and minor airport noise.
Reach 7A and Reach 7B
Reaches 7A and 7B are increasingly urbanized traveling north along these
reaches, with dense residential populations along Reach 7A. A 24-hour noise
measurement (Site 3) was collected along Reach 7A near Watsonville Road
and La Jolla Drive in Morgan Hill on December 21, 2011, with an LEQ of
63.3 dB. A 1-hour measurement (Site 7) was collected along Reach 7B near
Monterey Road and Spring Avenue in Morgan Hill on November 15, 2011,
with an LEQ of 62.1 dB. Primary sources of noise observed during
measurements at Site 3 included a moderate amount of flowing traffic along
Watsonville Road and minor neighborhood traffic along La Jolla Drive.
Primary sources of noise observed during measurements at Site 7 included
vehicle traffic along Spring Avenue, truck backup alarms, and pedestrian
traffic.
Reach 8
Reach 8 is an urbanized area within Morgan Hill with dense residential and
commercial uses along the stream banks. Two 24-hour noise measurements
(Sites 4 and 5) were collected along Reach 8 near Warren Avenue and Hale
Avenue and along Del Monte Avenue between Dunne Avenue and 5th
Street, respectively, in Morgan Hill. Site 4 was collected November 15, 2011
with an LEQ of 49.5 dB, while Site 5 was collected December 20, 2011 with
an LEQ of 53.5 dB. Primary sources of noise observed during
measurements at Site 4 included lawnmowers and leaf blowers. Primary
sources of noise observed during measurements at Site 5 included light
traffic along Del Monte Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-164

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 14
Reach 14 is a semi-urban area with residential, agricultural, and commercial
uses along the stream banks and the South County Airport to the west. A 24hour noise measurement was collected along Reach 14 at Amistad Lane and
Church Avenue in San Martin on November 22, 2011. The LEQ was 63.6
dB. Primary sources of noise observed during measurements including light
vehicle traffic along Church Avenue, agricultural vehicle traffic in fields to the
west, minor noise from the airport west of U.S. 101 and minor levels of U.S.
101 freeway traffic.
Vibration Setting
Vibration sources in an area with both residential and industrial use, such as
along most of the Project area, would include truck and vehicle traffic, as well
as industrial operations. Vibration levels are not typically measured for
background information, rather expected vibration levels are calculated for
the various phases of a project, as is done for the Proposed Project
activities. Vibration impact criteria do not take existing vibration levels into
account. Typically, the existing environment does not include a significant
number of perceptible ground-borne vibration events (which is true for the
Project area). When a project would result in vibration levels greater than
5 VdB over the existing source, the existing source is not considered, and
standard vibration criteria is applied (FTA 2006a,b).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-165

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-166

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.12-1 Noise Measurement Locations

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-167

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-168

Chapter 3

3.13

Affected Environment

AESTHETIC RESOURCES
3.13.1 Introduction
This section evaluates potential impacts on visual resources (aesthetics) from
implementation of the alternatives identified for the Project. The environmental
setting presents an overview of the visual character of the regional landscape;
a detailed description of visual character along the Project reaches; and
contains federal, state, and local ordinances and regulations that are
applicable to the Project. Results of the impact evaluation are provided in
Section 4.13.
Visual resources are the physical characteristics of a landscape that determine
its scenic quality. These characteristics are both natural and human-made
features that make up a specific landscape scene. Natural features include
landform, water surfaces, and vegetation. Human modifications include
structures, roads, transmission lines, levees, etc. Since scenic quality is a
measure of human sensory experience, the visual resources most important
are those within the “seen area” of areas accessible to people (roadways,
recreational areas, and human developments).
This visual assessment relies partly on the visual assessment methodology
established by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) as described in
the FHWA Visual Assessment Methodology manual. The aesthetic value of an
area is a measure of its visual character and quality, combined with the viewer
response to the area (Federal Highway Administration 1988). Viewer response
is a combination of viewer exposure and viewer sensitivity. Viewer exposure is
a function of the number of viewers, number of views seen, distance of the
viewers, and viewing duration. Viewer sensitivity relates to the extent of the
public’s concern for a particular viewshed. These terms and criteria are
described in detail below.
3.13.2 Project Area
The project area for this visual resources analysis encompasses the Project
site encompassing the area covered by all the action alternatives, as well as
those portions of the adjacent residential and rural areas that are visible in the
line of site of the Project alternatives and related activities. This would
constitute a long narrow band running paralleling either side of Upper Llagas
Creek through most of the creek reaches.
Visual Character
Both natural and artificial landscape features make up the character of a view.
Character is influenced by geologic, hydrologic, botanical, wildlife, recreational,
and urban features. Urban features include aspects of landscape settlement
and development, such as roads, utilities, structures, earthworks, and the
results of other human activities. The perception of visual character can vary
significantly among viewers depending on their level of sensitivity and interest.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-169

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Among sensitive viewers, perception can vary seasonally and even hourly as
weather, light, shadow, and the elements that compose the viewshed change.
Form, line, color, and texture are the basic components used to describe
visual character and quality for most visual assessments. The appearance of
the viewshed is described in terms of the dominance of each of these
components.
Visual Quality
Visual quality is evaluated using an approach to visual analysis adopted by
FHWA, which employs the concepts of vividness, intactness, and unity, as
defined below:


Vividness is the visual power or memorability of landscape
components, as they combine in striking or distinctive visual patterns.



Intactness is the visual integrity of the natural and human built
landscape and its freedom from encroaching elements; this factor can
be present in well-kept urban and rural landscapes, as well as in
natural settings.



Unity is the visual coherence and compositional harmony of the
landscape considered as a whole; it frequently attests to the careful
design of individual components in the artificial landscape.

Visual quality is evaluated based on the relative degree of vividness, intactness,
and unity, as modified by its visual sensitivity. High quality views are highly vivid,
relatively intact, and exhibit a high degree of visual unity. Low quality views lack
vividness, are not visually intact, and possess a low degree of visual unity.
Viewer Exposure and Sensitivity
The measure of the quality of a view is also correlated to the overall sensitivity
of the viewer. Viewer sensitivity or concern is based on the visibility of
resources in the landscape, proximity of viewers to the visual resource,
elevation of viewers relative to the visual resource, frequency, and duration of
views, number of viewers, and type and expectations of individuals and viewer
groups. The importance of a view is related in part to the position of the viewer
relative to the resource; therefore, visibility and visual dominance of landscape
elements depend on their placement within the viewshed. To identify the
importance of views of a resource, a viewshed is broken into zones of
foreground, middleground, and background. Generally, the closer a resource
is to the viewer, the more dominant it is and the greater its importance to the
viewer. It is important to note that zones in a viewshed may also vary between
different geographic regions or types of terrain.
Visual sensitivity depends on the number and type of viewers and the
frequency and duration of views. Visual sensitivity is also modified by viewer
activity, awareness, and visual expectations in relation to the number of
viewers and viewing duration. For example, visual sensitivity is generally
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-170

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

higher for views seen by people who are driving for pleasure and people
engaging in recreational activities, such as hiking, biking or camping, and
homeowners. It can also be inferred that sensitivity tends to be lower for views
seen by people commuting to and from work or as part of their work.
Commuters and non-recreational travelers typically have fleeting views and
tend to focus on commute traffic, not on surrounding scenery; therefore, they
are generally considered to have low visual sensitivity due to the transient
nature of their viewing experience. Residential viewers typically have extended
viewing periods and are concerned about changes in the views from their
homes; therefore, they are generally considered to have high visual sensitivity.
Viewers using recreation trails and areas, scenic highways, and scenic
overlooks are usually assessed as having high visual sensitivity. The same
landform or visual resource appearing in different geographic areas could have
a different degree of visual quality and sensitivity in each setting. For example,
a small hill may be a significant visual element on a flat landscape but have
very little significance in mountainous terrain.
3.13.3 Environmental Setting
The Project area is located along the Upper Llagas Creek corridor in southern
Santa Clara County running through the City of Morgan Hill to the north and
south through San Martin and south to the City of Gilroy. In the Project area,
Upper Llagas Creek, East and West Little Llagas Creek run generally parallel
on the west and east of U.S. 101. The Project area landscape contains
agricultural and low intensity land uses in the south and primarily urban in
nature running north through portions of densely populated and commercial
areas. Currently, much of the Project vicinity is urbanized or is farmed.

3.13.3.1 Project Area Overview
An overview of visual conditions within the Project area is provided below,
followed by the existing visual character and conditions by Project reach.
The major topographical features of Santa Clara County include the
Santa Clara Valley, the Diablo Range to the east, and Santa Cruz
Mountains to the west. Santa Clara Valley is ringed by rolling hills and
runs the entire length of the county from north to south. The Diablo Range
covers the entire eastern half of the county. It consists mainly of
grasslands, brush and oak savannah, due mostly to sparse rainfall (Santa
Clara 1994). The Project area is located in Santa Clara Valley near the
foothills of the Santa Cruz Mountains. From view corridors, visual
elements in the Project area include views of farmlands, both the Santa
Cruz Mountains and Diablo Range in the background and wandering
creeks in the middle ground. The City of Morgan Hill is the most
urbanized portion of the Project area along U.S. 101, with agricultural
lands surrounding the city limits.
There are no officially designated scenic highways in the Project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-171

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Reach 4
Reach 4 is in the southern most extent of the Project area and contains
an intermittent stream channel that winds through agricultural and
suburban areas. Accessible views of the Reach 4 creek corridor are
available from the bridges crossing over the creek, such as at Buena
Vista Avenue, Rucker Avenue, and Masten Avenue, as well as some
roads that run parallel to the creek.
Reach 5
Reach 5 is a short 0.4 mile segment connecting Reaches 6 and 14 and
crossing under U.S. 101 in an east-west direction. Land use to the north
and south is agricultural, with a lesser degree of urban development to
the south. Views of this reach are available from U.S. 101 and an
agricultural road just north of the reach that runs parallel to the creek
corridor.
Reach 6
Upper Llagas Creek flows through the Reach 6 channel in a southerly
direction on the west side of U.S. 101. The channel is composed of
gravel, sand, and silt. The southwestern portion of Reach 6 is adjacent to
several SCVWD percolation ponds and the southeastern portion or
Reach 6 is adjacent to greenhouses and agricultural fields. The middle
portion of Reach 6 traverses through agricultural fields, small corporation
yards, and suburbanized areas with South County Airport of Santa Clara
County located between Reach 6 and U.S. 101. Portions of this reach
are adjacent to paved roads. The northern portion of Reach 6 passes
through an industrialized area and waste treatment facilities. Views of
the Reach 6 creek corridor are available from the bridges crossing over
the creek, such as at Church Avenue and East San Martin Avenue. The
creek corridor is also visible from paths within Silveira Park.
Reach 7A and Reach 7B
Reach 7A does not contain a creek channel. The southern half of Reach
7A is a topographically flat section of land with a combination of heavy
agricultural use (plowed fields) or fallow land that has been converted to
annual non-native grassland. The northern half of Reach 7A runs
through a residential neighborhood and ends to the north at the
intersection of West Little Llagas Creek and Reach 7B. Reach 7A runs
through a suburban area offering accessible views, including views from
John Wilson Way at Oakwood Country School looking west.
Reach 7A covers flat, undeveloped, grassland south of Watsonville Road
surrounded by residential and commercial development. Reach 7A
exhibits a more rural character south of Watsonville Road, while the
northern portion of this reach has a suburban character.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-172

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Views of Reach 7A are available from bridges crossings, such as at
Monterey Road, West Middle Avenue, Watsonville Road, La Crosse
Drive, which also intersects with Reach 7B.
Reach 7B is in a suburban area with residences to the west and
commercial uses to the east. Morgan Hill Community Park is directly
west of Reach 7B to the north of West Edmundson Avenue. Views of the
Reach 7B creek corridor are available from the bridges crossing over the
creek, such as La Crosse Drive, West Edmundson Avenue, and West
Dunne Avenue, which also intersects with Reach 8. Views of Reach 7B
from Morgan Hill Community Park are screened by intervening
vegetation.
Reach 8
Reach 8 contains an intermittent stream (West Little Llagas Creek). The
channel transects a heavily urbanized area with businesses, residential
areas, and roads abutting many portions of the top of the channel bank.
Reach 8 passes through urban residential and commercial
neighborhoods in Morgan Hill, where Llagas Creek runs underground in
channelized culverts and occasionally comes to the surface. The
aboveground sections of the creek in this reach are bordered by riparian
or ruderal vegetation. The remaining open channels in Reach 8 can be
seen from some sidewalks, road sides, and bridges along Monterey
Road, along Hale Avenue, and other streets in downtown Morgan Hill.
Reach 14
Reach 14 consists of an engineered flood channel east of and parallel to
U.S. 101. Reach 14 does not have a clearly defined riparian corridor, but
some scattered trees and bushes are present along this reach. Areas
beyond the roads on each side of the channel consist of agricultural
fields or are heavily suburbanized. Expansive irrigated croplands line
Reach 14, allowing the channel to be clearly seen from nearby roads,
including Church Avenue and San Martin Avenue.
Creek corridor views are available at bridges crossing the creek corridor,
including at Church Avenue, East San Martin Avenue, and Sycamore
Avenue, as well as some roads (e.g., Amistad Lane) and agricultural
areas on either side.
Key Observation Points
To capture the baseline visual setting of the Project area as seen by
viewers in the area, eight key observation points were identified in the
visual simulations (Figures 3.13-1a–h). These key observation points
were assessed to determine, which would be the most representative of
the Project’s potential effects on the viewshed. Each visual simulation
contains the name of the reach and the alternative it represents. Many of
the visual simulations are representative of all the action alternatives
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-173

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

since they are the same in many of the reaches. Some of the key
differences between alternatives are also represented in these
simulations.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-174

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Hale Avenue looking south (Viewpoint 1)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1a

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations 1. Hale Avenue Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-175

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-176

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Monterey Road at 4th Street looking west (Viewpoint 2)

Visual Simulation of NRCS Alternative

Figure 3.13-1b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations 2. Monterey Road Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-177

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-178

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Spring Avenue looking northwest (Viewpoint 3)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1c

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations 3. Spring Avenue Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-179

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-180

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Near La Crosse Drive looking northwest toward Llagas and Edmundson creeks (Viewpoint 4)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1d

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations: 4. La Crosse Drive Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-181

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-182

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Trail near La Jolla Drive looking southeast (Viewpoint 5)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1e

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations: 5. La Jolla Drive Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-183

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-184

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Highway 101 looking east (Viewpoint 6)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1f

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations 6: Highway 101 Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-185

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-186

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Rucker Avenue near Borges Court looking east (Viewpoint 7)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1g

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations: 7. Rucker Avenue Existing View and Visual Simulations

December 2015

3-187

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-188

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Church Avenue Near Amistad Lane Looking North At Reach 14 (Viewpoint 8)

Visual Simulation of Applicant’s Proposed Action

Figure 3.13-1h

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

Visual Simulations: 8. Church Avenue Existing View and Visual Simulation

December 2015

3-189

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docs

December 2015

3-190

Chapter 3

3.14

Affected Environment

UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
3.14.1 Introduction
In this section, the potential for the alternatives to affect utilities or increase
demand for various public services is assessed. Utilities considered in this
section include electricity and natural gas, water, sewer and wastewater, landfills,
stormwater drainage, as well as telecommunications and cable. Public services
considered in the section include fire and police services, and schools. Potential
impacts to parks are considered in Section 3.15, Recreation Resources. Public
services are delivered by cities, counties, and special districts located in the
vicinity of the project area, while utilities are delivered by both public and private
entities. In general, the various alternatives are not expected to increase demand
for utilities and public services in the project area, because the Project is not
anticipated to increase population in the region (see Section 3.16, Population
and Housing). In addition, operations and maintenance of the various
alternatives is not anticipated to increase demand for these services. Therefore,
the focus of the section is on how utilities and public services may be affected by
the various alternatives; and this section will not focus on the potential for the
Project to increase growth and, therefore, increase demand for the various
utilities. The SCVWD will comply with all regulations associated with the
management of solid waste and would do so under each alternative.
The major resource documents used to complete this section are listed here:


California Department of Water Resources (DWR) and U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers (USACE). 2013. California’s Flood Future: Recommendations
for Managing the State’s Flood Risk (Public Review Draft). Sacramento,
California.



City of Gilroy Water Department. 2011. Annual Water Quality Report –
2011. Gilroy, California.



City of Gilroy. 2013. South County Regional Wastewater Authority.
Available online at:
http://www.cityofgilroy.org/cityofgilroy/city_hall/community_development/bl
es/industrial_waste/default. aspx. Accessed on February 16, 2013.



City of Gilroy, City of Morgan Hill, Santa Clara County. 2009. Draft
Regional Storm Water Management Plan. Santa Clara County, California.



City of Morgan Hill. 2010b. City Council Policy Briefing: Solid Waste
Management and Recycling. Morgan Hill, California.



Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2006. Santa
Clara LAFCO Service Reviews and Sphere of Influence
Recommendations for the South Central Santa Clara County Area. San
Jose, California.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-191

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2010. 2010
Countywide Fire Service Review. San Jose, California.



Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2011.
Countywide Water Service Review. San Jose, California.



Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012d. Where does our
water come from? South County. San Jose, California.

3.14.2 Project Area
The project area is within Morgan Hill and unincorporated Santa Clara County
(including the community of San Martin). The southern extent of the project area
is less than 1 mile from the City of Gilroy, although it lies within Gilroy’s SOI as
determined by LAFCO (see discussion in Section 3.8, Land Use and Planning).
The northern portion (Reaches 8, 7B, and portions of 7A) is within the City of
Morgan Hill; a portion of 7A is within unincorporated Santa Clara County, but
within Morgan Hill’s SOI. Reaches 6, 5, and 14 are within the San Martin planning
area while a portion (north of Masten Avenue) of Reach 4 is also in the San
Martin planning area. The southern portion of Reach 4 is within unincorporated
Santa Clara County and within the City of Gilroy’s SOI.
A small special district, Lions Gate Community Services, lies southwest of San
Martin and west of the Project. The district provides sewage collection,
wastewater treatment, and potable water services for residents within the service
area. The district is outside of the project area and is not discussed in this
section. Also, the project area lies within the Santa Clara County Open Space
Authority; a discussion of this special district is provided in Section 3.15,
Recreation Resources.
3.14.3 Environmental Setting
In this section, utility providers are first discussed, and then a summary of public
service providers is included. Table 3.14-1 provides a list of providers of utilities
and public services in the project area. Each service is discussed later in the
section.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-192

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.14-1 Summary of Utility and Public Service Providers
Utility/Public Service

Provider(s)

Notes

Electricity and Natural Gas

Pacific Gas & Electric

Water

City of Morgan Hill
San Martin County Water District
Numerous Mutual Water Companies

Sewer and Wastewater

City of Morgan Hill
City of Gilroy *
South County Regional Wastewater Authority
(SCRWA)
Septic tanks are used in unincorporated areas

Stormwater Drainage

City of Morgan Hill
Santa Clara County

Solid Waste

Recology South Valley
GreenWaste

Telecommunications

Verizon
AT&T

Cable

Charter Communications

Fire Protection

South County Fire District
Cal Fire
City of Gilroy Fire Department **

**Listed due to mutual aid
agreements.

Police Protection

City of Morgan Hill Police Department Santa
Clara County Sheriff’s Department City of
Gilroy Police Department ***

***Listed due to mutual aid
agreements.

Schools

Morgan Hill Unified School District
Gilroy Unified School District

Parks

See Section 3.15, Recreation Resources

The treatment facility is operated by
SCRWA (a Joint Powers Authority).
*City of Gilroy is listed because
wastewater system is operated in
cooperation with Morgan Hill.

Several landfills serve the project
area.

3.14.3.1 Utilities
In this section, the providers and service areas of the various utilities
within the project area are described. No information is provided on the
capacities of the various utilities, because the various alternatives are
not anticipated to create additional demand for these resources. The
facilities, including above- and below-ground lines (e.g., electricity,
natural gas, sewer, water, stormwater drainage, cable,
telecommunications including fiber-optic lines, etc.) managed by the
various utilities are widespread in the project area and within the Project
footprint and these facilities would be affected under the various
alternatives.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-193

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Electricity and Natural Gas
PG&E provides electricity and natural gas service in the project area
(California Energy Commission 2007).
Water
The City of Morgan Hill provides water service to residents and
businesses within the city limits (Santa Clara LAFCO 2006). Morgan Hill
also provides water to the unincorporated Holiday Lakes Subdivision west
of Anderson Reservoir. The source of the water is groundwater from the
Coyote Valley within the Santa Clara Subbasin and the Llagas Subbasin
(within the Gilroy-Hollister Basin). The San Martin County Water District
(SMCWD), an independent special district, serves a portion of the
unincorporated community of San Martin (Santa Clara LAFCO 2011); the
SMCWD draws groundwater from the Llagas Subbasin for delivery to their
customers. In addition to the service provided by Morgan Hill and the
SMCWD, several mutual water companies each serve relatively small
number of customers (generally less than 100) in and around the project
area. Just outside of the project area, the City of Gilroy uses nine wells to
extract groundwater from the Llagas Subbasin to provide water for city
residents (City of Gilroy Water Department 2011). Management of
groundwater resources in the vicinity of the project area is the
responsibility of SCVWD. Three sources are used to replenish
groundwater in the groundwater basins: (1) percolation of local rainfall; (2)
water captured in local reservoirs released to creeks and recharge ponds;
and (3) water imported from the Delta (SCVWD 2012d). In fact, the
Church Street Percolation ponds along Reach 6, divert water from Llagas
Creek into SCVWD recharge ponds.
Figure 3.14-1 shows the location of 11 wells that are within 500 feet of the
Project area. There is one well each along or near both Reaches 8 and
7B. There are three wells along Reach 14 while six of the wells are along
or near Reach 6. The SCVWD operates four of the wells, three of which
are close to the recharge ponds along Reach 6. The other SCVWD well is
along Reach 7B. The other seven wells are operated by private entities for
the purposes of water supply and/or irrigation wells.
Sewer and Wastewater
The City of Morgan Hill maintains a sewer system within the city and some
unincorporated areas adjacent to the city (City of Morgan Hill 2013a). The
effluent is sent via an interceptor sewer line to the wastewater treatment
facility near Gilroy. Also, the City of Gilroy maintains a sewer system for
residents within the city limits, and the wastewater is sent through the
system for treatment (City of Gilroy 2013). Wastewater from within the
cities of Morgan Hill and Gilroy is treated at the South County Regional
Wastewater Authority (a joint powers authority) in Gilroy. The waste
treatment facility is co-located with a recycled water facility (operated in
cooperation with the SCVWD). Sewer service is not provided throughout
much of the unincorporated areas, including San Martin, where
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-194

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

residences use septic systems.
Stormwater Drainage
The Llagas Creek channel is the primary stormwater infrastructure feature
within the project area. The City of Morgan Hill maintains laterals and
drains to West Little Llagas Creek within the city limits. The county is
responsible for stormwater drainage within the unincorporated portions of
the project area. Recently, the cities of Gilroy and Morgan Hill, along with
the county implemented a stormwater management plan (City of Gilroy,
City of Morgan Hill, and Santa Clara County 2009). The primary goal of
the plan is to provide a framework for Phase II of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit
compliance.
Solid Waste
Garbage, recycling, and organic waste is collected by Recology South
Valley in Gilroy, Morgan Hill, and parts of unincorporated San Martin.
Whereas, GreenWaste provides pick up for other unincorporated areas
within the project area. Both Recology and GreenWaste are private
companies operating on contract with the local jurisdictions. Recology also
maintains a transfer station in San Martin where construction and
demolition debris are accepted with the exception of dirt, rock, concrete,
and brick. The San Martin Transfer station is adjacent to the Project
footprint. As of 2011, Santa Clara County reported that the county has
greater than 15 years of landfill capacity remaining (Cal Recycle 2011).
Telecommunications and Cable
The primary provider of phone service in Gilroy and Morgan Hill is
Verizon, while the San Martin unincorporated area is served by AT&T
(California Public Utilities Commission 2007). Charter Communication
provides cable service within the project area (Federal Communications
Commission 2013).

3.14.3.2 Public Services
Fire Protection
Although the various agencies have defined jurisdictions, mutual aid
agreements make it possible that agencies will respond to incidents
outside of their jurisdictions. A countywide mutual aid agreement exists in
Santa Clara County (Santa Clara LAFCO 2010).
As of early 2013, the City of Morgan Hill commenced a 5-year agreement
with Cal Fire to provide fire protection within the city limits (CBS – San
Francisco Bay Area 2013). The Santa Clara County Fire District had
provided fire protection for Morgan Hill for the previous 17 years.
Currently, Cal Fire employs an additional 22 in-line firefighters, along with
two battalion chiefs in Morgan Hill. Cal Fire is contracted by the South
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-195

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Santa Clara Fire Protection District to provide fire protection for
unincorporated areas in the vicinity of the project area. In total, CAL Fire
operates five fire stations in the project area. Fire protection services
within the City of Gilroy are provided by the city’s fire department. The city
maintains three fire stations. Although the project area is outside of the
city limits, mutual aid agreements provide the possibility that the Gilroy
Fire Department could respond to a fire in the southern extent of the
project area. No fire stations are within the Project footprint.
Police Protection
Police services are provided by multiple agencies in the vicinity of the
project area (Santa Clara LAFCO 2006). Within the city limits of Morgan
Hill, police services are provided by the Police Department. The
department is approved to have 36 fulltime sworn officers. The Sheriff has
primary jurisdiction for police services in the unincorporated portions in the
project area. Currently, there is 586 fulltime, sworn badge staff and the
headquarters in San Jose. Along with providing police services for the
unincorporated portions of the county, the communities of Cupertino, Los
Altos Hills, and Saratoga are also served by the Sheriff. The Sheriff
maintains a sub-station in unincorporated San Martin; other communities
served by this sub-station include Rucker and Uvas Canyon, as well as
unincorporated areas around Morgan Hill and Gilroy. The Gilroy Police
Department has 65 sworn officers and has primary jurisdiction within the
city limits. The project area does not fall within the city limits of Gilroy, but
is within 1 mile. Mutual aid agreements are managed both at a countywide
and regional level. The police stations and sheriff station are outside of
the Project footprint.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-196

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.14-1 Wells Within 500 Feet of Upper Llagas Creek Project

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-197

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-198

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Schools
The entire Project is within Santa Clara County and there are 31 total
school districts (6 unified, 5 high school, and 21 elementary) in the county.
Two school districts, Morgan Hill Unified School District and Gilroy Unified
School District, serve the project area.
The Morgan Hill Unified School District serves the areas within the city
limits of Morgan Hill, a small area in South San Jose and unincorporated
areas in the county south of Bernal Avenue to Church Avenue in San
Martin (Morgan Hill Unified School District 2013). The district has 14
schools and an enrollment of 8,700 students. Britton Middle School is
adjacent to the Project footprint; in fact, the ball fields adjacent to the
school would be within the construction zone under the Culvert/Channel
Alternative. This is discussed in greater detail in Section 3.15, Recreation
Resources. The Gilroy Unified School District (2013) serves the
southernmost regions within the county including the City of Gilroy and
unincorporated areas. The southern extent of the project area (south of
Church Avenue) is within this district. There are 16 schools in the district
serving over 11,000 students.
Parks
Information on potential impacts to parks is addressed in Section 3.15,
Recreation Resources.
3.15

RECREATION RESOURCES
3.15.1 Introduction
In this section, recreation resources and providers within the vicinity of the project
area are discussed, and then the alternatives are reviewed for potential impacts.
The completion of the Project would not create additional demand at existing
local or regional parks, nor is it anticipated that the Project would require the
completion of additional parks that would adversely affect the environment.
Therefore, the focus of this section is to assess if the alternatives have the
potential to physically impact existing recreational resources in the project area,
such as parks or trails located within the Project footprint, which may be impacted
by construction.
3.15.2 Project Area
The Project area is within Morgan Hill, and unincorporated areas within the
county (including the community of San Martin). The northern portion
(Reaches 8, 7B and portions of 7A) is within the City of Morgan Hill; a portion of
Reach 7A is within unincorporated Santa Clara County, but within Morgan Hill’s
SOI1. Reaches 6, 5, and 14 are within the San Martin planning area, while a

1

The SOI for SCVWD is coterminous with its boundary and County’s boundary. The SOI for the SCVWD was last
reviewed in 2007 and no changes were made at that time

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-199

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

portion (north of Masten Avenue) of Reach 4 is also in the San Martin planning
area. The southern portion of Reach 4 is within unincorporated Santa Clara
County and within the City of Gilroy’s SOI. Public recreation opportunities in the
vicinity of the project area are delivered by the following providers: City of Morgan
Hill Parks and Recreation, Santa Clara County Parks, the City of Gilroy’s
Community Services, and the Santa Clara County Open Space Authority.
The City of Morgan Hill provides a wide range of recreational opportunities from
small neighborhood parks to larger parks with sports fields, as well as special use
facilities such as an aquatic center and a skate and bicycle motocross (BMX)
Park. Generally, the region has a fair amount of natural resource based
recreational opportunities including hiking, mountain biking, camping, and nature
study, as Santa Clara County Parks and Santa Clara County Open Space
Authority maintain parks and open spaces throughout South Santa Clara County.
These opportunities are generally outside of the project area, but accessible to
the local population, in the hills and peaks of the Santa Cruz Mountains (to the
west) and Diablo Range (to the east). In addition, a large State Park, Henry W.
Coe, is about 15 miles east of Morgan Hill. Figure-3.15-1 shows the location of
recreational resources pertinent to this section.
3.15.3 Environmental Setting
Santa Clara County Parks
Santa Clara County Parks (2013) maintains 45,000 acres of urban and
undeveloped parks and trails throughout the county. Several parks are in the
general vicinity of the project area including the following with acreages:


Anderson Lake (3,109 acres)



Chesbro Reservoir (216 acres)



Coyote Lake – Harvey Bear Ranch (4,595 acres)



Uvas Reservoir (626 acres)

These facilities serve residents in the vicinity of the project area but are not within
the Project footprint and are not expected to be impacted by the various
alternatives.
Santa Clara County Parks maintains 125 miles of bike trails (both paved and for
mountain bikes) throughout the county and numerous trails designated for hiking.
Close to the project area, Coyote Creek Parkway is a paved 15-mile-long trail
from Coyote Heller County Park to Cochrane Road in the northern part of Morgan
Hill. The trail is multipurpose for both hikers and bikers.
Santa Clara Open Space Authority
The Santa Clara Open Space Authority, a special district, preserves open space
throughout much of the county, including 548-acre Coyote Ridge north of Morgan
Hill and 5,575-acre Upper Coyote, and an assortment of lands and easements
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-200

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

obtained over a 10-year period, in the hills east of Morgan Hill and Gilroy. These
facilities are not within the Project footprint.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD)
The West Little Llagas Creek Trail (Reaches 7A and 7B) is on SCVWD-owned
land. The trail was recently upgraded in cooperation with the City of Morgan Hill.
The trail provides opportunities for walking, biking and other trail related activities.
The trail runs along the creek from Spring Avenue (about 0.25 mile south of
downtown) through Watsonville Road. The trail is on both sides of the channel
from La Crosse Drive south to Watsonville Road. The trail is within the Project
footprint and would be impacted by the action alternatives. This route is paved
and includes some small areas of landscaping and several benches. The trail is
operated in conjunction with the City of Morgan Hill, per a Joint Use Agreement.
The City of Morgan Hill is responsible for maintenance and upkeep, such as trash
and graffiti removal. Under the Joint Use Agreement, it is noted that the trail
should not “unreasonably interfere” the SCVWD’s goal of using these lands for
flood protection. The agreement also states that any trail improvements as
installed by the City of Morgan Hill are subject to removal if the area is deemed
necessary for flood protection, as is the case for the action alternatives.
City of Morgan Hill
The City of Morgan Hill maintains parks and recreational facilities in the city.
According to Santa Clara LAFCO, the City maintains over 100 acres of parks with
the inclusion of the outdoor sports center (LAFCO 2006). These include
neighborhood parks, sports fields, an aquatic center, and a skate and BMX park,
among other facilities. The City seeks to maintain a variety of park types and
experiences by developing different classifications for the parks and the varied
recreational experiences. The City classifies and maintains the following park
types: mini park (< 1.5 acre); neighborhood park (3–10 acres); community park
and community/school park (10 acres minimum); trails/linear parks (no acreage
limit); sports park (20 acres minimum), and special use facilities (City of Morgan
Hill 2006). In total, the department lists 26 parks or facilities within the city limits.
Additional facilities are available adjacent to, and in cooperation with, Morgan Hill
Unified Schools.
A review of a park map reveals that the Centennial Recreation Center is very
close to the Project footprint. The Centennial Recreation Center operates in
cooperation with the Mount Madonna YMCA. The 54,000-square-foot facility has
workout facilities, an indoor pool, and facilities for teen and senior programs. The
facility is adjacent to the West Llagas Trail just north of Edmondson Avenue.
Also, the Project footprint is close to Galvan Park and Britton Field ball fields,
adjacent to Britton Middle School (both along Reach 8). In fact, the
Culvert/Channel Alternative would cross under the ball fields.
In 2008, the City produced a Bikeways Master Plan (2008) update to both track
progress from the 2001 plan and to develop future goals. This section focuses on
what the City designates as Class I: Bike Paths and paths that are separated

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-201

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

from automobile roadways and not on trails with features (such as bike lanes)
available along roads. The 2008 master plan shows four Class 1 trails in the city.

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-202

Chapter 3

Figure 3.15-1

Affected Environment

Recreational Facilities in Close Proximity to Project Footprint

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-203

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-204

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

City of Gilroy
The City of Gilroy Community Services maintains over 125 acres of developed
parklands and 129 acres of preserve land (Santa Clara LAFCO 2006). The City
of Gilroy does not maintain any parks outside of the city limits; therefore, there
are no parks within or near the Project footprint.
Other Recreational Facilities
Lake Silveira, located near Reach 7A, currently receives recreation use along
informal trails in and around the lake. However, Lake Silveira is not a sanctioned
recreation site and public access is not formally allowed; people do currently
recreate near the lake. The lake is within the Project footprint, as it would be
altered as part of restoration of the creek in all action alternatives for the Project.
3.16

POPULATION AND HOUSING
3.16.1 Introduction
In this section, existing conditions related to population and housing in the vicinity
of the project area are provided and the potential impacts of the various
alternatives are assessed.
The major resource documents used to complete this section are listed here:


Association of Bay Area Governments and Metropolitan Transportation
Commission. 2013. Selected Census Data for the San Francisco Bay
Area.



City of Gilroy. 2011. 2007–2014 Housing Element (Public Review Draft).
Gilroy, California.



City of Morgan Hill. 2010c. Draft Housing Element. Morgan Hill,
California.



Santa Clara County. 2010. County of Santa Clara Housing Element
Update 2009–2014. Adopted by the Board of Supervisors, August 2. San
Jose, California.



State of California, Department of Finance. 2013. Report P-1 (County):
State and County Total Population Projections, 2010–2060. Sacramento,
California.



U.S. Census Bureau. 1992. 1990 Census of Population: General
Population Characteristics - California. Section 3 of 3. Washington D.C.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-205

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

3.16.2 Project Area
The project area is entirely within Santa Clara County including parts of the City
of Morgan Hill and unincorporated areas within the county. The project area is
not within the city limits of Gilroy, but is within the SOI 2 as determined by LAFCO.
3.16.3 Environmental Setting
Generally, the project area is suburban and agricultural. The Project area has
experienced a continuing transition of agricultural lands being converted for
residential and commercial development and the population has increased
substantially since the 1970s. The northern portion (Reaches 8, 7B, and portions
of 7A) of the project area lies within the City of Morgan Hill; a portion of Reach 7A
is within unincorporated Santa Clara County, but within Morgan Hill’s SOI.
Reaches 6, 5, and 14 are within the San Martin planning area; in addition, a part
of Reach 4 (north of Masten Avenue) is also in the San Martin planning area. The
southern extent of Reach 4 is within unincorporated Santa Clara County and
within the City of Gilroy’s SOI.
3.16.3.1

Population
Table 3-16.1 provides census data for communities in close
proximity to the project area. In general, population has increased
rapidly within Santa Clara County (67%) from 1970–2010. Morgan
Hill and Gilroy have grown at even a greater rate over the same
time period; although, some growth is attributable to annexation of
unincorporated areas. San Martin is within unincorporated Santa
Clara County and is a Census Designated Place (CDP).
Population totals are provided for San Martin since 1990, the first
census where CDPs were delineated from county-level data.
Similar to Morgan Hill and Gilroy, the San Martin CDP has
increased substantially since 1990.

Table 3.16-1 Population Trends for Communities in the Vicinity of Project area 1, 2

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Increase
1970–2010

Santa Clara

1,064,714

1,295,071

1,497,577

1,682,585

1,781,642

67%

Morgan Hill

6,485

17,060

23,928

33,556

37,822

483%

Gilroy

12,665

21,641

31,487

41,464

48,821

285%

1,713 2

4,230

7,027

--

City / Community

San Martin (CDP)

Census tracts were
not delineated

1 Association of Bay Area Governments and Metropolitan Transportation Commission (2013)
2 U.S. Census Bureau (1992)

2

SOI refers to “boundaries for all agencies within its jurisdiction, indicating the physical boundary and service
area each agency is expected to serve”. Source: Santa Clara County 2006.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-206

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

In general, the rate of growth is anticipated to decrease substantially within Santa Clara
County over the next several decades. The California Department of Finance provides
population projections by county (Table 3.16-2). When comparing the 2010 census figure
listed in the previous table with the projected 2060 population, the increase is expected to be
23 percent over the time period.
Table 3.16-2 Population Projections for Santa Clara County 1
City / Community

Santa Clara County

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

Projected Increase
2010–2060

1,889,898 1,986,545 2,083,710 2,152,199 2,198,503

23%

1 California Department of Finance (2013)

Housing
In general, there are some differences in the household
characteristics of the three communities (Morgan Hill, Gilroy, and
San Martin) compared to Santa Clara County as a whole. Table
3.16-3 presents housing related data for Santa Clara County and
for the communities in close proximity to the project area. Both
Morgan Hill and Gilroy have vacancy rates close to the average for
the county as a whole, while San Martin’s vacancy rate is
substantially higher. Compared to the county, all three
communities have a lower percentage of multi-unit structures, a
higher percentage of owner occupied units, and a larger average
household size.
Table 3.16-3 Population Projections for Communities in the Vicinity of Project area 1

City / Community

Housing
Units

Vacant
Units

Santa Clara County

579,329

2.3%

Morgan Hill

11,091

Gilroy
San Martin (CDP)

% of Units
in Multi Unit
Structures

Average
Househol
d Size

Owner
Occupied

Renter
Occupied

32.8%

59.8%

40.2%

2.92

2.2%

15.5%

72.5%

27.5%

3.05

12,152

2.3%

24.9%

75.9%

24.1%

3.46

2,122

6.1%

6.3%

65.7%

34.3%

3.46

1 Association of Bay Area Governments and Metropolitan Transportation Commission (2013)

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-207

Chapter 3

3.17

Affected Environment

SOCIOECONOMIC RESOURCES
This section analyzes potential impacts of the Applicant’s Proposed Action on social and
economic (socioeconomic) resources within the project area. Impacts to specific
components of socioeconomic characteristics including population, housing, land use,
recreation, and public utilities are addressed in other section of the EIS. Impacts to
employment, income, taxes, and similar socioeconomic factors associated with each of
the Project alternatives are identified and assessed in this section relative to the existing
condition of the potentially affected socioeconomic resources. A set of criteria is
developed for evaluating the significance of each impact and potential mitigation
measures are identified for any impacts determined significant.
3.17.1 Introduction
The Applicant’s Proposed Action is located in southern Santa Clara County along
13 miles of Upper Llagas Creek bisecting the City of Morgan Hill, the San Martin
CDP, and the City of Gilroy. The Project area spans seven reaches of Upper
Llagas Creek (8, 7B, 7A, 6, 5, 4, and 14) and encompasses approximately 300
acres. By design, the Applicant’s Proposed Action would increase flood capacity
in the upper reaches, while ensuring no induced flooding in the lower reaches.
Socioeconomic resources considered in this impact analysis include population
and housing; components of the economic base, such as employment, income,
economic output, and fiscal resources; and land use. Cardno ENTRIX staff
compiled baseline information on these socioeconomic resources by searching
databases of social, demographic and economic data, and indices reported for
various geographic levels of detail within and around the project area. The
primary sources for this study include:


U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. 2011. American
Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, 2007–2011.



U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. 2009. American
Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, 2009.



U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. 2010a. ZIP Code
Business Patterns (ZBP).



U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. 2000. DP-3 Median
Value (Dollars) For All Owner-Occupied Housing Units, 2000.



U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011b.
Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey, May 2011.



Minnesota Impact Analysis for Planning (IMPLAN) Group, Inc. 2013. Total
Output by Industry, Santa Clara County, California, 2010.



State of California Board of Equalization. 2011. 2010–11 Annual Report,
Statistical Appendix.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-208

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

These data sources are widely utilized by social scientists and many are
frequently referenced in reports by the general media.
3.17.2 Project Area
The project area for the socioeconomic impacts analysis is the area formed
collectively by the City of Morgan Hill, the San Martin CDP, and the City of Gilroy.
These cities are located in southern Santa Clara County along U.S. 101,
approximately 25 miles southeast of San Jose. These cities contain the entire
Project area and the primary socioeconomic resources potentially subject to
direct and indirect impacts. While the demand for construction labor may
indirectly impact socioeconomic resources in additional nearby population
centers, this impact analysis focuses on the jurisdictions in and nearby the
Project area. Figure 3.17-1 displays the socioeconomics project area with
reference to various geographic reporting units for the social, demographic, and
economic data informing this analysis.
3.17.3 Environmental Setting
This section describes the existing condition of the socioeconomic resources
within the project area. These existing conditions were used to conduct
qualitative and quantitative analysis of potential impacts of the various Project
alternatives. Although this section relies on the latest available data for each
intended demonstrative table available at the time of the study, much of the data
pre-dates 2012 and certain economic indicators in the project area may have
since changed.
Socioeconomic resources in the project area are described at the city/community
level of detail, where available or estimated, with county level data presented for
context. While other sections describe the subject resource by river reach, much
of the key economic data sources are not of sufficient geographic detail. Further,
evaluations of economic resources may be distorted if conducted for highly
detailed geographies that do not approximate the true geographic extent of the
relevant market or accounting unit for the resource. 1 Table 3.17-1 provides
general correspondence between the cities in the project area, ZIP codes, and
the reaches of Upper Llagas Creek forming the Project area.2

1

2

For example, although available for individual Census Tracts closely corresponding to individual river
reaches, the cumulative housing stock in and around the Project area is the relevant baseline metric for
evaluating potential impacts associated with in- migration of construction labor. In the case of flood
protection afforded by the Project, socioeconomic resources potentially affected may extend outside the
physical area nearby the river reach.
ZIP Code Business Patterns data published by the U.S. Census Bureau are utilized to describe business
establishments within the project area. As reflected in Table 3.17-1, this study assumes ZIP code 95037 to
represent Morgan Hill, ZIP code 95046 to represent the San Martin CDP, and ZIP code 95020 to represent
Gilroy.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-209

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-1 Geography of the Socioeconomics Project Area

City / Community

Corresponded to:
ZIP Code

Morgan Hill

95037

Census Tracts

Reach

5123.05, 5123.07, 5123.08, 5123.09,
5123.10,

8, 7A, 7B

5123.11, 5123.12, 5123.13, 5123.14
San Martin (CDP)

95046

5124.01, 5124.02

6, 5, 14

Gilroy

95020

5124.01, 5125.03, 5125.05, 5125.06,
5125.08,

4*

5125.09, 5125.10, 5126.02, 5126.03,
5126.04
ZIP code, Census Tract, and reach are corresponded to the majority city/community by
acreage.
* Reach 4 does not physically extend into the City of Gilroy but it is the nearest reach to this
jurisdiction.
Population and Housing
Section 3-16, Population and Housing, presents historic and current population
levels and detailed housing characteristics for communities within the project
area and Santa Clara County. Many of the following statistics are directly
reported in Section 3.16, or are derived from the statistics reported therein.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-210

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.17-1 Socioeconomic Resources Project Area

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-211

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-212

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

As of 2010, the population of the project area was 93,670 people: 37,822 in
Morgan Hill, 7,027 in San Martin, and 48,821 in Gilroy. The project area has
been characterized by substantial population growth in recent history.
Population within the project area increased 63 percent between 1990 and
2010 (3.2% annually) compared with a 17 percent increase (0.9% annually)
throughout the remainder of Santa Clara County. Access via U.S. 101 to the
expanding high-tech job base in Silicon Valley has been largely responsible
for population growth in the project area, particularly Morgan Hill, which is
known as a bedroom community for the high-tech industry. Over the next 20
years the rate of population growth in Santa Clara County is expected to be
slower than in the previous 20 years.
As of 2010, there were approximately 25,000 housing units within the project
area. This accounts for just 4 percent of all housing units in Santa Clara County.
Aside from San Martin, housing availability within the project area is somewhat
limited. Vacant units account for approximately 2 percent of all housing units in
Morgan Hill, Gilroy (approximately 523 units), and Santa Clara County compared
with 6 percent in San Martin. San Martin accounts for less than 10 percent of the
housing units in the project area.
Owner-occupancy is more prevalent in the project area than in Santa Clara
County as a whole. Owners occupy approximately 75 percent of the housing
units in Morgan Hill and Gilroy compared with 60 percent in Santa Clara County.
Additionally, single-family units are more prevalent in the project area (80%)
relative to Santa Clara County as a whole (67%). Within the project area, multifamily units are more prevalent in Gilroy (25% of units), relative to Morgan Hill
(15% of units) and San Martin (6% of units).
Whether a person owns or rents, housing costs are the major component of living
expenses for most of the United States population. Housing comprises 29
percent of living costs nationwide (CCER 2010). At the same time, a home can
represent a family’s most valuable real asset over the long term. The cost of
housing in the San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA) is among the highest in the nation.
As of 2009, the median home value in the project area was just over $500,000,
17 percent below the Santa Clara County median home value (Table 3.17-2).
Even in light of the recent housing crisis, the value of homes in the project area
appreciated by 13 percent between 2000 and 2009. With typical loan terms, a
prospective homeowner in the project area can expect to face approximately
$2,400 in monthly mortgage principal, interest, taxes, and insurance. Rental
housing in the project area costs approximately half as much as homeownership.
Median rents ranged from $1,222 (Gilroy) to $1,485 (Morgan Hill), increasing
while moving south to north through the project area toward Silicon Valley (U.S.
Census Bureau 2012). Rental rates in Morgan Hill are higher than in Santa Clara
County as a whole; this is due, in part, to larger supply of rental housing as a
proportion of total housing in the rest of Santa Clara County. 3
3

No analysis of the comparability of rental units (e.g., size, # bedrooms) between the areas was conducted for
the purpose of this study.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-213

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-2 Median Home Value, 2000 to 2009
Median Home Value

2000

2009

(2009 dollars)

Percentage
Change

Gilroy/Morgan Hill Urbanized Area

$473,694

$536,500

13.3%

Santa Clara County

$526,244

$645,500

22.7%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau: Census 2000; U.S. Census Bureau: ACS 2009 1-Year Estimates

Land Use
Land is a factor of production and, thus, an important socioeconomic resource.
Land use is constrained by both social (e.g., community connectivity, safety)
and economic development criteria. Flood protection objectives also inform
land use planning. Section 3.8, Land Use and Planning, describes the land use
patterns within the Project footprint and the 1-percent flood extent along Upper
Llagas Creek. 4
Project Footprint
At approximately 300 acres, the Project footprint comprises 2 percent of acreage within the
boundaries of the cities/communities forming the socioeconomics project area (not including
roads). 5 Land designated as Residential and Open Space comprises the majority of the
Project footprint (80%), followed by Agriculture (16%). Table 3.17-3 describes the land use
within the Project footprint in and around the cities and community forming the
socioeconomics project area. Much of the Project footprint in Open Space use near Reaches
8, 7A, and 7B is Llagas Creek itself (Section 3.8, Land Use and Planning; Figure 3.8-1a,
Land Use in the Project Vicinity).
Table 3.17-3 Land Use Within the Project Footprint
City / Community

Reach

Land Use

Morgan Hill

8, 7A, 7B

Open Space (61%); Residential (27%); Roads (7%); Commercial (10%)

San Martin (CDP)

6, 5, 14

Residential (90%); Open Space (9%)

Gilroy

4

Agriculture (74%); Residential (26%)

4

5

While not congruent with the full extent of the socioeconomics project area, information on land use in the 1percent flood extent is useful for informing the specific significance criteria developed to evaluate potential
socioeconomic impacts of the Project.
A portion of the 1-percent flood extent covers unincorporated areas of Santa Clara County within the project
area whereas city acreage is calculated based on the boundary lines of the incorporated areas.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-214

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Existing 1-percent Flood Extent
At approximately 3,000 acres, the existing 1-percent flood extent comprises
approximately 19 percent of the acreage within the boundaries of the
cities/communities forming the socioeconomics project area (not including roads)
(Section 3.8, Land Use and Planning; Table 4.8-5, Acres of Land Uses Flooded
Under the Various Alternatives). 6 Land designated for residential use and
agricultural use comprise approximately 21 and 53 percent of the flood extent,
respectively, for a total of 74 percent. Another 11 percent of the flood extent is
comprised of open space, while utilities infrastructure, roads and commercial land
comprise much of the remaining 15 percent.
Economic Base
Employment
Employment is the means by which people earn income. High unemployment is
an indicator of a weak economy. Table 3.17-4 describes the employment
characteristics of the project area. The labor force is the number of persons
living in the area with employment or who are actively seeking employment.
The labor force residing in the project area averaged 47,809 during 2007–2011,
comprising 5 percent of Santa Clara County’s total labor force. Over the same
period, unemployment among the labor force in the project area averaged 10.3
percent, compared to 8.6 percent in Santa Clara County, 9.6 percent in
California, and 7.6 percent in the United States (Bureau of Labor Statistics
2012).
Table 3.17-4 Labor Force and Unemployment, 2007–2011

Area

Labor Force

Unemployment Rate

Morgan Hill

19,439

9.3%

San Martin

3,792

13.0%

Gilroy

24,578

10.9%

Santa Clara County

931,510

8.6%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011 American Community Survey

6

Ibid
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-215

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

The industry composition of the employed population residing within the project
area is presented in Table 3.17-5. The top five industry sectors, by number
employed, comprised 65 percent of total employment in the project area. These
sectors include: Education and Health Services, 18.7 percent; Manufacturing,
15.4 percent; Retail Trade, 11.5 percent; Professional, Management and
Administrative (private), 11.2 percent; and Construction, 8.5 percent. Although
with different composition, the same five industry sectors comprise the top five by
number employed for the resident labor force of each of the three communities
within the project area and Santa Clara County.
In the context of assessing socioeconomic impacts of the Applicant’s Proposed
Action, it is important to recognize that not everyone who lives in the project area
also works in the project area.7 Approximately 50 percent of the labor force within
the project area commutes 30 minutes or longer to work, with 24 percent
commuting 45 minutes or longer (U.S. Census Bureau 2011). Table 3.17-6
presents estimates of the number of persons employed at establishments in each
industry sector within the project area, regardless of where they reside.8 The top
five industry sectors by number employed comprise 72 percent of the
employment located within the project area. These industries are: Retail Trade,
19.9 percent; Manufacturing 14.8 percent; Education and Health Services 14.3
percent; Arts, Entertaining and Food Services, 13.1 percent; and Professional,
Management and Administrative (private), 10.7 percent.
Future employment within the project area is uncertain. For the San JoseSunnyvale-Santa Clara MSA, which covers San Benito and Santa Clara
counties, the projections show a 21.6 percent increase in total employment from
2010 to 2020 (California Employment Development Department 2011).9 The
Information sector is projected to have the largest growth at 45.6 percent.
Construction has the second highest projected growth at 34.5 percent.

7

8

Employment statistics based on place of residence may provide a misleading picture of the industry sectors active within the
project area, especially in smaller less populated geographic units. For example, in California and in other states where
counties are relatively large, presenting data on employment by county of residence is likely to accurately reflect the industry
sectors active within the area.
Employment by industry, based on place of work, is published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis for counties and MSAs.
Data are not available for individual cities and towns. An estimate of employment by industry within the communities forming
the project area was derived using ZIP Code Business Patterns data published by the U.S. Census Bureau. The ZIP Code
Business Patterns data provides the number of private establishments by size, as determined by a range of number of
employees (e.g., 1-4 employees, 5–9 employees, etc.). Additionally, the data provides the total number of paid employees for
a sample pay period. To estimate the number of employees by industry, the midpoint of each firm size range was computed.
For each industry, the number of firms in each size range was multiplied by the midpoint number of employees in the size
range. The estimated number of employees by firm size was then totaled for each industry, summed across industries, and
the percent of the estimated total was computed for each industry. The estimated percent of employees in each industry was
then used to allocate the total number of paid employees reported for the sample pay period across industries.

9

The California Employment Development Department publishes employment projections for MSAs
covering one or more counties, but not for cities and towns within the county.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-216

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-5 Employment by Place of Residence

Sant
a
#

San Martin

#

%

#

%

#

%

Farming

94

0.5

55

1.6

138

0.6

287

0.7

1,692

Agriculture, forestry,
fishing and hunting,
and mining

267

1.5

123

3.7

1,082

4.9

1,472

3.4

4,425

1,194

6.7

422

12.6

2,033

9.2

3,649

8.5

47,005

Wholesale trade

573

3.2

84

2.5

498

2.3

1,155

2.7

20,252

Information

490

2.8

15

0.4

389

1.8

894

2.1

32,627

1,173

6.6

134

4.0

1,306

5.9

2,613

6.1

36,330

911

5.1

66

2.0

942

4.3

1,919

4.5

22,421

Manufacturing

3,025

17.1

705

21.0

2,920

13.3

6,650

15.4

167,034

Retail trade

1,319

7.4

347

10.3

3,301

15.0

4,967

11.5

81,918

378

2.1

272

8.1

477

2.2

1,127

2.6

23,578

FIRE

1,033

5.8

107

3.2

1,021

4.6

2,161

5.0

44,015

Professional,
Management, and
Administrative

2,415

13.6

331

9.9

2,069

9.4

4,815

11.2

152,960

Education and Health
Services

3,691

20.8

391

11.7

3,996

18.1

8,078

18.7

157,349

Arts, Entertainment,
and Food Services

1,162

6.6

302

9.0

1,846

8.4

3,310

7.7

60,638

Total

17,725

100.0

3,354

100.0

22,018

100.0

43,097

100.0

852,244

Industry Sector

Construction

Other services,
except public
administration
Public administration

Transportation and
Utilities

Gilroy

Project
area
#
%

Morgan Hill

FIRE stands for Finance, Insurance and Real Estate.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007–2011 American Community Survey; U.S. Department of Agriculture, National
Agricultural
Statistics Service: 2007 Census of Agriculture.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-217

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-6 Employment by Place of Work
Morgan Hill

San Martin

Gilroy

Project area
Total

Industry Sector

Santa Clara
County

#

%

#

%

#

%

#

%

#

%

Farming

94

0.7

55

4.7

138

0.9

287

0.9

1,692

0.2

Agriculture (support),
forestry, fishing and
hunting, and mining

9

0.1

4

0.3

64

0.4

77

0.2

222

0.0

867

6.0

154

13.2

1,397

8.6

2,418

7.6

34,068

4.0

1,770

12.3

61

5.2

644

4.0

2,475

7.8

86,564

10.2

Information

450

3.1

5

0.4

180

1.1

635

2.0

64,073

7.6

Other services,
except public
administration

518

3.6

27

2.3

630

3.9

1,175

3.7

26,796

3.2

Manufacturing

3,191

22.1

188

16.1

1,307

8.1

4,686

14.8

89,570

10.6

Retail trade

1,605

11.1

89

7.6

4,630

28.6

6,324

19.9

76,686

9.1

43

0.3

34

2.9

301

1.9

378

1.2

11,556

1.4

633

4.4

39

3.3

526

3.3

1,198

3.8

38,005

4.5

Professional,
Management, and
Administrative

1,708

11.8

191

16.4

1,504

9.3

3,403

10.7

213,956

25.3

Education and Health
Services

1,976

13.7

26

2.2

2,540

15.7

4,542

14.3

129,133

15.2

Arts, Entertainment,
and Food Services

1,551

10.8

294

25.2

2,303

14.2

4,148

13.1

76,423

9.0

Total

14,415

100.0

1,167

100.0

16,164

100.0

31,746

100.0

847,052

100.0

Construction
Wholesale trade

Transportation and
Utilities
FIRE

FIRE stands for Finance, Insurance and Real Estate.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 Zip Code Business Patterns; Author’s Calculations

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-218

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Income and Earnings
Income is a key indicator of a population’s economic well-being. Income earned
by the population through employment is recirculated throughout the local
economy through expenditures on goods and services and tax revenue. Typical
measures of income include annual income per person (per-capita income) and
annual income per household (typically reported for the median household). The
poverty rate measures the proportion of individuals within a given geographic
area with incomes lower than the threshold identified as the poverty line for
individuals or households with similar family characteristics (Section 3.19,
Environmental Justice).
Income data for the project area are presented in Table 3.17-7. Annual income of
the median household in Morgan Hill averaged $94,301 during 2007–2011. This
was as much as 25 percent higher than the median household elsewhere in the
project area and 6 percent higher than that of Santa Clara County. Despite this
household income disparity, per-capita income in Morgan Hill and San Martin
were similar, but substantially higher than in Gilroy. The poverty rate is similar
throughout the project area, at approximately 11 percent, and higher than the 9.2
percent poverty rate prevailing for Santa Clara County. The data imply that one
out of every ten households in the project area live on income below the poverty
line.
Table 3.17-7 Income and Poverty, 2007–2011
Area

Per-Capita

Median

Poverty

Income

Household Income

Rate

Morgan Hill

$39,433

$94,301

11.0%

San Martin

$37,094

$77,188

11.9%

Gilroy

$28,719

$75,483

11.0%

Santa Clara County

$40,698

$89,064

9.2%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007–2011 American Community Survey
Data on earnings and wages by industry sector indicate the importance of individual sectors to
income generation and the quality of jobs within the area. Earnings and wage data are reported
for counties and MSAs, but not for individual communities. Table 3.17-8 presents total earnings
in Santa Clara County by industry sector during 2010. Total earnings amounted to $101,805
million. Earnings in the Manufacturing sector total $26,784.1 million (26.3%) followed by
$23,022.8 million in earnings within the Professional, Management, and Administrative sector
(22.6%). Earnings by the Education and Health Services ($10,214.5 million) and Information
($11,056.6 million) combined to account for another 20 percent of earnings countywide.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-219

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-8 Earnings by Industry, Santa Clara County 2010
Industry Sector

$ (millions)

%

Farming

$107.2

0.1%

Agriculture (support), forestry, fishing and hunting, and

$79.4

0.1%

Construction

$3,269.6

3.2%

Manufacturing

$26,784.1

26.3%

Wholesale trade

$4,968.7

4.9%

Retail trade

$4,265.5

4.2%

Transportation and Utilities

$1,158.8

1.1%

Information

$11,056.6

10.9%

FIRE

$4,347.2

4.3%

Professional, Management, and Administrative

$23,022.8

22.6%

Education and Health Services

$10,214.5

10.0%

Arts, Entertainment, and Food Services

$2,521.6

2.5%

Other services, except public administration

$2,089.2

2.1%

Government/ Public Administration

$7,919.8

7.8%

Total

$101,805.1

100.0%

Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis 2010

Economic Output
Total Industry Output (TIO) reflects the value of intermediate and final goods and services
produced. It can be measured from either the demand side (purchases) or the supply side
(outlays plus value added). When reported by industry, output measures indicate the relative
economic importance of each industry. TIO estimates for Santa Clara County are presented in
Table 3.17-9. At $122,190.3 million, the Manufacturing sector accounts for nearly half the value
of economic output in Santa Clara County. Together, industry sectors Financial, Insurance, and
Real Estate (FIRE); Professional, Management and Administrative; and Information combine to
account for another 34 percent of total output. It is worth noting that these patterns do not
adequately represent the industry composition of Gross Regional Product (GRP) within the
project area. In particular, there are major differences between the type of manufacturing in
Silicon Valley and the manufacturing activities in the project area. 10

10

The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code for Manufacturing includes 300 distinct
industries ranging from Fruit and Vegetable Canning, to Sawmills, to Semiconductor and Related Device
Manufacturing.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-220

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-9 Total Industry Output, Santa Clara County 2010
Industry Sector

$ (millions)

%

Farming

$247.7

0.1%

Agriculture (support), forestry, fishing and hunting, and $728.5

0.3%

Construction

$7,389.9

2.8%

Manufacturing

$122,190.3

45.5%

Wholesale trade

$9,058.1

3.4%

Retail trade

$8,071.9

3.0%

Transportation and Utilities

$3,140.8

1.2%

Information

$23,587.7

8.8%

FIRE

$33,981.4

12.7%

Professional, Management, and Administrative

$34,001.5

12.7%

Education and Health Services

$15,491.2

5.8%

Arts, Entertainment, and Food Services

$6,276.9

2.3%

Other services, except public administration

$4,278.1

1.6%

Total

$268,443.9

100.0%

FIRE stands for Finance, Insurance and Real Estate.
Source: Minnesota IMPLAN Group 2013; USDA/Santa Clara County Agricultural Commissioner.

Fiscal Resources (Property and Sales Taxes)
Property Taxes
Property taxes are a tax levied on the assessed value of land, buildings, and
improvements. Counties, cities, schools, and special districts in California depend
on the property tax as a primary source of revenue, which can be used for
multiple purposes.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2010–2011, the locally assessed value of county-assessed
property in Morgan Hill and Gilroy was $6.2 billion and $5.6 billion, respectively
(State of California, Board of Equalization 2011a). This resulted in approximately
$68.6 million in tax revenues for Gilroy and $73.9 million in tax revenues for
Morgan Hill 11. The net taxable assessed value of property in Santa Clara County
was $297.3 billion and tax revenues generated from property tax assessments
totaled over $3.5 billion in Santa Clara County (State of California, Board of
Equalization 2011b).
Sales Taxes
Sales taxes are levied on the consumption of goods and services and are
calculated as a percentage of the sales price. The base 2013 sales tax rate in
California is 7.5 percent, of which 0.25 percent is apportioned to the local county
transportation funds and 0.75 percent is apportioned to the local cities and county
as operation funds percent (State of California, Board of Equalization 2013a).
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-221

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

The effective sales tax rate in any area can be higher due to local assessments.
In 2013, the sales tax rate in Santa Clara County and the entire project area was
8.625 percent (State of California, Board of Equalization 2013b). In FY 2010–
2011, Santa Clara County received a total of $235.4 million in sales tax
revenues, of which $4.3 million was distributed to Morgan Hill and $9.3 million
was distributed to Gilroy (State of California, Board of Equalization 2011c).
Economic Resources Subject to Flooding Addressed by the Applicant’s
Proposed Action
Flood events can have tremendous direct impacts on socioeconomic
resources located within the extent of the outflow, as well as indirect economic
impacts throughout the region and elsewhere. Incremental flood protection
afforded to socioeconomic resources typically improves local and regional
economic conditions relative to existing conditions.
The Applicant’s Proposed Action is designed to increase flood capacity of
Reaches 8, 7B, and 7A to contain the 1-percent flood event (100-year flow) and
of Reach 14 to contain the 10-percent flood event. Project activities, including
channel widening/deepening and infrastructure modifications along Reaches 6, 5,
and 4, are designed to ensure modifications upstream do not induce incremental
flooding downstream.
Reaches 8, 7B, and 7A bisect Morgan Hill and the flood flows from the area
expand into northern San Martin. This area has flooded several times in recent
history, including 1997 and 1998 and as recently as 2008 and 2009:


Morgan Hill and San Martin sustained $350,000 (by local estimates) in
damages from floods along the Upper Llagas Creek during 1997 and
1998.



The January 4, 2008 storm inundated Morgan Hill’s downtown as local
officials declared an emergency and opened their Emergency Operations
Center to deal with the widespread flooding. As of 2010, associated
damages had not been monetized.



Downtown Morgan Hill was again flooded on October 13, 2009. Storm
waters entered homes and businesses, families were displaced, and
roads closed. Much of the downtown was inundated with several inches of
water causing businesses to shutter for days. 12

Comments made during the public scoping meeting for this Project echoed
concerns about continued flooding of downtown Morgan Hill (Reaches 8 and 7B)
causing a detriment to its future economic growth. As reported in Table 3.17-10,
downtown Morgan Hill is home to at least 109 different commercial business
establishments of various types.
11
12

Calculation assumes the Santa Clara County average property tax rate of 1.191% (State of California, Board of
Equalization 2011b).
No estimates of the economic impacts appear to be available in the public domain.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-222

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Table 3.17-10 Business Establishments in Downtown Morgan Hill
Type of Establishment

Number of Establishments

Restaurant

25

Retail

18

Professional

37

Services

23

Recreation

6

Source: Morgan Hill Downtown Association 2013.

Reaches 7B and 7A are characterized by residential, commercial, and industrial areas.
Types of businesses in these reaches include major retail shopping outlets, mixed-use
commercial centers, a major self-storage facility, schools (private and public), gas
stations, crop production, nursery production, a food processing plant, and developable
land, among others.
Approximately 550 acres of the 1-percent flood extent was planted with crops or left
fallow in 2013. A significant portion of this acreage is like to be Important Farmland (see
Table 4.7-6, Acres of Williamson Act and Important Agricultural Lands Flooded Under 113

Percent Flood Scenario by Alternative). The Project is projected to protect
approximately 370 acres, comprised mainly of vegetables including peppers, leafy
greens, celery, cabbage, and bok choy (31%); oats and hay (28%); outdoor flowers
(2%); and acreage to a mix of these crops (39%) (Santa Clara County Department of
Agriculture 2013)14.
In addition to commercial, industrial, and agricultural operations, approximately 16,000
people live in 5,200 housing units within the Census Tracts bisected by Reaches 8, 7B,
and 7A (5123.14, 5123.13, 5123.07) in and around the flood extent. Housing units and
population in the area has steadily increased over the years in spite of historical and
contemporaneous flood events.

13

14

Important Farmland: Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Local
Importance. The data source for specific planted and fallowed acreage is different from the data source identifying
Important Farmland.
Crop distribution on protected acreage computed by Cardno ENTRIX GIS staff from cited data sources

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-223

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

While the Project would virtually remove this entire area from the existing 1-percent flood
extent, the associated economic value to the region is unknown. The NRCS’s analysis of
Alternative F in the 1982 EIS/EIR estimated the Project would protect 1,123 residential
structures, 65 mobile homes, 463 commercial establishments, 24 industrial buildings,
and 1,300 acres of agricultural land (See Section 2.3.1). By the NRCS’s estimate,
avoided flood damages afforded by the entire Project would amount to approximately
$2.3 million annually (adjusting for inflation only). 15 However, the substantial population
growth and shifts in land use patterns within the area since the 1980s, and the fact that
portions of the Project along Lower Llagas Creek have since been completed, render the
NRCS’s estimate obsolete. No update of the original NRCS study was available to
inform this study.

15

Alternative F in the 1982 EIS/EIR is reflected closely by the NRCS Alternative in this EIS. Annual benefits associated with
Alternative F were estimated at $941,100. This estimate was inflated to 2012 price levels using the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) for all items published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose area. Portions of
the Project along Lower Llagas Creek have been completed since the original study was conducted in 1982.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-224

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.17-1 Geography of the Socioeconomics Project Area

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-225

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-226

Chapter 3

3.18

Affected Environment

HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
This section describes the existing environment and assesses potential impacts related
to hazards and hazardous materials for the Project. Potential hazards addressed in this
section include issues related to hazardous materials in soil and groundwater, releases
of hazardous materials during construction, fires, and interference with an adopted
emergency response or emergency evacuation plan. If Project-related impacts are found
to exceed thresholds of significance, mitigation measures are identified.
Information on potential soil and groundwater contamination hazards in the Project area
was drawn primarily from a Hazardous Materials Assessment Report titled Draft
Memorandum Presenting Findings of Hazardous Materials Assessment Reports Review
for Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, prepared by Weiss Associates (Weiss),
dated November 15, 2011. Weiss compiled existing conditions information on hazards
and hazardous materials in the Project area based on review of Phase I Environmental
Site Assessment (Phase I ESA) reports, Phase II Environmental Site Assessment
(Phase II ESA) reports, and database searches.
3.18.1 Introduction
The potential environmental concerns identified in the project area include
pesticides and fertilizers, nitrates, fecal coliform, potentially hazardous chemicals,
petroleum hydrocarbons, heavy metals, naturally-occurring asbestos, asbestoscontaining building materials, lead-based paint, and polychlorinated biphenyl(PCB)-containing lighting fixtures.
This section describes potential hazards and hazardous materials by Project
reach, as described in Chapter 2. In general, the following potential Constituents
of Concern (COCs) were identified for all reaches:


Pesticides and fertilizers from prior or ongoing agricultural activities;



Asbestos and lead-based paint from buildings constructed prior to 1978;
and



Naturally-occurring asbestos in soil.

3.18.2 Project Area
The Project is located in southern Santa Clara County, approximately 25 miles
southeast of San Jose, in the communities of Morgan Hill, San Martin, and
Gilroy (Figure 1.1-1, Regional Area Map). From south to north, the Project
passes through rural residential areas in Gilroy and San Martin before entering
rural areas again, then residential areas, and finally through the main
commercial district of Morgan Hill. The Project consists of the upper seven
reaches (4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14) of Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek,
and West Little Llagas Creek from just downstream of Buena Vista Avenue
(Figure 2.2-1, Upper Llagas Creek Project Area Reaches). Weiss determined
that the project area for the hazardous materials assessment comprises nearly
400 discrete parcels. The project area generally represents a 25-foot buffer
from the top of bank.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-227

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

All potential COCs are identified in the specific reach descriptions, below.

3.18.3

Environmental Setting
Reach 4
Reach 4 is an intermittent stream channel that winds through agricultural
and suburban areas. According to Weiss, a previous Phase I ESA
identified an oil stain in a Reach 4 parcel that could indicate the presence
of petroleum hydrocarbons in the soil. Other potential COCs in Reach 4
include the following:


Residual pesticides and fertilizers (from prior and ongoing nearby
agricultural uses);



Nitrate;



Fecal coliform;



Asbestos and lead paint;



Non-friable asbestos in buildings;



Total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH);



Tetrachloroethylene (PCE) in groundwater (source unknown); and



Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) from transformers.

Reach 5
Reach 5 is a short 0.4-mile segment connecting Reaches 6 and 14 that
averages 15 feet wide at the OHWM. Land use is heavy agricultural to the
north and urbanized to the south. Potential COCs include:


Residual pesticides and fertilizers (from prior and ongoing nearby
agricultural uses);



Asbestos and lead-based paint; and



Non-friable asbestos from building materials.

Reach 6
Upper Llagas Creek flows through the Reach 6 channel in a southerly
direction. The channel is composed of gravel, sand, and silt. The
southwestern portion of Reach 6 is adjacent to several SCVWD
percolation ponds. The southeastern portion or Reach 6 is adjacent to
greenhouses and agricultural fields. The middle portion of Reach 6
traverses through agricultural fields, small corporation yards, and
suburbanized areas. Portions of this central reach are adjacent to paved
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-228

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

roads. The northern portion of Reach 6 passes through an industrialized
area and waste treatment facilities including a former waste transfer
station. Potential COCs in Reach 6 include the following:


Residual pesticides and fertilizers (from prior and ongoing nearby
agricultural uses);



Non-friable asbestos from building materials;



Asbestos and lead-based paint;



VOCs, Semi-volatile Organic Compounds (SVOCs) and metals
from activities related to a food processing, landfill and junk yard;



Fecal coliform and nitrate from a septic tank and leach field; and



Excess nutrients from a food processing waste holding tank area
and/or holding pond sediment.

Reach 7A and Reach 7B
Reach 7 is divided into two sections, Reaches 7A and 7B. Reach 7A is
the southern reach and Reach 7B is the northern reach. The southern
portion of Reach 7A is a topographically flat section of land (there is no
channel) with a combination of heavy agricultural use (plowed fields) or
fallow land that has been converted to annual non-native grassland. The
northern half of Reach 7A runs through a residential neighborhood and
ends to the north at the intersection of West Little Llagas Creek and
Reach 7B
Reach 7B contains West Little Llagas Creek; and the channel is
composed of gravel, sand, silt, and clay. The stream channel transects a
suburban area. The banks and the non-disturbed areas beyond the top of
the bank contain annual grassland species. In the northern portion, the
stream channel is adjacent to small businesses and is in an underground
culvert for the last 650 feet on the north end.
Concentrations of arsenic, cobalt, nickel, and vanadium were reported to
exceed screening levels in Phase II ESAs for Reaches 7A and 7B.
According to Weiss, these metals may be naturally occurring, but it is
unclear whether soil concentrations of these metals are elevated across
the entire Project area or only in Reaches 7A and 7B.
Potential COCs specific to Reach 7A include the following:


Pesticides, herbicides, metals, petroleum hydrocarbons, VOCs,
SVOCs, and nitrates from agricultural activities, potential COCs
from an automobile junk yard and large manure pile;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-229

Chapter 3

Affected Environment


Pesticides, metals, PCBs, SVOCs, and TPH potentially from a fuel
tank; and



Asbestos and lead based paint in structures.

Potential COCs identified specific to Reach 7B include the following:


VOCs, SVOCs, metals, and methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE)



Asbestos and lead based paint in structures;



Non-friable asbestos in buildings;



Unknown stored chemicals potentially sourced to a garage with no
secondary containment, poor housekeeping, or an unlabeled 55gallon drum; and



Lube oil and kitchen grease from 55-gallon drums.

Reach 8
Reach 8 contains an intermittent stream (West Little Llagas Creek). The
channel is composed of gravel, sand, silt, and clay and averages 12 feet
in width. The channel transects a heavily urbanized area with businesses,
residential areas, and roads abutting many portions of the top of the
channel bank. The channel runs underground for 250 feet.
Potential COCs specific to Reach 8 include the following:


PCBs in soil from a small electrical substation;



Residual pesticides and fertilizers;



Non-friable asbestos in buildings; and



Potential releases from the Union 76 service station that is
adjacent to a Reach 8 parcel.

Reach 14
Reach 14 is a wide channel with several portions that were excavated in
2011. The areas beyond the roads on each side of the channel consist of
agricultural fields or are heavily suburbanized. Potential hazardous
materials include:


Residual pesticides and fertilizers from row crops and orchards;
and



Perchlorate may be present in groundwater underlying Reach 14.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-230

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Weiss identified two sites near Reach 14 with potential COCs, a scrap
metal recycling facility and a school (Table 3.18-1).
Potential Releases of Hazardous Materials
The Olin site, less than 1 mile from the project area at 425 Tennant
Avenue, was known to have affected groundwater quality underlying
parcels in Reaches 4, 5, and 6. This site has been identified as having a
previous significant release of Perchloroethylene (PCE) (Piers 2003 as
cited in Weiss 2011). Other sites, listed in Table 3.18-1, had previous
releases of hazardous materials, as discussed below.
Table 3.18-1 Summary of Sites Identified in Geotracker and Envirostor Databases
Sites within
Reach Project area

Site Near
Project area

Cleanup
Status

4

None Identified

None Identified

N/A

N/A

N/A

5

None Identified

None Identified

N/A

N/A

N/A

6

None Identified

San Martin Auto Wreckers,
14155 Llagas Ave.,
San Martin, CA (~600 feet)

Closed as of
2011

Arsenic, copper,
diesel, nickel,
other metals,
waste oil: motor,
hydraulic
lubricating

Soil, aquifer used
for drinking water

--

San Martin Closed Landfill,
14070 Llagas Ave., Gilroy,
CA (overlaps with SCVWD
ROW)

Closed with
Deed
Restriction

Landfill waste

Soil

--

Air and Auto Salvage
Services, 13895 A Llagas
Ave., San Martin, CA
(~200 feet)

Closed as of
1988

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

--

Western Refrigeration,
13805 Llagas Ave.,
San Martin, CA (~100 feet)

Closed as of
1987

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

Royal Oak
Mushroom,
15480 Watsonville
Rd., Morgan Hill,
CA 95037

--

Closed as of
1996

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

--

Lico Distributing,
14245 Monterey Road

Closed as of
2002

LUST cleanup
site

Groundwater,
aquifer used for
drinking water

Morgan Hill
Corporation Yard,
105 Edes Court,
Morgan Hill, CA
95037

--

Remediation
OPEN

LUST cleanup
site: benzene,
fuel oxygenates,
gasoline,
toluene, xylene

Soil, surface
water, aquifer
used for drinking
water supply

7A

7B

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Potential
COC

Medium

December 2015

3-231

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Sites within
Reach Project area

Site Near
Project area

Cleanup
Status

--

Word Oil, 16720 Monterey,
Morgan Hill, CA 95037
(~200 feet)

Site
assessment
OPEN

--

Olin Corporation ,
425 Tennant Avenue,
Morgan Hill, CA 95037

Don
Love Auto,
17090 Monterey
Hwy, Morgan Hill,
CA 95037

Potential
COC

Medium

LUST cleanup
site: gasoline

Aquifer used for
drinking water
supply

Remediation
as of April
2004
OPEN

Cleanup
program site:
perchlorate

Aquifer used for
drinking water
supply, well used
for drinking water
supply

--

Closed as of
1988

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

--

Unocal, 17015 Monterey St.,
Morgan Hill, CA 95037 (~100
feet)

Closed as of
1996

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

--

Monterey Mushroom Inc.,
642 Hale Ave.,
Unincorporated, CA

Closed as of
2001

LUST cleanup
site

Soil

None Identified

Winston Chan Property
(recycling scrap metal)
14735 Monterey Highway,
San Martin, CA

Cleanup
DDE, DDT, DDD
completed 1986.
No further action.

Soil

--

Barrett Avenue Elementary
School. The nearest surface
water is 1.1. miles to the
south, Llagas Creek. 10 acre
site was formerly an orchard
and was used since 1987 to
raise flowers. since 1987 to
raise flowers.

Voluntary
cleanup
completed 2003.

Soil

2

141

Unless otherwise noted, data obtained from
Geotracker database at http://geotracker.swrcb.ca.gov,
accessed August– September 2011. Sites “near
project area” are defined as within approximately 500
feet, except for the Olin site, which is approximately
2000 feet from Reach 7B.

Dieldrin and
toxaphene. No
metals or
herbicides were
found.

Abbreviations:
COC = Constituent of Concern
DDD = metabolite of
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane
DDE = dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene
DDT = dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
LUST = leaking underground storage tank
N/A = not applicable

1 Data obtained from Envirostor database, accessed August to September 2011.
2 Data obtained from GeoTracker database, accessed February 2013.
Source: Weiss 2011, GeoTracker database (SWRCB 2013)

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-232

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Geologic and Hydrogeologic Conditions
Soil borings obtained during Phases II ESAs conducted in 1997 and 2004 showed
shallow alluvial soils that are generally coarse-grained with a high sand content. The
borings also show that fine-grained sediment content increases with depth and soils at
depths greater than 10 feet are generally sandy to silty clays. In Reaches 7A and 7B,
groundwater was encountered in many borings at depths of 14 to 26 feet during the
2011 study (Weiss 2011). In other reaches, the depth to groundwater was not reported,
because only surface sampling was conducted (Weiss 2011).
Naturally Occurring Asbestos
Local geographic information suggests that serpentinite, an ultramafic rock, is not
present in the project area. However, there is a slight possibility that it could be
inadvertently discovered during construction of the Project as discussed in Section
4.1, Geology and Soils, contains additional discussion of the location of ultramafic
rocks outside the Project Area.
Comparison With Screening Levels
Weiss compared analytical data for soil and groundwater samples obtained from Phase
II ESAs with the following environmental and human health screening levels:


Environmental screening levels (ESLs) from the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board – San Francisco Bay Region (RWQCB-SF).



California Human Health Screening Levels (CHHSLs) from California Department
of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC).



Regional Screening Levels (RSL) for Chemical Contaminants at Superfund Sites
from the Environmental Protection Agency.



Maximum Contaminant Limit (MCLs) for Drinking Water Contaminants set by the
USEPA under the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations.

Soil data were compared with screening values applicable to residential land use. Weiss
then compared constituent concentrations that exceeded screening levels with maximum
background values.
Reported concentrations of arsenic in soil samples from Reaches 7A and 7B exceeded
all screening levels, with the highest concentration reported at 14 mg/kg. Reported
concentrations of thallium in deep soil (deeper than three meters below ground surface
[bgs]) samples from Reach 7A exceeded all screening levels, with the highest
concentration at 13 mg/kg. Nickel concentrations exceeded ESLs in shallow soil (0–3
meters bgs) in Reach 7A, with the highest concentrations reported at 300 mg/kg, but did
not exceed the CHHSLs or RSLs. Reported concentrations of vanadium in soil in Reach
7A exceeded the ESL, with the highest concentration of 110 mg/kg, but did not exceed
the CHHSLs or RSLs. One soil sample in Reach 7A was reported to have a
concentration of mercury of 5.3 mg/kg, exceeding the ESL, but not exceeding the
CHHSLs or RSLs. Reported antimony concentrations exceeded all screening levels in
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-233

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

one soil sample in Reach 7A at a concentration of 210 mg/kg. Reported cobalt
concentrations in shallow and deep soil samples from Reach 7A exceeded the RSL, with
the highest concentration of 36 mg/kg.
Reported pesticide concentrations exceeded the screening levels in four shallow soil
samples (< 3 meters bgs): dieldrin was reported at 0.0029 mg/kg in one soil sample from
Reach 4 and at 0.0034 mg/kg in one soil sample from Reach 5, and endosulfan I was
reported at 0.008 mg/kg in one sample from Reach 4 and at 0.021 mg/kg in one sample
from Reach 5.
Nearly all herbicide results were reported at concentrations below the detection limit. No
ESLs exist for these constituents. No detections of PCBs, VOCs, or SVOCs exceeding
the screening levels were reported in soil samples from Reaches 7A or 7B. Fecal
coliform was reported at concentrations below the detection limit in samples collected in
Reach 4.
In Reaches 7A and 7B, groundwater was encountered at depths 14 to 26 feet (Weiss
2011); groundwater samples were analyzed for a range of contaminants in these
reaches. Reported concentrations of arsenic, barium, beryllium, chromium, cobalt,
copper, lead, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver, vanadium, and zinc in groundwater
samples from Reach 7A exceeded groundwater ESLs. Reported concentrations of Total
Petroleum Hydrocarbons as Diesel (TPH-D) exceeded the ESL in groundwater samples
collected in Reach 7A, but they were not detected above the ESLs in soil in the same
area. Reported concentrations of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, and mercury
exceeded MCLs in samples collected from Reach 7A.
Nitrate concentrations reported in groundwater samples collected in Reach 7A exceeded
the MCL. Reported concentrations of 4,4'- Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) and
heptachlor exceeded their respective ESLs in groundwater samples from Reach 7A.
Vector-Borne Disease Hazards
The principal vector-borne disease concern in the Project area relates to diseases
spread by mosquitoes. West Nile Virus (WNV) has had a serious impact upon the health
of humans, horses, and wild birds throughout the state. Mosquito-borne viruses belong
to a group of viruses commonly referred to as arboviruses (for arthropod-borne).
Although 12 mosquito-borne viruses are known to occur in California, only WNV,
western equine encephalomyelitis virus (WEE), and St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLE)
are significant causes of human disease. Since 2004, there have been 16 human cases
of WNV in Santa Clara County and no deaths (SCVCD 2011). In 2012, there were 471
WNV human cases in the state; however, none of these 2012 cases occurred in Santa
Clara County (California Department of Public Health 2013).
Mosquito Breeding
Many mosquitoes lay their eggs on the surface of fresh or stagnant water. A body of
standing water represents a potential breeding habitat for mosquitoes, including water in
cans, barrels, horse troughs, ornamental ponds, swimming pools, puddles, creeks,
ditches, or marshy areas (SCVCD 2011). Within cities and developed areas, runoff from
landscape watering, car washing, and storms often collects in retention ponds or catch

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-234

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

basins long enough to produce mosquitoes. Mosquito larvae can develop anywhere
water stands for at least 5 days (California Department of Health Services 2005).
Mosquito Control
In California, local vector control agencies have the authority to conduct surveillance for
vectors, prevent the occurrence of vectors, and abate production of vectors (California
Codes: Health and Safety Code Section 2040). Vector control agencies also have
authority to review, comment, and make recommendations for projects with respect to
their potential vector production (California Health and Safety Code Section 2041).
Vector control agencies utilize a combination of mosquito abatement procedures tailored
to the period in the mosquito life cycle and specific habitat conditions. Mosquito control
methods may include the use of biological agents (e.g., mosquitofish), microbial control
agents (e.g., Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis and B. sphaericus), pesticides, and
source reductions (i.e., emptying containers holding water that could produce
mosquitoes) (California Department of Health Services 2005). The entire Project area is
within the jurisdiction of the Santa Clara County Vector Control District. The Santa Clara
County Mosquito-borne virus Response and Operations Plan provides an overview of
procedures and strategies for surveillance and operational response to mosquito-borne
viruses in the county, outlines risk assessment models, and prompts surveillance and
control activities. The document is based on the California Mosquito-Borne Virus
Surveillance and Response Plan that provided statewide guidelines (SCVCD 2011).
Wildfire Hazards
The combination of highly flammable fuel, long dry summers, and steep slopes creates a
significant natural hazard of large wildland fires in many areas of Santa Clara County. A
wildland fire is a fire in
which the primary fuel is natural vegetation. Wildland fires can consume thousands of
acres of vegetation, timber, and agricultural lands. Fires ignited in wildland areas can
quickly spread, if unabated, to areas where residential or commercial structures are
intermingled with wildland vegetation. Fires that start in urbanized areas can grow into
wildland fires. Wildland/urban interface fire hazards are especially pronounced in areas
of high structure densities adjacent to undeveloped open space areas with dense
vegetation (Santa Clara County 2008).
Wildfire behavior is based on three primary factors: weather, topography, and fuel.
Wildland fire season in Santa Clara County spans the months after the last spring rains
have fallen and until the first fall or winter rains occur. The months of August,
September, and October have the greatest potential for wildland fires as vegetation dries
out and humidity levels fall.
Each city in Santa Clara County is responsible for its fire protection either by utilizing its
own resources or contracting with the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection (CAL FIRE), a fire district, or adjacent municipal service. The unincorporated
area is the primary responsibility of CAL FIRE, along with some fire protection districts
and volunteer fire companies.
Wildfires can be caused by natural events, such as lightning or high winds. However,
most wildland fires are human caused. Campfires, careless smokers, electrical sparks,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-235

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

and arson cause most wildland and wildland/urban interface fires. In Santa Clara
County, electrical equipment, such as power lines and transformers, have caused
numerous fires. Fires started by the use of mowing and power equipment around very
dry vegetation are also cause for concern.
Santa Clara County’s fire agencies have signed a countywide mutual aid agreement to
ensure that firefighting resources and personnel will be available to combat wildland
urban interface fires (Santa Clara County 2008).
Based on the California Department of Forestry’s wildfire hazard real estate disclosure
map for Santa Clara County, the Project area is outside areas with substantial forest
wildland fire hazards (California Department of Forestry 2012). However, some Project
elements would be constructed in areas that could pose wildfire risks under dry
conditions. Portions of Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 are located less than 1 mile from a very
high fire hazard severity zone in a local area of responsibility (CAL FIRE 2008).
Airports
The nearest public airport to the Project is San Martin Airport, located less than 0.20 mile
from Reach 6 and less than 0.40 mile from Reach 14.
Schools
As discussed in Section 3.14, Utilities and Public Services, several schools occur within
0.25 mile of the Project reaches and are listed in Table 3.18-2.
Table 3.18-2 Schools Within 0.25 mile of a Project Reach
Project Reach

School(s)

Address

4

No schools within 0.25 mile

5

No schools within 0.25 mile

6

San Martin/Gwinn Elementary School

100 North Street, San Martin, CA 95046

7A 8and 7B

Kiddie Academy of Morgan Hill

15750 Monterey Street, Morgan Hill, CA
95037

8

Paradise Valley Elementary School

400 La Crosse Drive, Morgan Hill, CA 95037

Oakwood School

105 John Wilson Way, Morgan Hill, CA 95037

Stratford School

410 Llagas Road Morgan Hill, CA 95037

Britton Middle School

80 W. Central Avenue, Morgan Hill, CA 95037

P.A. Walsh School

14

353 West Maine Avenue, Morgan Hill CA
95037

No schools within 0.25 mile

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-236

Chapter 3

3.19

Affected Environment

ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
3.19.1 Introduction
This section describes the environmental justice implications of the Project in the
Project area, including an analysis of communities of concerns for both minority
and low-income characteristics and the disproportionate distribution of negative
effects on communities of concern.
3.19.2 Project Area
The Project area for this analysis is all of the 2010 Census Tracts intersected by
the Project footprint, which includes Tracts 5123.07, 5123.13, 5123.14, 5124.01,
and 5124.02 (Figure 3.19-1). These tracts are located in Santa Clara County,
California. This area contains the urban city of Morgan Hill and the
unincorporated area of San Martin.
3.19.3 Environmental Setting
This section describes the demographic characteristics by Project reach as
described in Chapter 2, Project Description, and by geographic region.
Demographic characteristics are used to identify communities of concern in
environmental justice analyses. The geographic region is defined for the purpose
of taking a census tract. For a more detailed investigation of population and
housing see Sections 3.16 and 4.16, Population and Housing. For a more
detailed investigation of socioeconomics see Sections 3.17 and 4.17,
Socioeconomic Resources.
Reach 4 and Reach 5
Reaches 4 and 5 are contained within Census Tract 5124.01. According to the
U.S. Census Bureau (Bureau of Census as defined in Title 13 U.S.C. §11), the
2010 population in this tract was 4,782 people and its population density was
299 persons per square mile. Of this population, 65.5 percent reported their race
as White, 43.1 percent reported their ethnicity as Hispanic or Latino, and
6.4 percent reported their ethnicity as Asian (U.S. Census Bureau 2010b). The
median household income is $79,213 and 9.6 percent of people have income
below the poverty level (U.S. Census Bureau 2011a).
Reach 6 and Reach 6 Bypass
A small portion of Reach 6 lies within Census Tract 5124.01, which is described
above. The majority of Reach 6 and all of Reach 6 Bypass lie within Census
Tract 5124.02. According to the U.S. Census, the 2010 population in this tract
was 5,167 people and its population density was 321 persons per square mile.
Of this population, 63.3 percent reported their race as White, 40.7 percent
reported their ethnicity as Hispanic or Latino, and 7.7 percent reported their
ethnicity as Asian (U.S. Census Bureau 2010b). The median household income

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-237

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

is $113,125 and 6.6 percent of people have income below the poverty level (U.S.
Census Bureau 2011a).
Reach 7A
The proposed Reach 7A is contained within Census Tract 5123.07. According to
the U.S. Census, the 2010 population in this tract was 6,344 people and its
population density was 3,003 persons per square mile. Of this population,
74.9 percent reported their race as White, 23.5 percent reported their ethnicity as
Hispanic or Latino, 7.6 percent reported their ethnicity as Asian, and 1.6 percent
reported their ethnicity as Black or African American (U.S. Census Bureau
2010b). The median household income is $95,357 and 1.2 percent of people
have income below the poverty level (U.S. Census Bureau 2011a).
Reach 7B
A small portion of Reach 7B lies within Census Tract 5123.07, which is described
above. The majority of Reach 7B lies within Census Tract 5123.13. According to
the U.S. Census, the 2010 population in this tract was 3,887 people and its
population density was 3,831 persons per square mile. Of this population,
55.4 percent reported their race as White, 55.3 percent reported their ethnicity as
Hispanic or Latino, 5.5 percent reported their ethnicity as Asian, and 2.4 percent
reported their ethnicity as Black or African American (U.S. Census Bureau
2010b). The median household income is $77,103 and 19.2 percent of people
have income below the poverty level (U.S. Census Bureau 2011a).
Reach 8
Reach 8 is contained within Census Tract 5123.14. According to the U.S.
Census, the 2010 population in this tract was 5,932 people and its population
density was 4,132 persons per square mile. Of this population, 60.7 percent
reported their race as White, 48.3 percent reported their ethnicity as Hispanic or
Latino, 7.3 percent reported their ethnicity as Asian, 1.6 percent reported their
ethnicity as Black or African American, and 1.2 percent reported their ethnicity as
American Indian and Alaska Native (U.S. Census Bureau 2010b). The median
household income is $65,913 and 24.6 percent of people have income below the
poverty level (U.S. Census Bureau 2011a).
Reach 14
A small portion of Reach 14 lies within Census Tract 5124.01 and the majority of
Reach 14 lies within Census Tract 5124.02. These tracts are described above
for Reach 6.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-238

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

Figure 3.19-1 Environmental Justice Project Area

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-239

Chapter 3

Affected Environment

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

3-240

CHAPTER 4

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES

This chapter provides a discussion of the potential environmental effects, which can be either
positive or negative, that could result from implementation of the Alternatives. A detailed
description of the alternatives is provided in Chapter 2. The evaluation of the effects was based
on results of modeling simulations, vegetation and serpentine soil mapping, current information
including scientific literature, direct observation, project design reports, reasonable scientific
judgment, the scoping process, and the environmental review CEQA documents. The No
Action Alternative considers the environmental conditions in the affected regions without the
Applicant’s Proposed Action.
Environmental impacts include both direct and indirect effects. Under the Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ) regulations, direct effects are “caused by the action and occur at
the same time and place,” while indirect effects are “caused by the action and are later in time
or farther removed in distance, but are still reasonably foreseeable. Indirect effects may include
growth inducing effects and other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land use,
population density or growth rate, and related effects on air and water and other natural
systems, including ecosystems” (40 C.F.R. 1508.8). This chapter also discusses potential
impacts of this project in concert with other reasonably foreseeable projects (cumulative
impacts), unavoidable adverse impacts, effects to the resources that cannot or would not be
reversed in a foreseeable amount of time (irreversible and irretrievable commitment of
resources), any conflicts and controversy associated with this project, and environmental
commitments.
This chapter describes in-depth environmental consequences in 19 resource and issue areas
for the Upper Llagas Creek Project (Project):




















Geology and Soils (Section 4.1)
Hydrology and Water Quality (Section 4.2)
Mineral Resources (Section 4.3)
Botanical Resources (Section 4.4)
Wildlife Resources (Section 4.5)
Aquatic Resources (Section 4.6)
Agriculture and Forestry Resources (Section 4.7)
Land Use and Planning (Section 4.8)
Cultural Resources (Section 4.9)
Traffic and Circulation (Section 4.10)
Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases (Section 4.11)
Noise (Section 4.12)
Aesthetics Resources (Section 4.13)
Utilities and Public Services (Section 4.14)
Recreation Resources (Section 4.15)
Population and Housing (Section 4.16)
Socioeconomics Resources (Section 4.17)
Hazards and Hazardous Materials (Section 4.18)
Environmental Justice (Section 4.19)

Some impacts are identified as “beneficial” consistent with the National Environmental
Protection Act (NEPA). An adverse impact would be less than significant if the impact is less
than the significance threshold. If mitigation can be applied to an otherwise potentially
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-1

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

significant impact to reduce it below the threshold of significance (“less than significant”), the
impact is thus identified as “less than significant with mitigation.” If mitigation cannot reduce the
impact to less than significant, it would be identified as “significant and unavoidable.” In the
case of the No Action Alternative, mitigation is not discussed or provided; because at the end of
the NEPA process mitigation measures would not be implemented for the No Action Alternative.
Where appropriate, impacts are described in terms of their duration. We define “short-term”
impacts to be those effects that occur up to the length of the construction period (coterminous
with the number of construction seasons, which vary from one alternative to another) and do not
endure beyond the construction period. “Long-term” impacts are effects that endure beyond the
construction period, even if not permanent.
Cumulative impacts (Section 4.20) are described and evaluated in this Chapter. Cumulative
impacts may result from individually minor but collectively significant effects of several projects
over a period of time. Cumulative effects may occur when a project’s incremental impacts,
added to those of other closely related past, present, and reasonably foreseeable probable
future projects, become environmentally important.
Following NEPA, this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) identifies the Proposed Project and
its alternatives, including a No Action Alternative. The impacts of all of the alternatives (No
Action Alternative, the Applicant’s Proposed Alternative [Tunnel Alternative], Natural Resource
Conservation Service [NRCS] Alternative, Culvert/Channel Alternative, and the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative) are compared to one another and to existing conditions in the Project area.
4.1

GEOLOGY AND SOILS
4.1.1

Introduction
The Upper Llagas Creek Project (Project) area is located within an actively
forming geologic environment of earthquakes and faulting as well as associated
uplift of mountain ranges and lowering of basins. These geological processes,
ongoing for millions of years, have created the landforms upon which the Project
streams flow; and, as a result, must be accounted for in Project design and
potential impacts. In addition, the Project involves excavation of soils and
exposure of underlying geologic layers in order to construct Project features,
such as new or expanded channels, culverts, maintenance, and access roads.
The ongoing risks of major earthquakes and potential hazards resulting from
ground shaking and failures, such as ruptures and liquefaction are important
factors to consider in design of key Project elements.
For the Project area, the provisions and requirements of Alquist-Priolo and
Seismic hazards Mapping Act are incorporated within the Santa Clara County
Geological Ordinance (Ordinance) which was created to address Geologic
Hazards within designated zones, including those caused by earthquakes and
landsliding (Santa Clara County 2006). The Ordinance incorporates various
zones designated by maps of specific geologic hazards, such as fault rupture,
seismic shaking, liquefaction, ground failures, and landslides. This Ordinance is
explained in Part 1. General Provisions, Sec. C12-600 Purpose:

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-2

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

“This chapter is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements
for the geologic evaluation of land based on proposed land uses. It further
establishes procedures to enforce these requirements, including rules and
regulations for the development of land which is on or adjacent to known
potentially hazardous areas, or which has the potential to create or increase the
risk of geologic hazard. The provisions of this chapter also are intended to
ensure that the County fulfills its duties under state law regarding geologic
hazards, including the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act and the
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act. This chapter may be cited as the "Santa Clara
County Geologic Ordinance.”
The Project area lies within the county-designated liquefaction hazards zone
(Santa Clara County 2012a), which require geologic reporting and consideration
in a project design.
4.1.2

No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative would follow existing conditions into the future without
any new constructed features or changes in the existing flood control system. As
a result, there would be no proposed activities or construction that would change
existing conditions for geology and soils conditions and therefore, no new
impacts would result from earthquake liquefaction failure.
The No Action Alternative would not change the existing maintenance and
operation activities. The Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) has
addressed the impacts of maintenance activities under the Stream Maintenance
Program (SMP), which was recently revised and reimplemented in 2012. A
description of the operation and maintenance activities under the SMP is
provided in Section 2.4 of Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, in this EIS.
As detailed in the 2012 SMP, work is divided into two general categories:
regularly-scheduled work (most vegetation management and trash pick-up) that
occurs in the same place and the same manner with a predictable frequency;
and other routine work that is not undertaken on a regular annual schedule, but is
done as the need arises. This latter type of work (e.g., sediment removal and
bank protection) has a less predictable frequency and location. Therefore,
selection of Best Management Practices (BMPs) is managed differently for these
two types of work. As the existing SMP is an ongoing project that would not
change under the No Action Alternative, there would be no new impacts due to
earthquake induced failures related to operations and maintenance of the
existing facilities.

4.1.3

Action Alternatives
With all of the action alternatives Project features could be subject to failure due
to earthquake-induced liquefaction ground failures, which could diminish flood
capacity and protection and/or present physical hazards to public safety. In the
aftermath of a major earthquake, the SCVWD would inspect the Project culverts,
maintenance roads, and channel for any failures that require repair or
remediation and implement repairs for all of the Action Alternatives. In some
circumstances, state and federal governments may provide disaster assistance

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-3

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

to enable rapid response, funding, and resources for repairs under Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) disaster assistance.

4.1.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The main components of the Tunnel Alternative are described in
Section 2.6. The key feature of this Alternative that could be subject to
failure and could present a physical hazard in the case of earthquake
induced failure is an underground concrete tunnel through Nob Hill in
Reach 8 (which is also a feature of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative). The
tunnel construction would be carried out by drilling then lining the earthen
tunnel with reinforcements and concrete. The other constructed features
of the Applicant’s Proposed Action include widening and deepening the
existing channel, constructing a new diversion channel in Reach 7A, new
culverts, maintenance roads, a sediment detention basin, exhuming two
buried bridges, and construction of the Lake Silveira mitigation element
(see Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 for description of the features and
construction at Lake Silveira).
The nature of structural engineering requirements for tunnels are different
than that of surface constructed channels and pipes; however, the same
procedures are required to define and account for an earthquake’s
potential liquefaction in the seismic design (i.e., selection of design event
and conditions and engineering to offset anticipated forces). Design
would meet the following seismic requirements:


2010 California Building Code, California Code of Regulations
Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2



American Society of Civil Engineers Standard 7-05 “Minimum
Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures”



American Concrete Institute 318, “Building Code Requirements for
Structural Concrete” (Chapter 21)



American Association of State and Highway Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) Load Resistance



Factor Design Bridge Design Specifications (6th. Edition)



AASHTO Standard Specification for Highway Bridges (17th.
Edition)

Included within these requirements is a mechanism for monitoring seismic
induced structural offset within the tunnel. Displacement bands or their
equivalent would be incorporated into the tunnel’s construction to monitor
tunnel movement. By meeting the design requirements listed above no
impacts would result from the construction of the Project.
The Project area is situated within portions of the Liquefaction Failure
Hazard Zone, as defined in the Building Code Ordinance. This means
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-4

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

that Project features, such as sediment detention basin, earthen stream
banks, maintenance roads, and box culverts may fail during an
earthquake due to land heaving, ground ruptures, or landsliding. Such
failures could compromise the operational performance of the flood
management system, potentially rerouting flows outside of the channel
conveyance system causing flooding, reducing flood capacity, or
presenting physical hazards to adjacent land uses that could threaten
public health and safety. Implementation of mitigation measures as
shown in Table 5.4-1 of this EIS would reduce the impact of impaired
flood conveyance capacity due to earthquake related ground failure.
Flood conveyance would be most at risk if there was failure within the
tunnel. Monitoring of displacement bands that are planned as part of the
tunnel construction would identify if there was a potential structural failure.
When an earthquake of Magnitude 3.7 (typically the smallest magnitude
with visually observable damage) or greater occurs in the Project vicinity,
tunnel displacement bands will be inspected for any structural instability
and any necessary repairs will be made.
Implementation of mitigation measures as shown in Table 5.4-1 of this
EIS would reduce the impact of impaired flood conveyance capacity due
to earthquake related ground failure within the tunnel.
Vegetation, sediment, and minor maintenance activities are implemented
solely for the purpose of ensuring that the Project features are functioning
to maintain the flood design capacity. Consequently, implementation of
these maintenance activities would help to ensure that the design channel
capacity is not impaired and thereby reduce the risk of failure of the
project features and associated potential for risk to people or public
property.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.1.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative consists of Project features that are very similar to
the Tunnel Alternative with the exception that there will be no tunnel
construction within Reach 8 (see Section 2.5 for description of NRCS
Alternative features and construction). All other Project reaches would
have the same level of protection; and the same Project features would
be constructed, as described for the Applicant’s Proposed Action.
Construction impact determinations, including O&M impacts, for the
NCRS Alternative are similar to those in the Applicant’s Proposed Action,
except there would be none of the impacts, monitoring, or mitigation
measures associated with the construction of the tunnel within Reach 8.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-5

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.1.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The key difference between the Culvert/Channel Alternative and the
NRCS Alternative is elimination of the need for channel deepening and
widening through residential properties between West Main Avenue and
West 2nd Street in Reach 8. The construction impacts of the
Culvert/Channel Alternative, including O&M impacts, would be the same
as the NRCS Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.1.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative has similar impact concerns as the
Tunnel Alternative (including a sediment detention basin and a tunnel),
but has some different design and flood management structures than the
Tunnel Alternative; most notably, a proposed weir and gate structure to
divert high flows at the upstream end of Reach 6 to Reach 14.
Operations and maintenance proposed under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative would be substantially similar to that described for the Tunnel
Alternative (described in detail in Section 2.5.5.) with the exception of
maintenance for the bypass channel hydraulic control structure in
Reach 6. The concrete weir hydraulic control structure would be regularly
inspected and maintained to ensure that the concrete is not cracking,
spalling, or otherwise losing its structural integrity and that the sluice
gates are free of debris and properly functioning.
Failures due to ground shaking could compromise the operational
performance of the bypass channel hydraulic control structure for the
Reach 6 Bypass, potentially rerouting flows outside of the channel
conveyance system causing flooding, reducing flood capacity, or
presenting physical hazards to adjacent land uses that could threaten
public health and safety. Similar to the Tunnel Alternative, when an
earthquake of Magnitude 3.7 (typically the smallest magnitude with
visually observable damage) or greater occurs in the Project vicinity,
tunnel displacement bands will be inspected for any structural instability
and any necessary repairs will be made.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.1.4

Summary of Impacts to Geology and Soils
The only Project impact to people and property from geology and soils risks
would be caused by earthquake-induced liquefaction. Mitigation measures and
BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action Alternatives to reduce the impacts

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-6

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

to Geology and Soils are discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.2

HYDROLOGY AND WATER QUALITY
4.2.1

Introduction
This section is an analysis of the potential impacts related to hydrologic and
water quality conditions that could be affected by implementation of the Project.
Potential impacts related to hydrology and water quality conditions were
evaluated on the basis of flood maps, water quality data in reports, streamflow
from existing models for Project design, field observations, and other information
on surface and groundwater conditions that are available in both published and
unpublished reports. How each of the Project alternatives would alter the overall
direction and trend of existing fluvial processes is considered and characterized.
The overall purpose, design, and effect of the Project is to reduce flooding
through Morgan Hill in Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B by containing the 1-percent
exceedance flow; in Reach 14 by containing the 10-percent exceedance flow;
and to not induce flooding in Reaches 4, 5, or 6, due to the upstream flood
capacity improvements, for all of the Project alternatives. As shown by
comparison of Figures 2.4-1 and 2.5-1, the Project only reduces the extent of
flooding—it does not cause increased flooding at any location. This is a
fundamental purpose and objective of the Project design. Additionally, the
operations and maintenance of the Project (Section 2.5.5) is intended to maintain
the designed flood capacity of the Project. Consequently, both construction and
maintenance would have no impact to a beneficial effect in relation to each of the
four significance criteria, listed above, that are associated with flooding. Each of
the summary impact assessment tables reflect this determination of no impact
and beneficial effect related to flooding.
The analysis addressing the potential to deplete groundwater supplies or
interfere with groundwater recharge considers the extent to which the Project
construction could lower the groundwater table by excavation to deepen and
widen existing channels and creating a new diversion channel (Reach 7A).
Excavation depths that intersect the groundwater table have the potential to
locally drain groundwater and, thereby, potentially lower the water table near
stream banks that in some locales support riparian vegetation (primarily in Reach
6); or if excavation is deep enough, could lower the aquifer. This EIS considers
the available well data that provides information on depth to groundwater in
relation to proposed excavation depths in order to determine the potential for
depleting groundwater supplies for each of the alternatives.
Regarding potential to interfere with groundwater recharge, none of the action
alternatives create any areas of new impervious surfaces that would impede
recharge in any reach. This includes new maintenance roads, which are
designed with an aggregate base; and, therefore, would allow percolation to
groundwater. All action alternatives, except for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative,
would require the inlet pipe to the SCVWD Church Street Percolation Ponds in

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-7

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Reach 6 to be adjusted so that it continues to take water from the channel at a
new lower elevation. This is necessary to maintain the same volume of water
diversion to the ponds after Project construction. Given the lack of new
impervious surfaces to be constructed under the Project design and continued
maintenance of inflow to the Church Street Percolation Ponds, the Project has no
potential to alter recharge to groundwater. Therefore, the issue of recharge to
groundwater is not considered further; and the focus of the analysis for each
alternative is on excavation depths in relation to groundwater elevations.
In regards with the potential to alter existing drainage patterns resulting in
substantial erosion or siltation on- or off-site, there are three potential causal
mechanisms that are considered: construction related activities that may cause
erosion and siltation, maintenance activities that may cause erosion and siltation,
and the overall stability of the channels as they function under the
post-construction design and hydrology. Construction and maintenance activities
are described in Sections 2.5.3 and 2.5.5. Construction activities that may cause
erosion and siltation involve grading and other earth moving activities, particularly
where the channel may be flowing perennially primarily in a portion of Reach 6.
SCVWD project BMPs address issues related to potential water quality impacts
from construction, which are identified and considered under each of the
alternatives below. The maintenance activity likely to have a potential for
increasing erosion and siltation is sediment removal to maintain channel
capacity. The potential for these construction and maintenance activities to
cause significant impacts from erosion and siltation is based on the adequacy of
the SCVWD project BMPs and construction approach.
If the proposed channel improvements are not designed so that they are stable,
then there could be issues associated with channel bank erosion and siltation.
However, a stable channel design analysis was performed by conducting
sediment transport and hydraulic studies (Balance Hydrologics 2012; Noble
Consultants and Northwest Hydraulics 2008). This analysis assisted with
determining stable channel dimensions and form that would not result in channel
aggradation (i.e., sediment deposition), or degradation (i.e., scour and incision),
and that would reduce potential long-term maintenance and would continue to
meet flood capacity objectives. The channel cross-sectional form was designed
to be in a stable, dynamic equilibrium to match the flow conditions and sediment
regime of the Llagas Creek watershed. The stable channel form incorporates the
additional flow volume and discharge that would occur by cutting off a section of
West Little Llagas Creek and routing that additional flow from Reaches 7B to 7A
and into Reach 6, just below Lake Silveira. The stable channel form includes a
bankfull channel morphology, whereby the width-depth ratio, slope, sinuosity,
and overall channel dimensions have been sized to accommodate the flow and
sediment load contributed by the drainage area. This stable channel form is
applicable to all of the action alternatives within their respective construction
footprints.
Additionally, all of the Project action alternatives include grade control structures
to arrest existing incision processes and ensure the Project channels are
vertically stable. The stable channel form does not and should not imply that
there would be absolutely no erosion; but it does mean that the channel
dimensions and planform should remain about the same over the long term; and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-8

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

would, therefore, not generate excess sediment that could cause any siltation or
aggradation.
The drainage pattern associated with the 9,600-foot length of West Little Llagas
Creek, from near La Crosse Avenue to East Little Llagas Creek at U.S. 101,
would also be altered under all Project alternatives. This section of West Little
Llagas Creek would be cut off from discharge generated upstream through
Reach 8 so that only runoff from the immediate drainage area and local storm
drain outfalls would provide flow. Under existing conditions, this portion of West
Little Llagas Creek flows intermittently during periods when sufficient rainfall
generates runoff. Flow in West and East Little Llagas Creek would be diminished
so that periodic, high flows during storm events will be of a smaller magnitude.
Consequently, this reach (between the cut-off point and 6,500 feet downstream
where the Butterfield channel extension confluences with West Little Llagas
Creek) would experience less frequent flooding and during the 1-percent
exceedance event a smaller area of flooding (compare Figures 2.4-1 and 2.5-1),
which is a beneficial effect of the Project. Downstream from the Butterfield
channel extension East Little Llagas Creek would continue to flood during a
1-percent exceedance event, similar to, but somewhat less than pre-Project
extents. There will be a smaller reduction in flow magnitude for the more
infrequent larger magnitude flow events compared with the greater reduction in
magnitude for the more moderate flood events. Overall, the reduction in flow
magnitude with the Project would also reduce the potential for erosion, incision,
or siltation of the channel. The intermittent nature of the channel flows would
persist with flow occurring only during storm events, due to the local drainage
area contributions to runoff that will continue with the Project.
The Basin Plan outlines water quality standards and TMDLs for Llagas Creek.
RWQCB approved erosion and sedimentation controls are detailed in approved
area-wide BMPs, which are identified within the Regional SWMP and described
in the SCVWD, BMP Handbook, Revision A, May 22, 2008. These BMPs are
intended to minimize degradation of water quality to levels set forth in the Basin
Water Quality Control Plan related to DO, turbidity, sedimentation, and nitrates.
Additionally, a Project SWPPP to be prepared in accordance with the CGP will
contain additional BMPs intended to protect water quality during Project
construction. The effect of the Lake Silveira mitigation element on temperatures
and DO conditions is not addressed in Section 4.2, Hydrology and Water Quality,
but is addressed in Section 4.6, Aquatics Resources, because of the important
connection of these water quality parameters to steelhead growth and survival.
However, it is noted here that the proposed restoration of flow into the formerly
abandoned Llagas Creek channel around Lake Silveira; and the creation of
wetland habitat represents a net benefit to water quality to the downstream
Project reaches by reducing high water temperatures, improving DO, and
providing a wetlands sink for nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. As
such, water quality during stormflow runoff through the Lake Silveira project
element would be improved and this is a beneficial effect of the Project.
There are no waste or nutrient discharges related to any of the Project
alternatives; however there are Project-related changes to the existing
stormwater drainage systems. Eliminating over-bank flows during floods through
Morgan Hill (Reaches 8 and 7B, including the cut-off portion of West Little Llagas
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-9

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Creek), the potential to entrain sediments and carry pollutants from urban and
agricultural lands on the floodplain, which then drain back into the channel, would
be substantially reduced, improving water quality. Although operational activities
do not contribute any additional runoff, all of the action alternatives would bypass
flow from the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel through a newly
constructed diversion channel in Reach 7A that would add runoff to the
downstream Llagas Creek Reaches 4, 5, and 6. However, this is not an impact
on the capacity of the stormwater drainage system. This is because the Project
design fundamentally includes an increase in the flood capacity of these
downstream reaches so that there is no induced flooding due to upstream project
improvements. Additionally, as discussed above, the downstream reaches are
dimensioned so that they are hydraulically stable under the new flow conditions.
As such, there is no operational impact to the stormwater drainage system.
Vegetation management, sediment management, and minor maintenance
activities are proposed and conducted only to maintain the flood capacity of the
channels under all of the action alternatives. Consequently, maintenance
activities do not add to runoff, rather maintenance ensures that the channels
function efficiently to handle the runoff and maintain the hydraulic capacity of the
channel design.
Excavation to deepen and widen existing stream channels and to create a new
diversion channel (Reach 7A) could potentially intercept local groundwater as
indicated by stream side well elevations, and recent piezometer readings and
pump tests specifically pertinent to Reach 7A (see Chapter 3-Section 3.2.4 for
description of existing groundwater conditions). An analysis is provided for each
alternative for the potential to substantially lower the groundwater table, along
West Little Llagas, East Little Llagas, and Llagas Creek in the Project design.
The analysis considers the extent, to which excavation will deepen the channel in
relationship to expected groundwater levels, describes the extent to which
groundwater elevations could be lowered and considers the potential for
groundwater lowering to affect adjacent riparian vegetation.
Through the implementation of SWPPP BMPs, the action alternatives would not
directly contribute substantial sources of potentially impacted runoff during
construction. Operation of the Project under all Project alternatives due to the
planned stable channel design would reduce ongoing channel incision and bank
erosion and, thereby, improve water quality and reduce sedimentation and
siltation impairment, helping to achieve the TMDL targets in Llagas Creek and
the Pajaro River.
4.2.2

No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built. As such, there
would be continued flooding, potentially exposing structures and people to
100-year flood hazards. Flooding in the urban areas of Morgan Hill and San
Martin would continue through Reaches 8 and 7B, and the cut-off segment of
West and East Little Llagas Creek. This periodic flooding would continue to
contribute to water quality degradation. Historic rates of channel streambed

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-10

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
incision1 of 0.4 to 0.8 foot per decade, (Balance Hydrologics 2012) and resultant
channel bank erosion and widening would likely continue. This process of
channel incision would contribute to sedimentation and would not help to achieve
TMDL targets. Under the No Action Alternative, storm runoff would continue
through channelized reaches, there would be no fish habitat improvement
features installed, and the diversion channel in Reach 7A would not be
constructed.
Ongoing operations in an unstable, incising channel would contribute to bank
erosion and sedimentation. Periodic flooding along Reaches 8, 7B, and West
Little Llagas Creek would continue, contributing to water quality degradation and
to continued impairment of the existing water quality standards. Continuing
maintenance activities would not contribute any additional runoff water that would
influence the capacity of stormwater drainage systems. This is because there
are no maintenance activities that contribute to increasing the volume of runoff.
Maintenance activities are designed to improve the rate at which water flows
through the channel and culverts, thereby reducing potential flooding; but it does
not do anything to impede runoff or add water volume to the stormwater drainage
system. Further, maintenance does not substantially add to sources of impacted
runoff as it is a continuing and existing condition, consequently there are no
related impacts.
Maintenance of stream channels would continue under the SCVWD SMP.
Maintenance activities, which broadly include sediment and vegetation
management, bank erosion repair, and minor maintenance, is described in
Section 2.4. Through the SMP and in accordance with the CCRWQCB Basin
Plan, SCVWD project BMPs will reduce any maintenance related impacts.
Impacts from operations and maintenance related to groundwater recharge
would be the same as under existing conditions. Groundwater supplies and
water table elevations would fluctuate naturally and with SCVWD recharge.
Sediment removal is the only maintenance activity that could potentially lower the
channel bed elevation and, thereby, potentially influence a shallow groundwater
table if it is near the channel invert. However, this type of activity has occurred
and will continue to occur very infrequently (every 4 to 5 years), only in small and
localized areas, and there have been no known effects interfering with
groundwater recharge or altering the groundwater table. Therefore, there are no
maintenance or operational impacts with potential to deplete or interfere with
groundwater under the No Action Alternative.

4.2.3

Action Alternatives

4.2.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Applicant’s Proposed Action tunnel construction, channel
improvements (excavation to widen and deepen) and construction and
operations and maintenance are described in Section 2.7. Llagas Creek
1

Causes of historic and ongoing channel incision are identified as the cumulative effects of decades of changes in
land use, the increase in impervious surfaces from urbanization, sediment supply loss associated with Chesbro
Reservoir, water diversions, hydrograph modifications, and past channelization (Balance Hydrologics 2012a; Schaaf
& Wheeler 2012).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-11

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

is currently on the CWA Section 303(d) list for impaired water bodies for
multiple water quality parameters. Sedimentation and nitrates are the
primary parameters with impairment.
Project construction (see Sections 2.5 and 2.7 for a complete description
of construction activities) would include channel modifications (excavation
to deepen and widen), constructing a tunnel, excavating a diversion
channel in Reach 7A, constructing or replacing culverts; installing
maintenance roads or access ramps; constructing temporary and
permanent grade control structures, and upgrading bridge crossings.
These actions are all surface-disturbing activities. When portions of the
Project area are excavated or otherwise disturbed, the potential for
unstabilized incidental material fallback, soil erosion and/or elevated
sediment levels to occur in runoff discharging from the site would
substantially increase. Construction activities would also have the
potential to mobilize sediments and associated organics, pesticides and
herbicide residues contained in the soils. In addition, equipment used
during the construction activities would have the potential to leak polluting
materials, including oil and gasoline. These sediments and contaminants
may be transported into and decrease or impair water quality in Llagas
Creek or downstream drainages and water bodies. Potential to violate
water quality standards during construction activities would minimized
following the SCVWD project BMPs and by implementation of the
SWPPP.
The SWPPP requires practices to reduce the potential for equipment to
introduce pollutants to the program area, and would require accidental
spill containment and disposal planning. In addition, the erosion and
sediment control plans within the SWPPP would be required to include
BMPs to minimize the potential for, and effects from, spills of hazardous,
toxic, or petroleum substances during construction activities. If a spill
occurs, the contractor’s superintendent would take action to contact the
appropriate safety and cleanup crews to ensure that the Spill Prevention
Control Plan (SPCP) is followed. A written description of reportable
releases would be submitted to the RWQCB and the Department of Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC) by the contractor or owner. This submittal
would be required to contain a description of the release, including the
type of material and an estimate of the amount spilled, the date of the
release, an explanation of why the spill occurred, and a description of the
steps taken to prevent and control future releases. The releases would
be documented on a spill report form. If an appreciable spill occurs and
results determine that Project activities have adversely affected surface
water or groundwater quality, a detailed analysis would be performed to
the specifications of DTSC to identify the likely cause of contamination.
This analysis would include recommendations for reducing or eliminating
the source or mechanisms of contamination. Based on this analysis,
contractors would select and implement measures to control
contamination with a performance standard that surface and/or
groundwater quality must be returned to baseline conditions. These
measures would be subject to approval by the SCVWD and/or the
RWQCB.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-12

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Although operational activities do not contribute any additional runoff, the
Tunnel Alternative (as well as all of the action alternatives) would bypass
flow from the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel through a newly
constructed channel in Reach 7A that would add runoff to the
downstream Llagas Creek Reaches 4, 5, and 6. The Project design
includes an increase in the flood capacity of these downstream reaches
so that there is no induced flooding due to upstream project
improvements. Additionally, the most of the cut-off section of West to
East Little Llagas Creek (up to the Butterfield extension channel) would
experience reduced flooding during the 1-percent exceedance event; a
benefit to water quality. In other reaches of the Project, the extent of
flooding would remain exactly the same as under existing conditions, so
water quality would not be degraded beyond existing conditions due to
flooding.
As part of the Lake Silveira project element (compensatory mitigation)
described in Section 5.3 of this EIS, new upland and riparian vegetation
plantings are proposed along the channel alignment through Reach 7A
that takes into consideration the post-construction ground contour
elevations and associated groundwater elevation as appropriate for plant
growth and survival. The Tunnel Alternative (and all action alternatives)
would result in a vegetated corridor along the Reach 7A channel
alignment. Although the groundwater table will be intercepted in Reach
7A, this is not a substantial lowering of the groundwater table or attendant
adverse effects.
Project construction activities would have no effect on existing storm drain
systems since there is no expansion or alteration of storm drain locations
for this alternative. Since construction activities do not expand or
otherwise alter existing storm drain locations, they also do not add
substantial additional sources of contaminated runoff to the stormwater
drainage system; as such, there are no impacts.
The Tunnel Alternative would result in flow through a designed stable
channel morphology, which would reduce ongoing, existing channel
incision and with little potential for bank erosion. This would reduce
sedimentation and improve water quality. Flooding would be reduced in
Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B, which is also a water quality improvement. The
6,500-foot-long cutoff portion of West and East Little Llagas Creek to the
Butterfield channel extension confluence would also no longer experience
high flows of the same magnitude, although some flooding will still occur
during the larger storm events. The reduction in flood magnitude and
extent which would reduce potential scour, erosion, and degradation of
water quality during over-bank flow events. This is a beneficial water
quality effect. In addition, within Reach 6, the proposed channel widening
would encroach upon a deed restricted property (see Table 3.18-1). The
deed restriction requires that any planning of any ground disturbing work
within the parcel requires consultation with the CCRWQCB to confirm
compliance with regulatory guidelines that pertain to a closed landfill. The
current property owner would also participate in consultation and final

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-13

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

design resolution. Compliance with the deed restriction and the resulting
consultation requirements would reduce potential water quality impacts.
Maintenance, including vegetation management, sediment management,
and minor maintenance work, for the Tunnel Alternative is described in
Section 2.5.5. Maintenance activities, predominately sediment removal,
would have the greatest potential to mobilize sediments and introduce
associated excess nutrients contained in soils. Because nearly all of the
stream reaches only flow intermittently, including during the winter
season, it is expected that most maintenance activities would occur when
the channels are dry, which would substantially reduce the potential for
siltation, release of nutrients, and prevent or substantially minimize
adverse changes in water quality parameters, such as DO and turbidity.
SCVWD BMPs include measures to isolate sites, such as by the use of a
flow bypass (WQ-12), that would address sediment removal activities that
might need to occur within a flowing section of channel. Potential to
violate water quality standards during maintenance activities would be
reduced by following the SCVWD project BMPs including, but not limited
to, those mitigation measures as discussed and described in Chapter 5
(Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives) of this
EIS.
A potential water quality issue specific to the construction and operation
of the tunnel in Reach 8 is related to potential bat colonization. Bats are
known to use structures, such as tunnels for roosting. Operation of the
tunnel portion within Reach 8 could pose a water quality problem if bats
use the tunnel to roost. If bats colonize the tunnel, then bat guano could
enter the channel and degrade water quality. Bat guano can introduce
nitrogen and E. Coli bacteria. Besides the water quality issue, there is
also an issue of potential for harm and injury to a colony if bats use the
tunnel. Consequently, a bat monitoring program will be implemented
upon completion of tunnel construction per the guidance of regulatory
agencies and local bat experts as described in Chapter 5 (Section 5.5.5
Wildlife Resources) of this EIS.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.2.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative is similar to the Applicant’s Proposed Action,
except that no diversion tunnel or sediment detention basin would be
constructed through a portion of Reach 8, replaced by channel
improvements between West Main Avenue and West Dunne Avenue.
This will increase the Project footprint, and require more channel to be
maintained relative to the Applicant’s Proposed Action. The NRCS
Alternative provides the same 1-percent flood management as the
Applicant’s Proposed Action in Reach 8 protecting downtown Morgan Hill,
as well as in Reaches 7A and 7B. See Section 2.6.1 for more detail on
features of the NRCS Alternative. All other Project reaches would have
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-14

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

the same level of protection; and the same Project features would be
constructed, as described for the Applicant’s Proposed Action. Impact
determinations for the NCRS Alternative are similar to those in the
Applicant’s Proposed Action, except there would be none of the impacts,
monitoring, or mitigation measures associated with the construction of the
tunnel within Reach 8.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.2.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culvert/Channel Alternative is similar to the NRCS Alternative. The
Culvert/Channel Alternative provides the same 1-percent flood
management as the NRCS Alternative in Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8,
protecting downtown Morgan Hill. The primary difference from the NRCS
Alternative is routing flows through the Britton athletic fields instead of
along Hale Avenue. See Section 2.8.1 for more detail on features of the
Culvert/Channel Alternative. Under the Culvert/Channel Alternative, the
impacts would be the same as those under the NRCS Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.2.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative is the most dissimilar from the other
alternatives, but provides for the same level of flood protection. The
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high flow bypass channel
(i.e., Reach 7A diversion channel) between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and
Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so
that no flood capacity improvements would be needed along Reach 6
(downstream of bypass) or Reach 5; and there would be no increased
inflow from upstream improvements. Flood conveyance improvements
for the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B, and for the downstream
Reach 4 would remain the same as that described for the Action
Alternatives. The Reach 6 Bypass would convey extra flow from
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 directly into Reach 14 in East Little Llagas Creek.
Reach 14, downstream of the bypass, would be designed to carry the
extra flow, maintaining capacity for a 10-percent exceedance flow event.
The bypass segment would provide protection from a 1-percent event.
However, within Reach 5 and 6 (downstream of the Reach 6 bypass)
where the channel would not be modified under this alternative, the
existing creek would remain subject to the instability, predominantly
channel down-cutting which has been an ongoing process. Channel
down-cutting eventually leads over time to over-steepened streambanks
with resultant channel erosion and widening. This would increase water
turbidity and potentially cause channel sedimentation. Consequently, the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-15

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Bypass Alternative has the potential over time to cause a degradation of
water quality relative to the other action alternatives. In addition,
Maintenance activities for these portions of Reach 5 and Reach 6 would
be implemented based on the existing SCVWD SMP BMPs under the
Bypass Alternative, only in locations the SCVWD has existing
maintenance easements. See Section 2.9.1 of this EIS for more detail on
features of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.2.4

Summary of Impacts to Hydrology and Water Quality
Effects of Project activities on hydrology, channel geomorphology, and water
quality vary. Effects of Project construction activities on water quality are
minimized for the Tunnel, NRCS, and Culvert/Channel Alternatives through the
implementation of the SCVWD project BMPs and the SWPPP required under the
GCP. One water quality issue associated with the Tunnel Alternative is identified
but mitigated with mitigation measures and BMPx as described in Chapter 5
(Section 5.5.5 Wildlife Resources) of this EIS. This mitigation measure would
eliminate the potential for bat roosting with consequent contamination and
degradation of water quality by bat guano in the tunnel section of Reach 8.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, differently from the other Action Alternatives,
would have significant impacts associated with the water quality and would result
in substantial erosion due to ongoing process of channel incision that would
continue through most of Reach 6 and in Reach 5 since these channel reaches
are not part of the constructed design for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.
There are no adverse impacts related to flooding from construction activities with
implementation of any of the Project alternatives. Effects of all operation and
maintenance activities on flooding under all of the action alternatives would be
beneficial by eliminating the 1-percent flood exceedance extents in Reaches 8
and 7B. The segment of West to East Little Llagas Creek where flows would be
reduced to local drainage flows by the construction of the Reach 7A diversion
channel would be subject to beneficial water quality effects for all action
alternatives due to the reduced flooding over a portion of the channel length (up
to the point of confluence with the Butterfield extension channel).
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Hydrology and Water Quality are discussed
and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-16

Chapter 4

4.3

Environmental Consequences

MINERAL RESOURCES
4.3.1

Introduction
This section describes the impacts for the various Alternatives to mineral
resources within of the Project area, including the designation of mineral
resource zones (MRZ) in the Project area as delineated on statewide MRZ maps.
This section will describe the pertinent federal, state, and local regulations
related to mineral resources.

4.3.2

No Action Alternative
There would be no construction under the No Action Alternative and, therefore,
no impact to loss of availability of mineral resources.
Under the No Action Alternative, removal of sands and gravels would occur
during maintenance of the existing channels. Due to the proximity of urban
areas, rural residences, and significant aquatic habitat (Section 4.6.2, Aquatic
Resources), these areas have limited or no accessibility for mining operations
and would likely render such operations infeasible in accordance with the Santa
Clara County General Plan criteria; therefore, there would be no impact.

4.3.3

Action Alternatives
With all of the action alternatives, construction could inadvertent discovery of the
locally important semi-precious stone resource, poppy jasper. In addition, all the
action alternatives would result in removal of aggregate material resources.

4.3.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The key feature of the Tunnel Alternative is an underground concrete
tunnel within Reach 8 through downtown Morgan Hill with channel
widening and deepening being restricted to the areas between Llagas
Road and to approximately Hillwood Lane. The main components of the
Tunnel Alternative are described in Section 2.7 of this EIS.
The Tunnel Alternative modifications would entail excavation in
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14 for channel widening or deepening. Channel
modifications in Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14 (areas identified at MRZ-2)
would result in removal of aggregate material resources. Aggregate
materials removed from the Project area would be stockpiled for future
reuse. Use of aggregate materials in the future would not represent a
loss of a resource and would represent a reduction in demand from local
quarries reflecting a beneficial use. Due to the proximity of urban areas,
rural residences, and significant aquatic habitat (Section 4.6.3.1, Aquatic
Resources), these areas have limited or no accessibility for mining
operations and would likely render such operations infeasible in
accordance with the Santa Clara County General Plan criteria; therefore,
there would be no impact. Instream complexity features for fish habitat
would also be installed in Reaches 4, 5, and 6.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-17

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

This alternative would also include installation of subterranean pipes and
culverts in places within Reach 8. The subterranean construction would
be carried out by drilling then lining the earthen tunnel with
reinforcements and concrete. Reaches 7 and 8 are not designated as
MRZ-2 and, therefore, implementation of this alternative would have no
impact on a known mineral resource. Since the tunnel would be
constructed beneath the town of Morgan Hill, it is possible that an
inadvertent discovery of the locally important semi-precious stone
resource, poppy jasper, could be encountered.
Extractable localities of poppy jasper have been well documented by
Morgan Hill and are protected. The likelihood of encountering a
previously undiscovered extractable quantity within the Project area is a
possibility due to the Project Area relative to the existing location of poppy
jasper parent rock outcrops. In accordance with guidance received from
the City of Morgan Hill Planning Department, the property owner would be
notified of the discovery, as they would be the legal owner of the mineral
and have final decision on its disposition (Maxey Pers. Com. 2013b). The
Applicant has discussed donating any Poppy Jasper that may be
discovered during the construction of the Applicant’s Proposed Action to
the City of Morgan Hill for use by the City in a future public art’s and/or
recreation project where the mineral can be viewed and enjoyed by the
public.
Post construction, operations and maintenance for all the Action
Alternatives would consist of maintenance activities described in
Section 2.7. Operations and maintenance of the Project would result in
no impact to mineral accessibility. In addition, because post-construction
maintenance activities are not expected to involve major earthwork
because of the geomorphologic bankfull channel design. Therefore,
finding a previously undiscovered deposit of a mineral resource, such a
poppy jasper, is remote.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.3.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative consists of Project features that are very similar to
the Tunnel Alternative with the exception that there will be no tunnel
construction within Reach 8 (see Section 2.6 for description of NRCS
Alternative features and construction). Impact determinations for the
NCRS Alternative are similar to those in the Applicant’s Proposed Action,
except there would be none of the impacts, monitoring, or mitigation
measures associated with the construction of the tunnel within Reach 8.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including operations
and maintenance (O&M) activities, are discussed and described in
Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives of this EIS.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-18

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.3.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The key feature of the Culvert/Channel Alternative is elimination of the
need for channel deepening and widening through residential properties,
as proposed for the NRCS Alternative between West Main Avenue and
West 2nd Street within Reach 8.
Impact determinations for the NCRS Alternative are similar to those in the
Applicant’s Proposed Action, except there would be none of the impacts,
monitoring, or mitigation measures associated with the construction of the
tunnel within Reach 8.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.3.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The construction and maintenance impacts, BMPs, and necessary
mitigation for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be similar as those
previously described under the Tunnel Alternative. The Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative would include maintenance for the bypass channel hydraulic
control structure constructed in Reach 6; however, this maintenance
would not result in impact levels different than those described under the
Tunnel Alternative.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high flow bypass
channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little
Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so that no flood capacity
improvements would be needed along Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas
Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Flood conveyance
modifications for the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B, and for the
downstream Reach 4 would remain the same as that described for the
Tunnel Alternative.
Therefore, though Reach 5 and a portion of Reach 6 would not require
excavating of materials to facilitate additional channel capacity, thus
reducing the likelihood to impact existing mineral resources, the
excavation of the Reach 6 bypass would off-set this reduced impact.
Thus, the impacts to mineral resources is similar to all the other Action
Alternatives.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities, are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.3.4

Summary of Impacts to Mineral Resources
No impacts to aggregate resources would result from implementation of Project
alternatives due to the proposed use of aggregate materials in the future retrofit

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-19

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

of Anderson Dam. This use would be beneficial by reusing material and reducing
demand on nearby quarries.
An impact could occur to the locally significant semi-precious gem resource,
poppy jasper, with an unanticipated discovery of a deposit during major
earthwork necessary to construct the Project.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Mineral Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.4

BOTANICAL RESOURCES
4.4.1

Introduction
Potential permanent and temporary impacts to vegetation, special-status plant
species and potential jurisdictional waters were evaluated by quantifying the
impacts to these existing resources for the Applicant’s Proposed Action (Tunnel
Alternative). The Geographic Information System (GIS) footprint, based on the
65-percent design, was overlaid vegetation and habitats and potential
jurisdictional waters to calculate acreages of impacts. Relative impacts of the
action alternatives were compared with the Tunnel Alternative. The potential
impacts to special-status plant species are based on an evaluation likelihood of
occurrence in the project area and impacts to suitable habitat.
The vegetation impact analysis is based on impacts to CAR habitats (USFWS
2003). The canopy of all trees that would be removed for construction was
considered permanent impacts to riparian forest (PFO). In addition, the
determination of permanent impacts to trees outside of the Project footprint was
based on analysis of impacts to critical root area. The critical root area is a
radius equal to 1.25 times a trees’ dbh reported in feet (Coder 2010). If
construction would remove at least 33 percent of a trees’ critical root area, then
the tree was assumed permanently impacted. The same methodology was
applied for impacts to California sycamore woodland, which is a subset of
riparian forest. Permanent impacts also include any native Riparian Scrub-shrub
(PSS) habitat that would be graded and any vegetation converted to hardscape
within the Tunnel Alternative footprint. Grading impacts to upland herbaceous
habitat, perennial marsh and seasonal wetlands are considered temporary
because these areas are expected to reestablish after grading. Additional GIS
analysis was conducted for the Tunnel Alternative to determine impacts to CAR
habitats outside the CDFW boundary.
The impact analysis for vegetation and habitats as well as jurisdictional waters
for the NRCS, Culvert/Channel, and Reach 6 Bypass alternatives are estimated
because the exact Project footprints including the constructed stream widths
have not been defined for these action alternatives. The impact analysis for
these action alternatives are based on a qualitative comparison with the Tunnel
Alternative. However, the alternatives share a common footprint over most of the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-20

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Project area so that the variation in botanical and waters area between the action
alternatives is generally small as described in the following sections.
4.4.2

No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative would consist of continuation of the current
management regime through the period covered by existing project permits
(10 years), as described in Chapter 2, Section 2.4. The Project would not be
built and no construction activities would occur. This alternative consists of
continued implementation of the SCVWD 20122022 SMP (SCVWD 2012c), including routine maintenance of stream channels,
sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and associated
minor activities. The SMP includes a series of resource protection policies and
BMPs. Vegetation management and giant reed control would be performed as
part of the SCVWD’s countywide SMP. The environmental permits associated
with the SMP cover impacts associated with routine maintenance which would
occur under the No Action Alternative.
Maintenance activities in the channel would be carried out according to the
SCVWD’s SMP, first implemented in 2002 and currently undergoing
re-authorization. The SMP procedures for routine maintenance of stream
channels involve ongoing sediment removal, vegetation management, bank
protection, and associated minor activities.
California sycamore woodlands would not be impacted under the No Action
Alternative because there would be no change to operations and maintenance;
however, with hydrologic changes to Llagas Creek from agriculture and upstream
development, including the construction of Chesbro Reservoir, this habitat type is
expected to continue to decline.
Some activities conducted under the SMP could impact rare or important plant
communities or special-status plant species and their habitats. Rare or important
plant communities in the project area that are under the jurisdiction of CDFW
include broad-leaved woodland, riparian native scrub, and riparian woodland.
Permanent direct impacts include the direct mortality of special-status plant
species and a loss of suitable habitat and direct loss of rare or important plant
communities through authorized SMP activities including vegetation removal,
giant reed control, and use of herbicides in all reaches. Potential indirect
consequences from SMP activities include the spread and establishment of
invasive non-native species, such as Himalayan blackberry that could eventually
displace rare or important plant communities or special-status plant species and
their habitats due to vegetation removal. However, BMPs would avoid and
minimize these potential consequences (see Section 5.6 of this EIS).

4.4.3

Action Alternatives
The action alternatives would result in temporary and permanent impacts to
vegetation types and habitats and USACE jurisdictional features that are
associated with construction activities and operation and maintenance activities.
Permanent construction impacts would be primarily a result of grubbing and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-21

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

grading, including removing mature riparian canopy trees along the creek
corridor. Temporary impacts include areas that would be temporarily disturbed
by access roads, equipment access, and staging areas, as well as areas that
would be grubbed or graded areas in some vegetation types that would naturally
regenerate following construction. Temporary disturbance to botanical resources
could result in the eventual decline and the loss of stability or reproductive
success of individual plants and vegetation communities. Operation and
maintenance activities that permanently remove vegetation or temporarily disturb
vegetation could also impact botanical resources. Construction or operation and
maintenance activities that potentially result in erosion, sedimentation, or
chemical contamination could damage or degrade botanical resources.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are discussed
and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.4.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative includes a variety of channel widening, deepening,
and other improvements as described in Chapter 2. This alternative was
developed to reduce the footprint of the NRCS Alternative, thus impacts
within Reach 8 by creating an underground concrete tunnel instead of
widening and deepening existing West Little Llagas Creek through the
downtown City of Morgan Hill.
Construction activities in all reaches would result in the direct removal
regulated federal and state waters. Impacts to wetlands include
jurisdictional perennial marsh and seasonal wetlands (PEM). Impacts to
non- wetland waters (Aquatic) include intermittent streams, perennial
stream, and culverts. Tables, 4.4-1, and 4.4-2 summarize the impacts to
vegetation types and habitats by reach that would result from construction
of the Tunnel Alternative. Permanent impacts are a result of grubbing
and grading for the construction of new channels, roads, and the
installation of culverts, except for areas proposed for replanting as
compensatory mitigation for impacts to wetlands and other waters of the
United States and state waters. Disturbed areas that are replanted are
considered temporary impacts. Temporary impacts would also include
areas that would be disturbed by temporary access roads, equipment
access and staging areas.
Most impacts to USACE jurisdictional areas are temporary due to channel
excavations (32.88 acres). Only small amounts of fill (0.41 acre) would
occur in USACE perennial marsh and aquatic habitats. This estimate is
based on the 65-percent design and may change slightly as Project
design is refined, but is not expected to increase. In general, the Tunnel
Alternative has lower direct impacts to jurisdictional wetlands and nonwetland waters than other action alternatives (except the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative), because the construction of the tunnel would reduce direct
wetland removal by reducing in-channel construction in downtown
Morgan Hill. With implementation of mitigation measures, such as
revegetation of the creek and the creation of a new wetland at Lake
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-22

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Silveira as described in Section 5.3 of this EIS, impacts to wetlands would
be minimized.
In addition, within Reach 4, 5, and 6, the installation of aquatic habitat
enhancements would constitute fill in jurisdictional wetlands and other
waters of the United States. Aquatic enhancements include the
placement of large woody debris, boulders, root wads, wing log
deflectors, and divider logs on Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A, which would
minimally reduce the extent of wetlands and waters; however, this impact
would be mitigated.
Table 4.4-1

Permanent and Temporary Impacts to USACE Jurisdictional Habitats for
the Tunnel Alternative

Jurisdiction

Habitat

USACE

Perennial Emergent Marsh (PEM)
Aquatic

Permanent Impacts
Area (ac)
0.321
0.09*

Temporary Impacts
Area (ac)
4.45
28.43

1

Permanent impacts to wetland and aquatic habitats were calculated based on the 65% design. Source: adapted
from H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013b

Table 4.4-2

Impacts to Vegetation Types and Habitats Outside of USACE Jurisdiction
for the Tunnel Alternative

Vegetation Type or Habitat
Reach 4
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed
Reach 5
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed
Reach 6
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed
Reach 7a
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed
Reach 7b
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Permanent Impacts
(Acres)

Temporary Impacts
(Acres)

0.8
0.1
---

1.9
-29.0
0.7

0.1
----

0.2
-7.8
0.3

0.4
0.2
---

0.6
-22.9
3.9

0.2
0.2
---

0.4
-34.3
0.4

0.1

0.5
December 2015

4-23

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Vegetation Type or Habitat
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed
Reach 8*
Riparian Forest (PFO) (native and non-native)
Riparian Scrub-shrub (PSS) (native and non-native)
Upland Herbaceous (U/H)
Developed

Permanent Impacts
(Acres)
0.1
---

Temporary Impacts
(Acres)
-9.5
1.0

0.3
0.5
---

--3.4
0.2

Note: The area of permanent and temporary project impacts for Reach 8 between Hillwood Lane and Llagas Road
are not available. As such, all Riparian Forest and Riparian Scrub-shrub within the work area was conservatively
assumed permanently removed and upland herbaceous impacts are assumed to all be temporary.

Permanent direct impacts from construction include vegetation removal,
which may result in direct mortality of special-status plant species and a
loss of their potential habitats and direct loss of rare or important plant
communities. Key impacting construction activities would include but are
not limited to the construction of the tunnel and portal, new diversion
channel in Reach 7A and new low flow channels, widening existing
channels, constructing access roads, culvert installation and replacement,
utility relocation and replacement, and exhuming bridges. Vegetation
would be grubbed and areas would be graded, resulting in permanent
removal of vegetation. In addition to the direct removal of vegetation,
these construction activities would also be associated with temporary
disturbance of rare or important plant communities and special-status
plant species and their habitats. The installation of aquatic habitat
enhancements could require removing or displacing sensitive wetland or
riparian habitats.
The greatest acreage of habitat impacts would be to upland herbaceous
in all reaches. Construction would result in impacts to Riparian Forest
(native and non-native) in all reaches and Riparian Scrub-shrub (native
and non-native) in all reaches except Reach 5. However, impacts to
Riparian Forest (native and non-native) and Riparian Scrub-shrub (native
and non-native) would be comparatively minor to Upland Herbaceous.
Impacts to Riparian Forest and Riparian Scrub-shrub, not including
California sycamore woodland, would be considered significant due to
rarity and important biological functions of these habitats.
The Tunnel Alternative would result in the direct loss of up to 11.17 acres
of California sycamore woodland, which is rare in the region due to
changed hydrologic conditions that have altered habitat suitability in
recent decades. Channels have become incised as a result of urban
development, agricultural use, reservoir construction, and groundwater
management in the project area. Of the approximately 600 western
sycamore in the Project reaches, up to 292 would be removed.
Avoidance and minimization measures will be refined to reduce impacts
to this important resource as the Project design is finalized. Llagas Creek
has limited sycamore restoration potential for the reasons stated in
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-24

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Section 5.5.4 and narrowing of the riparian corridor as a result of
suburban development, agriculture, and leveed channels. Mitigation
measures as discussed in Section 5.5.4 will include the replanting of
native sycamores wherever they would be successful within the Project
area, generally around Lake Silveira and near the confluence of the new
Reach 7A diversion channel and within Reach 6 of Llagas Creek.
However, sufficient area with appropriate conditions for replacement trees
is not available to attain the number generally required by resource
agencies for impacts to western sycamore trees. Impacts to sycamore
woodland would remain unavoidable.
Permanent direct impacts of the Project include the spread of non-native
invasive species including giant reed, cape ivy, and Himalayan
blackberry. Construction would disturb these populations which may
cause the spread of these invasive plant species downstream. The
SCVWD would implement mitigation measures as discussed and as
described in Section 5.5.4 of this EIS to ensure invasive exotic species
are properly handled and do not invade sensitive plant communities
downstream.
Several local plans and policies address preservation of riparian and
wetland habitat, including from the Santa Clara County General Plan
(C-RC31, R-RC31, and SC 16.10), City of Gilroy Open Space and
Conservation Policies (1e and 5b), and the City of Gilroy General Plan
Policies (20.01a and 20.03, 20.c). In addition, several other local plan
and policies address preservation of special status plant species including
the City of Gilroy General Plan Policy 20.04. Removal of riparian
vegetation and impacts to special-status plant species associated with
construction and operations and maintenance would conflict with these
policies. Impacts to riparian habitat, special-status plant species or
wetlands could occur when vegetation is removed to maintain channel
capacity or other maintenance work is conducted.
Temporary impacts include areas that would be disturbed by equipment
access and staging areas. Temporary disturbance would cause
individual plants or plant communities to decline in vigor and reproductive
capabilities or be displaced by the establishment of invasive non-native
species, such as giant reed. Implementation of mitigation measures and
BMPs are discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary
of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.
Without the implementation of BMPs many construction activities could
also result in indirect permanent impacts from hazardous material
releases or erosion and sedimentation that could potentially damage
individual plants and lead to their decline or death. The use of standard
BMPs related to hazardous materials and sediment control would ensure
that such impacts are avoided or minimized.
The diversion of West Little Llagas Creek into the new diversion channel
on Reach 7A would result in a permanent indirect impact to waters of the
United States. The reduced flow in this intermittent stream channel may
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-25

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

convert wetland portions of this channel to upland habitat or reduce the
jurisdictional width of the channel’s flow. West Little Llagas would have
reduced flows between the new diversion channel in Reach 7A and the
Butterfield Detention Basins, except when flows exceed approximately
the 5-year event, those high flows would continue to occur. Minimal flow
regime changes would occur within West/East Little Llagas downstream
of the Butterfield detention facility, except that low flows would be
reduced. This reduction in water could indirectly permanently impact
vegetation, particularly riparian habitat which is limited to scattered trees
adjacent to agricultural fields in this area and wetland habitat, which is
discussed below. The most common native trees in this area are oaks,
but there are also many willows and scattered cottonwoods and western
sycamores. Because this reach is relatively short (approximately
6,500 feet) and wetlands and riparian habitat is limited in this area, the
potential additional area of impact would be relatively small. If
physiological stress due to the changed flow regime causes reduced
growth rates, morphological changes or mortality in mature trees, this
impact would be a considered significant. Implementation of mitigation
measures would require the monitoring of West/East Little Llagas Creek
and contingencies should mature trees or existing vegetation be
adversely affected, would reduce this impact.
Flows in Llagas Creek will increase immediately downstream from where
the Reach 7A diversion channel would connect with Llagas Creek just
downstream from Lake Silveira at the upstream end of Reach 6. The
Reach 7A diversion channel effectively increases the drainage area of
Llagas Creek at this confluence point. Therefore, both the magnitude and
the duration of flows will increase into Reach 6. Additionally, the
Reach 7A diversion channel will intercept groundwater at the lower end of
the reach near the lake, because there is a shallow groundwater table in
this area and the channel bottom will be constructed several feet below
the groundwater table elevation. This will likely cause some shallow
groundwater to be influent to the channel, expressing itself as surface
flow in the lowermost segment of Reach 7A, including during the drier
summer months, that will contribute to flow in Reach 6. These flow
contributions are likely to be small over the summer months, but over time
would help to sustain flow and support riparian growth and habitat in
Reach 6. Although interception of groundwater in Reach 7A has the
potential to lower the shallow groundwater table, which could in turn
adversely affect the growth and survival of riparian vegetation close to the
proposed channel construction, there is no existing Reach 7A channel
and no existing riparian vegetation on the proposed channel alignment
that could be affected.
Operation and maintenance activities of the newly constructed features
would be as described in Section 2.5.5, and could result in permanent or
temporary impacts to rare or important plant communities or
special-status plant species and their habitats. Vegetation management
would be expanded over existing conditions, because the Project would
require the revegetation of much of the Project area. Vegetation
maintenance would be determined based on the maintenance of design
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-26

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

flows by maintaining the appropriate channel roughness coefficients as
shown in Table 2.5.5. Areas restored as part of mitigation measures
discussed and described in Section 5.5.4 are not a part of channel
improvements (such as Lake Silveira, infill planting areas, and areas
where invasive non-native species are removed) would not require
vegetation management and, therefore, there would be no impacts to
these areas. In areas where vegetation management would be required
(see Section 2.5.5.1 for description of maintenance activities and
methods) to maintain channel capacity, the direct removal of vegetation
would cause temporary disturbance to rare or important plant
communities and permanent impacts to special-status plant species and
their habitats if these species become established in the future. Specialstatus plant species or rare or important plant communities are not
anticipated to become established in the channel at these locations.
Therefore, impacts would be less than significant. Vegetation removed
by mowing would be expected to resprout or grow back quickly;
vegetation removed by herbicide use may take up to a year to reestablish.
Minor maintenance activities would be performed on all reaches to repair
and maintain SCVWD facility functions. Minor maintenance activities are
described in Section 2.5.5. New channels are designed to minimize
erosion; therefore, only minor erosion control is anticipated for the new
channels. Accumulated sediment at two locations (at the confluence of
Reaches 4, 5 and 14; and near the top of Reach 6) would be removed
every 10 or more years.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.4.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative would have similar impacts as the Tunnel
Alternative, because the Project alignment, construction, and facilities are
similar. The key difference between this alternative and the Tunnel
Alternative is (1) channel widening and improvements to the existing
channel between West Main Avenue and West Dunne Avenue; and
(2) omission of the tunnel construction within a Section of Reach 8 to
address high flow events. As a consequence, impacts are very similar to
the Tunnel Alternative, the primary difference being greater wetland and
riparian vegetation removal in the section of between West Main Avenue
and West Dunne Avenue where channel widening would be necessary.
As described for the Tunnel Alternative, most construction activities for
the NRCS Alternative in all reaches would result in the removal or
temporary disturbance of vegetation types and habitats that provide
suitable habitat for four special-status plant species or that are rare or
important plant communities. While the route and Project plans for most
of the NRCS Alternative are well-defined, the extent of the impact area
and precise plans has not been developed for the section of Reach 8
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-27

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

between West Main Avenue and West Dunne Avenue. For that reason,
precise area of impact cannot be determined for this segment of channel,
which represents about 4 percent of the total Project length. However, it
is unlikely that special-status plant species occur within the disturbed
sections of West Little Llagas Creek in downtown Morgan Hill. Impacts
for the rest of the Project are well defined, as described above under the
Tunnel Alternative.
Relative to the Tunnel Alternative, the NRCS Alternative would result in
removal of rare or important plant communities in the additional
3,000-foot section that is not part of the Tunnel Alternative. Impact
activities for temporary and permanent impacts would be the same as
described for the Tunnel Alternative. Upland herbaceous habitat would
account for the majority of the vegetation removal associated with this
alternative and approximately 1.5 additional acres of native riparian forest
would be removed as compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
Construction of the NRCS Alternative, similar to the Tunnel Alternative,
would result in the same impacts to California sycamore woodland, would
disturb invasive exotic species populations during construction which
could spread downstream, could result in a permanent indirect impact to
wetlands in the portion of West Little Llagas Creek where flows are
reduced as a result of the Reach 7A diversion channel. In addition,
impacts to jurisdictional wetlands would be similar to the Tunnel
Alternative, except that impacts would be slightly greater, because they
include the additional area of channel widening described above, which is
estimated to be 0.3 acre of waters of the United States and 0.1 acre of
jurisdictional wetlands.
Operation and maintenance activities of the newly constructed features
would be the same as for the Tunnel Alternative, as described in
Section 2.5.5, except that additional maintenance would be required on
West Little Llagas Creek between Main Avenue and West Dunne Avenue
to ensure that high flows are not impeded.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.4.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would have similar impacts to the NRCS
Alternative, because the Project alignment, construction, and facilities are
similar. The key difference between this alternative and the NRCS
Alternative is that an approximately 1,700-foot section of the channel
would not be widened in Reach 8 and flows would be routed into two
culverts under existing developed areas near downtown Morgan Hill. As
a consequence, impacts are very similar, the primary difference being
slightly less

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-28

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

wetland and riparian vegetation removal in the section between Hale
Avenue at the Britton School athletic fields and Del Monte Avenue where
culvert would be built. In addition, flows in channel avoided section would
be limited to runoff from the local area as described below. Given the
amount of impervious area and amount of irrigated landscape, flows are
expected to be relatively low, but present periodically at least during the
rainy season which will support some vegetation, but possibly at reduced
quantity from the existing condition.
As described for the NRCS Alternative, most construction activities for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative in all reaches would result in the removal or
temporary disturbance of vegetation types and habitats that provide
suitable habitat for special-status plant species or that are rare or
important plant communities. While the route and Project plans for most
of the Culvert/Channel Alternative are well-defined the extent of the
impact area and precise plans has not been developed for the section of
Reach 8 between Hale Avenue at the Britton School athletic fields and
Del Monte Avenue. For that reason, precise area of impact cannot be
determined for this segment of channel or south of this location where
channel widening would differ from the Tunnel Alternative. Combined
with the additional segment of the NRCS Alternative, this represents
about 7 percent of the total Project length. However, impacts for the rest
of the Project are well defined as described above under the Tunnel
Alternative.
Construction of the Culvert/Channel Alternative, similar to the NRCS
Alternative, would result in the same impacts to California sycamore
woodland, would disturb invasive exotic species populations during
construction which could spread downstream, could result in a permanent
indirect impact to wetlands in the portion of West Little Llagas Creek
where flows are reduced as a result of the Reach 7A diversion channel.
Relative to the NRCS Alternative, the Culvert/Channel Alternative would
result in less removal of rare or important plant communities and potential
habitat for special-status plant species in the 1,700-foot section that
would be avoided by construction of the culverts. Impacting activities for
temporary and permanent impacts would be the same as described for
the Tunnel Alternative. Upland herbaceous habitat would account for the
majority of the vegetation removal associated with this alternative. As
compared to the NRCS Alternative, approximately 1.12 acres of riparian
forest and 0.02 acre of riparian scrub would not be removed, but could be
indirectly affected by reduced flows in this section of creek. Additional
planted trees around the athletic fields and streets would need to be
removed, thus impacted.
Operation and maintenance activities of the newly constructed features
would be the same as for the NRCS Alternative, as described in
Section 2.5.5, except that maintenance would not be required on West
Little Llagas Creek between Hale Avenue at the Britton School athletic
fields and Del Monte Avenue.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-29

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.4.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
Impacts of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be similar to the Tunnel
Alternative, except that there would be (1) reduced high flow events in the
Reach 6 below the bypass and in Reach 5; (2) the magnitude of high flow
events will increase in Reach 14 due to the bypass; (3) there would be no
construction disturbance to the lower part of Reach 6 below the junction
with the bypass channel and in Reach 5; and (4) there would additional
disturbance of Reach 14 to enlarge the channel to accommodate the
additional flow from the bypass channel. This equates to substantially
less vegetation and wetland removal in Reaches 5 and 6.
As described for the Tunnel Alternative, most construction activities for
the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative in all reaches would result in the removal
or temporary disturbance of vegetation types and habitats that provide
suitable habitat for special-status plant species or that are rare or
important plant communities. While the route for most of the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative is well-defined, the extent of the impact area and
precise plans has not been developed for the bypass section. For that
reason, area of impact cannot be determined for this segment, which
represents about 2 percent of the total Project length. Impacts for the rest
of the Project are well defined, as described above under the Tunnel
Alternative.
Relative to the Tunnel Alternative, the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would
result in less removal of rare or important plant communities and potential
habitat for special-status plant species, because approximately 3 miles of
channel downstream of the bypass (Reach 5 and a portion of Reach 6)
would not be directly impacted as like with the other Action Alternatives.
Impact activities for temporary and permanent impacts would be the
same as described for the Tunnel Alternative. Upland herbaceous habitat
would account for the majority of the vegetation removal associated with
this alternative. However, approximately 3.1 acres of Riparian Forest and
13.7 acres Riparian Scrub (not including California sycamore woodland)
would be avoided as compared to the Tunnel Alternative. Construction of
the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would result in the direct loss of up to
approximately 8 acres of California sycamore woodland, which is less
than for the Tunnel Alternative. However, similar to the No Action
Alternative, with hydrologic changes to Llagas Creek from agriculture and
upstream development, including the construction of Chesbro Reservoir,
this habitat type is expected to continue to decline within the undisturbed
Reach 5 and a portion of Reach 6.
Indirect impacts include reduced vigor of riparian and wetland vegetation
the portion of the creek that would be bypassed and introduction on nonnative invasive species. Impacts to vegetation in the bypassed creek
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-30

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

section are expected to be negligible to positive, because only high flows
would be diverted and high flows are not generally necessary for the
maintenance of vegetation and wetlands. Furthermore, high flows
promote scour which can result in the loss of herbaceous wetland
vegetation and small shrubs and trees.
Construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, similar to the other
Action Alternatives, would disturb invasive exotic species populations
during construction which could spread downstream, could result in a
permanent indirect impact to wetlands in the portion of West Little Llagas
Creek where flows are reduced as a result of the Reach 7A diversion
channel.
Operation and maintenance activities of the newly constructed features
would be the same as for the Tunnel Alternative, as described in
Section 2.5.5, except that maintenance would not be necessary on
approximately 3 miles of channel downstream of the bypass in Reaches 5
and 6, as these are outside the construction footprint of this alternative.
As described for the Tunnel Alternative, maintenance activities could
result in permanent or temporary impacts to rare or important plant
communities, or special-status plant species, or their habitats. Vegetation
removal would result in impacts to rare or important plant communities
that require mitigation, as described for the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for the various Action Alternatives are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.4.4

Summary of Impacts to Botanical Resources
Impacts to sensitive plant communities (except California sycamore woodland),
riparian communities, special-status plants and their habitats, and jurisdictional
wetlands and waters of the United States as a result of implementation of the
Action Alternatives would be mitigated with mitigation measures. All action
alternatives would result in unavoidable impacts to California sycamore
woodlands. The Tunnel Alternative would have fewer impacts to rare or
important plant communities and special-status plant species, and waters of the
United States, compared to the NRCS and the Culvert Channel alternatives,
primarily due to the smaller footprint in Reach 8 associated with the construction
of the tunnel.
The NRCS Alternative, compared to other alternatives, has the highest acreage
of impacts to vegetation communities that potentially support special-status
plants or sensitive vegetation communities. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative has
the lowest acreage of impacts to vegetation communities. This alternative
reduces the construction footprint in Reach 8 compared to the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives and also has the smallest footprint in Reach 5 and
in Reach 6 downstream of the bypass channel. The Culvert/Channel Alternative
has a footprint in Reach 8 that is smaller than the NRCS Alternative but larger
than the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-31

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Botanical Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-32

Chapter 4

4.5

Environmental Consequences

WILDLIFE RESOURCES
4.5.1

Introduction
This section describes the wildlife resources of the Project area, including wildlife
habitats, common wildlife species, and special-status wildlife species. In addition,
this section discusses potential Project impacts to special-status wildlife species
and their habitats that occur within the Project area.
Section 3.5.3, Environmental Setting, describes the regulations and ordinances
that apply to wildlife resources.
A list of special-status wildlife species was compiled for the Project area based
on the following sources: the CDFW, California Natural Diversity Data Base
(CNDDB; Appendix H; Figure 3.5-1), the USFWS species lists for the Project
Quadrangles, and the Santa Clara County List (Appendix I).
Baseline information on wildlife resources in the Project area, including
special-status species and their habitats, was compiled from existing published
and unpublished literature describing biological resources in the region,
environmental database searches, consultation with local wildlife professionals,
and information provided by staff from the CDFW, USFWS Pacific Southwest
Region, the SCVWD, and the USACE. Primary data sources include the
following:


Baseline Biological Resources/Habitat Mapping—Verification and
updated habitat map of the 2006 Tetra Tech habitat map and updated
California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) query of the Upper Llagas
Creek Flood Protection Project. Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012.
(prepared for Cardno ENTRIX).



Biological Resources Report for Lake Silveira Master Plan—H.T. Harvey
& Associates (prepared for Amphion Environmental Inc.) 1988.



Hydrography, Hydrology, Water Quality, and Plant Communities of Lake
Silveira, Morgan Hill area, Santa Clara County. July 23, 2012 (prepared
for Cardno ENTRIX).



Baseline Biological Study of Lake Silveira—prepared by Condor Country
Consulting, Inc.



Surveys for Red-legged Frog and California Tiger Salamander—prepared
by Santa Clara Valley Water District.



Butterfield Biological Boulevard Resources Extension Assessment—
Wetlands Research Associates (WRA), Inc. May 2010 (prepared for the
City of Morgan Hill, California).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-33

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences


California Red-legged frog distribution and status—1997. H.T. Harvey &
Associates (prepared for SCVWD).



California Tiger Salamander Distribution and Status—1999. H.T. Harvey
& Associates (prepared for SCVWD).



California Tiger Salamander Surveys and Site Assessments at Selected
Santa Clara County Locations H.T. Harvey & Associates (August 2012).



Final Recovery Plan for the Least Bell’s Vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus)—U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). March 1998.



Draft Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Biological
Assessment—Santa Clara County. November 2001.



Lake Silveira Restoration Project Design Development Report—H.T.
Harvey & Associates (Prepared for RMC Water and Environment).
October 18, 2013.



Least Bell’s vireo breeding records in the Central Valley following
decades of extirpation—Howell, C.A., Wood, J.K., Dettling, M.D., Griggs,
K., Otte, C.C., Lina, L., Gardali, T. 2010. pp. 105-113.



Lower Llagas Creek Least Bell’s Vireo Surveys (Project # 3035-14), H.T.
Harvey & Associates. August 19, 2010.



Upper Llagas Creek Bridge and Culvert Surveys for Bat Habitat (HTH
Project #3270-18)—H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD).
January 28, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: Inclusion of Bat Evaluations
into Environmental Documents—Technical Memorandum from Melissa
Moore to Mitchell Katzel—Cardno ENTRIX. February 6, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: Biological Report—Least
Bell’s Vireo Assessment.



Technical memorandum from Stephen M. Ferranti to Mitchell Katzel—
Cardno ENTRIX. February 6, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Burrowing Owl Survey and
Impact Assessment, H.T. Harvey & Associates. July 5, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project least Bell’s vireo
Assessment. Unpublished report prepared by Dr. Rottenborn, H.T.
Harvey & Associates. September 26, 2011.



Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Notice of Preparation, SCH
#2012102032, Santa Clara County. California Department of Fish and
Wildlife.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-34

Chapter 4

4.5.2

Environmental Consequences


Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project: West Little Llagas Creek
Wildlife Habitat Assessment Technical Memorandum (HTH Project
#3270-21)—H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD).
September 13, 2013.



Upper Llagas Creek Project: Lake Silveira special study: focused surveys
for detection of California red-legged frog and California tiger salamander
final report. Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012.



Upper Llagas Creek Tunnel Bat Exclusion Design (HTH Project
#3270-17)—H.T. Harvey & Associates (prepared for SCVWD).
December 21, 2012.

No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential
areas of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue. Storm runoff would continue
through the West Little Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and Llagas Creek
channel reaches. The bypass channel in Reach 7A would not be constructed
under the No Action Alternative, and channel bank erosion and widening would
likely continue. Maintenance of the Upper Llagas Creek facilities would be
conducted in accordance with the guidelines established in the SMP Update
2012–2022 (SCVWD 2011). SMP activities, including routine maintenance of
stream channels involving ongoing sediment removal, vegetation management,
bank protection, and associated minor activities, would continue to directly and
indirectly impact wildlife and wildlife habitat. The SMP includes a series of
resource protection policies and BMPs to reduce impacts to wildlife. The SMP
also includes measures to nuisance and invasive species including vegetation
management and giant reed (Arundo spp.) control.
Under the No Action Alternative, construction activities and channel improvement
would not occur. Therefore, no impacts to common and special-status nesting
birds, special-status reptiles or amphibians, common and special-status bats,
San Francisco dusky-footed wood rat, special-status invertebrates, migratory
mammals, including San Joaquin kit fox and American badger, would occur due
to construction activities.
Operation and maintenance activities, such as vegetation and sediment removal
may result in both direct and indirect impacts by disturbing nesting birds, reptiles
or amphibians, serpentine-associated invertebrate species, including Opler’s
longhorn moth and Bay checkerspot butterfly, bats, such as pallid and hoary bat,
San Francisco dusky-footed wood rat, invertebrates, migratory mammals,
including coyote, deer, bobcat, San Joaquin kit fox, and American badger.
These species could use habitat within the Project area and habitat adjacent to
the Project area for foraging, water, and as refuge during migration or dispersal
to more suitable foraging and or breeding areas. Although the San Joaquin kit
fox and American badger would be expected to occur infrequently and at very
low number of individuals, the species could move through the Project area
during dispersal, between areas of known breeding habitat and to areas outside
of the Project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-35

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Vegetation maintenance, sediment removal, and or minor maintenance activities
could result in: disturbance from maintenance personnel, noise, and
maintenance equipment; accidental trapping and killing of individuals if
equipment (e.g., trucks, excavators, etc.) compacts or fills burrows. Vegetation
maintenance of upland habitat and in-channel sediment and vegetation removal
may reduce and remove suitable prey habitat and/or decrease availability of prey
species (e.g., frogs, fish, invertebrates, rodents, etc.), thus impacting larger
special-status mammal species foraging opportunities. Special-status migratory
mammalian species may be forced to move from suitable, temporary refuge
habitat to less suitable habitat due to removal of understory vegetation and or
emergent vegetation in or around the channel (e.g., deer are known to seek
shelter in dense cattails during low channel flows and/or around sand bars that
form in the channel as a result of sediment accumulation).
Removal of smaller trees and trees with dense foliage would also reduce roosting
habitat and result in both direct and indirect impacts to wildlife. Generally
operation and maintenance activities result in limited trimming and possible
removal of limited amounts of woody riparian vegetation and does not include
removing large, mature trees that could potentially disturb wildlife. Direct impacts
to the aforementioned wildlife would occur when individuals are physically injured
or killed during removal of vegetation or sediment, subjected to stress from being
disturbed during hibernation, or face increased risk of predation when forced to
leave their preferred habitat. Structural element maintenance would be
performed on an as needed basis. Excessive noise during maintenance activities
of vegetation and sediment removal, and maintenance of structural elements
(e.g., culverts and bridges) could disturb wildlife and result in abandonment of
their young.
Maintenance activities within the creek channel would continue to be carried out
according to the SCVWD’s SMP. The SMP established procedures for routine
maintenance of stream channels involving ongoing sediment removal, vegetation
management, bank protection, and associated minor activities, as described in
Section 2.4. The SMP incorporated a wetland and riparian mitigation program, a
series of resource protection policies, and BMPs to address and reduce
environmental impacts from the aforementioned maintenance activities. Such
BMPs have provisions for revegetating channel banks and benches, identification
and avoidance of occupied roosts, minimize impacts to aquatic reptiles and
amphibians by reducing impacts to water quality (e.g., erosion and sediment
control), provisions to ensure that the best means to bypass flows through a work
area would be used, minimize disturbance to the channel, and avoid direct
mortality of aquatic animals. See Appendix B of this EIS for the SCVWD’s SMP
BMPs.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-36

Chapter 4

4.5.3

Environmental Consequences

Action Alternatives

4.5.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative includes channel improvements (i.e., widening
and deepening), excavation of diversion channels, and construction of
permanent maintenance roads, reinforced concrete boxes, and grade
control structures in Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14. In Reach 8 an
underground concrete tunnel would be constructed under Nob Hill to
convey high flows. A 250-foot-long sediment detention basin and inlet
weir would be constructed between Wright Avenue and Hillwood Lane to
capture sediments from traveling to downstream reaches. Culverts would
be constructed leading downstream from the sediment basin to the tunnel
entrance along Hale Avenue and from the tunnel outlet to downstream of
Ciolino Avenue. Under the Tunnel Alternative culverts in Reach 6,
drainages in Reach 14, and a new diversion channel in Reach 7A would
also be constructed. Two bridges in Reach 7A would be exhumed and
culverts in Reach 7B would be modified. The Lake Silveira mitigation
element would consist of constructed inlet and outlet structures to split
flow from Llagas Creek into the historic Llagas Creek channel and Lake
Silveira, as well as restoration activities to increase riparian and wetland
habitat (see Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 for further details).
Construction activity associated with the Tunnel Alternative would affect
wildlife resources within the Project area as compared to the No Action
Alternative. A sediment detention basin and inlet weir will be constructed
in the channel through a ruderal field within Reach 8. This new feature
would also have a maintenance/access road installed at the top one bank
of the channel.
Direct impacts would occur if construction equipment and personnel kill,
injure, or crush ground nesting birds, and/or modify habitat suitability for
nesting birds (i.e., through the removal of suitable ground nesting habitat
to construct the detention basin). Construction of permanent
maintenance roads on channel banks could result in impacts to nesting
birds that utilize the channel banks for foraging and or nesting
opportunities, as well as burrow destruction and direct loss of habitat or
individual through disturbance of grassland areas that support small
mammal habitat.
Removal of riparian vegetation (e.g., native shrub and hardwood trees),
in-channel emergent vegetation, and upland vegetation in Project area
reaches during channel construction could result in potential impacts to
nesting special-status birds, migratory birds and non-special-status birds
protected by the MBTA (including raptors, wading birds, and other
passerines) if foraging and nesting activities occur in or adjacent to the
construction site. Removal of riparian vegetation would decrease or
remove suitable foraging habitat, roosting, and nesting habitat for tree
and shrub nesting birds such as western burrowing owl, western
Meadowlark, and killdeer. Upland grading, for the construction of
maintenance roads, would remove riparian scrub vegetation that would
provide habitat for a variety of nesting birds. Upland grading and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-37

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

excavation of a channel through agricultural and open habitat could result
in potential impacts to ground nesting birds, such as western burrowing
owl, western Meadowlark, and killdeer. Potential disturbance to breeding
individuals and/or destruction of burrows, nests, and scrapes could occur
during the nesting season if ground nests are located in or adjacent to the
construction zone.
Excavation and grading of a channel, particularly construction of a
sediment detention basin and inlet weir along the creek in Reach 8 and
through the agricultural lands (predominately through Reach 7A), could
impact ground nesting species, such as western burrowing owl, western
meadowlark, and San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat, and foraging
habitat for diurnal raptors, such as red-tailed hawk and American kestral.
Excavation through this habitat would result in compaction of burrows and
direct mortality, decreasing suitable habitat for prey species. However,
the Project would not impact nesting habitat for burrowing owls due to the
absence of breeding owls. The Project has limited potential to impact
foraging habitat for owls breeding outside the Project area; and, although,
there is some potential to impact roosting and foraging habitat for
wintering owls, these affected areas represent a small portion of the
regionally available foraging habitat (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013f).
Potential habitat occurs within the Project area that could provide suitable
migratory corridors for common and special-status species, such as
coyote, deer, bobcat, San Joaquin kit fox, and American badger.
Mammalian wildlife could use the habitats within the Project area and
habitat adjacent to the Project area for foraging, water, and as refugia.
During the construction phase, portions of the channel would not be
available for wildlife to use as a migratory corridor, because exclusionary
fencing would be installed around facilities and adjacent work areas that
are to be protected from construction-related disturbance. Discontinuity of
riparian vegetation and habitat would possibly interrupt the ability of
mammalian wildlife to move from one suitable habitat patch to another,
especially if the migratory corridor goes through the Project area.
However, within the Project area, the San Joaquin kit fox and American
badger would likely occur only as a rare dispersant between areas of
known habitat. Their occurrence is expected to be very low and
infrequent. Indirect impacts would result to migratory mammalian
species, if the Project area were utilized as a “resting stop” between
patches of more suitable habitat; if habitat within the Project area was no
longer available to the species, the individual would be forced to continue
moving at the expense of increased physiological stress that could affect
survivability. The disruption of movement corridor as a result of
construction activities would range from 1 to 5 years. Impacts on
movement corridors for wildlife species would be significant without
mitigation. Construction of sediment detention basin and tunnel under
Nob Hill would occur in downtown Morgan Hill. This area is highly
developed and urbanized, thus does not provide a high quality migratory
corridor to such mammalian species; migratory species would not likely
occur in that reach.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-38

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

In addition, there is the potential for impacts to special-status reptiles and
amphibians when using upland habitat for estivation. These species are
associated with annual and perennial grassland and commonly observed
in open, agricultural areas with ground squirrel activity. Construction of a
sediment detention basin could directly harm WPT that maybe inhabiting
the channel in Reach 8. Indirect effects would also occur through
alteration of the channels habitat suitability (e.g., decrease emergent
wetland vegetation or basking sites) and if necessary foraging and
nesting habitat is altered or destroyed, if water quality is impaired as a
result of construction activities, or through the introduction of predators.
Similar direct impacts would occur as a result of construction of culverts.
Opler’s longhorn moth and Bay checkerspot butterfly have the potential to
occur within the Project area and in adjacent serpentine grasslands
where their host plants could occur. Any construction activity, during
vegetation management, sediment removal, grading, equipment use,
vehicle traffic, and worker foot traffic that would occur in or adjacent to
serpentine habitat may result in the injury or mortality of individual
serpentine associated plant and serpentine associated invertebrate.
Vegetation removal, particularly removal of serpentine grasslands
adjacent to the channel and upland grading for access and maintenance
roads, would have the potential to remove and/or destroy larval food
plant. Direct impacts to individuals would occur if the species is within the
construction zone and construction equipment or personnel kill, injury, or
trample a special-status invertebrate. Construction activities within
channel would likely not impact the Bay checkerspot butterfly or Opler’s
longhorn beetle, as it is unlikely these species would be utilizing the
channel for forage. Many moths are attracted to artificial lights and stay in
close proximity to the light as long as it is turned on. This could result in
use of excessive energy, which could result in interference in mating or
make them easy prey for nocturnal predators, such as bats.
San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat nests were observed adjacent to
Reach 7A near the intersection of Watsonville Road and Monterey Road
in (WRA 2010). Nests were observed along West Little Llagas Creek at
the edge of riparian woodland habitat. Wood rats may use more than one
nest and may move from nest to nest as they forage within their home
range. The nest serves as a place of residence to store food and bear
young. Due to this dependency, nests are of particular importance to
wood rats and disturbance to them would be avoided to the extent
possible. Removal or conversion of riparian habitat would directly impact
active woodrat nests, individual woodrats, and would reduce woodrat
nesting and foraging habitat. If night work occurs in the vicinity of these
nests, it could result in delay of their nightly emergence in the presence of
lighting, which could result in shortened feeding time, difficulty in foraging,
or increased mortality due to impairment of night vision.
In addition, in-stream work could alter water quality through accidental
discharge of hazardous material or discharging sediment downstream
and impair foraging and breeding habitat for the aforementioned wildlife.
Special-status amphibians and reptiles habitat would be lost if the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-39

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

aforementioned structures are placed in occupied breeding, foraging, or
estivating habitat for the species. Construction along the channel would
remove riparian vegetation that could provide refuge and shelter from
predators; removal of this vegetation may increase predation risks for
amphibians by decreasing suitable habitat that provided cover and
possibly making the modified habitat attractive to predatory animals (e.g.,
cats, coyotes, raptors, and raccoons). Indirect impacts could occur if
necessary foraging and nesting habitat is altered or destroyed, if water
quality is impaired as a result of construction activities, or through the
introduction of predators.
Habitat enhancement of Lake Silveira and re-establishment of the historic
Llagas Creek channel would require some vegetation removal in order to
construct the inlet and outlet structures and to provide access for
equipment and personnel. Habitat loss for nesting birds, for common and
special-status bats and for the San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat
would be temporary and the majority of vegetation removed would be
invasive blackberry. Suitable migratory corridors for common and
special-status mammalian species could be temporarily impacted. These
areas would be restored with native riparian woodland plant species,
benefiting common and special-status mammalian species and further
benefiting nesting birds. The restoration of the lake would increase the
amount of emergent marsh habitat and would attract bird species not
currently supported at the site (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013g). The
restoration of the lake would increase the amount of emergent wetland
habitat. This would increase the amount of breeding habitat for all frogs,
including bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana) that could predate on native
special-status amphibians and reptiles. Although the restoration effort
would possibly increase bullfrog populations, the habitat would be
improved for native frogs. Restoration of Lake Silveira would not impact
special-status serpentine associated invertebrates, because the areas to
be impacted during construction do not support serpentine grassland
habitat.
Under the Tunnel Alternative, there would be less vegetation removal in
some Project reaches. Impacts to nesting birds, for common and
special-status bats and for the San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat are
lessened with reduced vegetation removal along the existing West Little
Llagas Creek channel. With construction of the tunnel under Nob Hill,
there would be no channel widening as the channel section through
downtown Morgan Hill would be avoided, thus reducing nesting and
foraging habitat impacts.
The cut-off section of West Little Llagas Creek would have reduced flows
except for local runoff (due to construction of a diversion channel in
Reach 7A) would indirectly impact nesting birds (such as great egret,
great blue heron, or mallards) by decreasing foraging habitat; intermittent
flows at West Little Llagas Creek may support small prey species (e.g.,
amphibians, small mammals, fish, and invertebrates, etc.) that wading
birds utilize for forage. Loss of flows to this creek could decrease suitable
habitat for the prey species, thus indirectly decreasing foraging habitat for
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-40

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

nesting birds. However, suitable nesting habitat for common and
special-status nesting birds is absent from the site and from adjacent
areas along West Little Llagas Creek (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013g).
Under the Tunnel Alternative, the tunnel would be constructed under Nob
Hill between Warren Avenue and Del Monte Avenue and culverts would
be constructed in Reaches 7B and 8. There will be no regular
maintenance required in the tunnel. The tunnel would be constructed to
minimize smaller crevices and openings for bats to roost in. It is
anticipated that air would regularly flow through the tunnel with
differences in the ambient outside temperature and the in-tunnel
temperature. It is less likely that bats would roost in situations with air
movement; however, bats would be expected to roost in warm dead air
spaces, such as the area inside three planned access points (H.T. Harvey
& Associates 2012a). If bats develop a roosting colony in the tunnel they
could present a water quality problem due to the presence and build-up of
guano which can introduce E. coli and nitrogen. Additionally, if a colony
establishes in the tunnel, then they could be subject to injury or killed
when high flows occur. Consequently to ensure that bats are not injured
and to protect water quality they should be precluded from establishing a
roosting colony in the tunnel.
Bats are expected to use the existing structures found in the Project area
as only night-roosts, as the structures lack appropriate crevices, weep
hole, or other features that could be used by day-roosting bats.
Furthermore, bats are expected to use the Masten Avenue (Reach 4),
U.S. 101 north and south (Reach 5), and Llagas Avenue (Reach 6)
bridges only during the warmer months based on lack of fresh guano
below roost sites during field surveys conducted in late winter (H.T.
Harvey & Associates 2013e).
Displacement or directly harming of roosting bats in culverts being
replaced could occur in various Project reaches. Removal of agricultural,
residential, and commercial/industrial buildings in the Project area would
also result in loss of roosting areas. If night work requiring light occurs in
these areas, it would result in delay of their nightly emergence in the
presence of lighting, which could result in shortened feeding time,
difficulty in foraging, or increased mortality due to impairment of night
vision.
Yuma myotis and pallid bat are known to commonly use bridges as roosts
(Johnston et al. 2004 as cited in H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012a).
Bridges are frequently used as roosts, because the upper surface of the
bridge heats ups during the day and remains warmer than ambient
temperatures through the night. Tunnels are often used the same
species where the tunnels ceiling surface is warmer. Two buried bridges
are to be exhumed as part of the Tunnel Alternative. Following their
construction, these bridges may provide suitable roosting habitat for some
species.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-41

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Construction equipment, noise, lights for night work, and increased
human presence would likely deter wildlife from entering the work area
that would normally utilize the area for forage or refuge; even if
construction activities were performed during the day, alteration of
existing habitat (as a result of channel widening and deepening and
upland grading) may result in decreased habitat suitability for many
wildlife species. The habitats within the Project area provide valuable
foraging and refuge resources for wildlife; if wildlife species are excluded
from using these habitats, it would force them into adjacent habitat that
would be less suitable and could result in both direct and indirect impacts
to the species. Direct impacts could result if, for example, a dispersing
bobcat were to normally migrate through the riparian corridor within the
Project was not able to because of construction disturbance and was
forced to cross busy streets and residential area, the bobcat could be
struck by a vehicle and killed.
The noise associated with construction of the tunnel may disturb birds
nesting within the vicinity of the construction area. Noise disruption would
be temporary and the birds would be able to move to adjacent suitable
habitat outside of the noise range. The construction of a tunnel under
Nob Hill would not impact special-status serpentine associated
invertebrates, because the location of the tunnel would be through an
existing urban environment and there would be no likelihood of serpentine
grassland to occur there.
Under the Tunnel Alternative, operation and maintenance activities (i.e.,
vegetation management, sediment removal, and maintenance of other
features, such as roads, culverts, and grade control structures) would be
similar to the No Action Alternative with the added maintenance of new
constructed features, such as the tunnel and grade control structures.
Operation and maintenance activities would be implemented as described
in Section 2.5.5.
Operation and maintenance activities in the channel could potentially
result in temporary impacts to nesting birds. Minor maintenance activities
would be performed to repair and maintain channel capacity and SCVWD
facility functions and could occur anywhere within the Project area.
Pruning or removal of riparian vegetation could potentially disturb a
variety of common and special-status nesting birds that rely on this
habitat type for foraging and nesting activities. Maintenance activities that
disturb nesting birds have the potential to result in nesting birds
abandoning their nests, resulting in failure of nesting attempts or loss of
chicks. Abandonment of a nest resulting in the failure of eggs or death of
chicks would be a significant impact. Removal of in-stream vegetation
associated with sediment removal activities may result in the temporary
loss of breeding and/or foraging habitat. Sediment management would
be reduced in downstream Project reaches with the newly constructed
detention basin capturing sediments traveling from upstream.
Re-grading of existing access roads and pedestrian paths could result in
the destruction of ground nesting bird scrapes and/or mortality of adults
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-42

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and chicks in ground nests (e.g., common dove and kill deer commonly
occupy ground nests in gravel and disturbed areas). Minor maintenance
activities could result in a reduction in the quality of breeding or foraging
habitat because of the accidental introduction of non-native vegetation
(i.e., mud on the underside of construction crew boots may contain seeds
of invasive weeds and grasses). Minor vegetation removal (i.e., trimming
of shrubs and mowing of annual grasses) would decrease suitable habitat
for invertebrate prey species and small mammal cover that are important
food sources for nesting birds, including raptors. Loss of small mammals,
from small mammal controls (either through rodenticide or trapping),
would reduce the availability of burrows and prey for western burrowing
owl.
In addition, operation and maintenance activities of the newly constructed
features could result in permanent or temporary impacts to special-status
reptiles and amphibians and their habitats. Minor maintenance activities
would be performed to repair and maintain SCVWD facility functions and
could occur anywhere within the Project area. Vegetation management
would likely be expanded over existing conditions since the Project would
require the revegetation of much of the Project area. Vegetation
maintenance would be based on the maintenance of design flows
according to the roughness coefficients, as shown in Table 2.5.5.
Vegetation removal methods include herbicides, hand pruning, hand
removal, and mowing. Amphibians could be impacted by the absorption
of chemicals through their skin. Hand or mechanical pruning or removal
impacts along channel banks could include mortality of individuals
crushed or injured by vehicles or equipment and disturbance to mammal
burrows used as refugia. Sediment removal would be conducted in a
couple of areas on regular intervals. Removal of sediment is estimated to
be required no more than once every 10 years.
Maintenance culverts would need to be periodically performed and could
adversely affect pallid bat and Yuma myotis. These two species of bats
commonly use bridges, culverts, and other tunnels for roosting habitat
(H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012a). Tunnels and culverts are used by the
bats when the “tunnel ceiling approaches the ground or road surface as
access points where solar heat warms through to the tunnel’s ceiling
surface” (H.T. Harvey & Associates 2012a). Maintenance activities in the
culverts include sediment and debris removal, and may displace or
directly harm common and special-status roosting bats that are attracted
to the structure and use it as a day, night, or maternity roosts. Individual
bats could be harmed or killed; loss of individual special-status bats would
be a significant impact.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-43

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.5.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative differs from the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s
Proposed Action) in that it would increase the Project footprint in Reach 8.
The NRCS Alternative would require a larger amount of Right of Way,
increase the amount of vegetation to be removed along the existing West
Little Llagas Creek, increase the extent of bank excavation, increase the
amount of fill into jurisdictional waters, increase the amount of hardscape
required in Reach 8, increase utilities relocation, and increase culvert
replacements through downtown Morgan Hill. The construction approach
and duration for the NRCS Alternative would be the same throughout the
entire Project reaches as previously described for the Tunnel Alternative,
except in Reach 8. The NRCS Alternative would require 3,600 feet of
channel modifications, culvert replacements between West Main Avenue
and West Dunne Avenue, and increase the Project footprint in Reach 8
as compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
There are several features unique to the NRCS Alternative that could
cause direct and/or indirect impacts to common and special-status
nesting birds. Increased channel widening and deepening between West
Main Avenue and West Dunne Avenue in Reach 8 as compared to the
Tunnel Alternative could cause direct impacts would occur if construction
equipment and personnel may kill, injury, or crush nesting birds, and/or
modify habitat suitability for nesting birds (i.e., through the removal of
suitable nesting trees).
Channel widening/deepening and culvert replacements would increase
nesting and foraging habitat indirect impacts to nesting birds at that reach
with the removal of riparian habitat for nesting birds. Overall, more
construction activities would increase both direct and indirect impacts to
nesting birds compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
As compared to the Tunnel Alternative, more channel
widening/deepening and culvert replacements through downtown Morgan
Hill in Reach 8 would be needed for this alternative, thus increasing
impacts on breeding, foraging, or estivating habitats of special-status
amphibians and reptiles. Impacts are further increased with greater
amounts of vegetation removal along the existing West Little Llagas
Creek channel as part of this alternative. A larger footprint of right of way
would increase the extent of upland habitat modification and result in
more impact to habitat suitability for special-status amphibians and
reptiles, although downtown Morgan Hill is not likely to support
special-status amphibians and reptiles. Direct and indirect impacts that
result in the loss of special-status reptiles and amphibians would be
reduced with BMPs and mitigation as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
Construction related impacts to special-status bats would be similar to the
Tunnel Alternative, except under the NRCS Alternative there would be
more impact to upland habitat because this alternative requires a larger
footprint of right of way and an increased amount of vegetation removed
in Reach 8; increased construction related impacts to upland and riparian
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-44

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

habitat would results in more direct and indirect impacts to roosting bats
through more disturbance to potential roosting and foraging habitat. With
increased channel widening/deepening and culvert replacement activity
through downtown Morgan Hill in Reach 8, impacts to roosting and
foraging habitat for bats would be increased compared to the Tunnel
Alternative. Increased construction activities would increase potential
impacts to habitat that migratory mammals would use during dispersal
events. This area is highly developed and urbanized, thus does not
provide a high quality migratory corridor to such mammalian species as
the San Joaquin kit fox or American badger; these species would not
likely occur in that reach. All other construction impacts to migratory
mammals, including San Joaquin kit fox and American badger, are similar
to those described in the Tunnel Alternative.
San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat have the potential to occur with the
Project area and in riparian woodland habitat. Vegetation removal,
particularly removal of riparian scrub adjacent to the channel, and upland
grading for access and maintenance road would have the potential to
remove and or destroy nesting habitat. Under the NRCS Alternative, there
would be an increase in right of way, increased amounts of vegetation
removal along the existing West Little Llagas channel, and increased
culvert replacements as compared to the Tunnel Alternative. Increased
upland habitat disturbance and increased vegetation removal under this
alternative would increase the potential for direct and indirect impacts to
woodrats.
Opler’s longhorn moth and Bay checkerspot butterfly have the potential to
occur with the Project area and in adjacent grasslands where their host
plants could occur. Vegetation removal, particularly removal of
grasslands adjacent to the channel, and upland grading for access and
maintenance road would have the potential to remove and or destroy
larval food plant. Under the NRCS Alternative there would be an
increased right of way, increased amounts of vegetation removal along
the existing West Little Llagas channel, and increased culvert
replacements as compared to the Tunnel Alternative, although there are
no known serpentine habitats through downtown Morgan Hill.
Operation and maintenance (O&M), such as vegetation maintenance
activities (e.g., vegetation trimming and removal), would be managed
similarly to the SCVWD SMP but under permits and conditions for the
Tunnel Alternative. As with the Tunnel Alternative, periodic maintenance
activities as described in Section 2.5.5 could potentially disturb foraging
habitat. O&M related impacts would be increased in downstream Project
reaches without the constructed detention basin capturing sediments
traveling from upstream, as well as increased amounts of channel in
Reach 8 to maintain; therefore, management activities and impacts would
be increased as compared to the Tunnel Alternative. O&M related
impacts to special-status amphibians and reptiles are similar to those
described in the Tunnel Alternative, except for the level of sediment
management. The amount of sediment needed to be removed from
downstream reaches would be increased as compared to the Tunnel
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-45

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Alternative, without the construction of the upstream sediment basin.
O&M related impacts to roosting bats are also similar to those described
in the Tunnel Alternative, except this Alternative would not construct a
new tunnel where there exists an opportunity for bats to potentially
colonize. Sediment and debris removal as part of culvert maintenance
could also disturb roosting bats. Impacts to special-status invertebrates
would be similar to those described in the Tunnel Alternative.
O&M related impacts to migratory mammals, including San Joaquin kit
fox and American badger, are similar to those described in the Tunnel
Alternative. There would be in increased in vegetation sediment in
downstream reaches compared to the Tunnel Alternative. Periodic
removal of riparian vegetation to maintain conveyance capacities could
potentially disturb foraging habitat. Vehicles and crews maintaining new
structures could disturb both common and special-status mammalian
species taking refuge adjacent to the channel. The operation and
maintenance impacts (both direct and indirect) to migratory mammalian
species, including San Joaquin kit fox and American badger, would be
similar to those described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.5.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would require a larger right of way
footprint and increase the amount of vegetation to be removed along the
existing West Little Llagas Creek in Reach 8 relative to the Tunnel
Alternative. The Culvert/Channel Alternative differs from the Tunnel
Alternative in that it would increase the Project footprint in Reach 8 with
the construction of a 1,700-foot segment of a double box culvert through
the Britton School athletic fields and continue under Del Monte Avenue to
West 2nd Street. Flows would pass through this section and would result
in a 1,820-foot section of the existing channel drying up, except for local
runoff. Substantially reducing flows through this section could result in the
permanent loss of up to 0.33 acre of jurisdictional wetlands; however,
several other habitat categories would be less impacted than for the
NRCS Alternative (see Section 4.4, Botanical Resources, for detailed
discussion). From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue the same
channel widening and deepening, along with culvert replacements at 2nd,
3rd, 4th, and 5th streets, would be the same as described under the
NRCS Alternative. All other Project reaches would have the same
features described in the Tunnel Alternative. The construction approach
and duration for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be the same
throughout the entire Project reaches, as previously described for the
Tunnel Alternative. Operation and maintenance activities would be
similar to those described for the Tunnel Alternative, except for Reach 8
where the widened channel through Morgan Hill would need to be
maintained along with periodic culvert maintenance.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-46

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Increased construction activities in Reach 8 through commercial areas
would result in more construction related direct or indirect impacts to
nesting birds as compared to the Tunnel Alternative. Although this is
marginally suitable habitat, construction of the double box culvert through
Reach 8 will take place on previously disturbed areas; however, channel
modification and vegetation removal would occur between West 2nd
Street and West Dunne Avenue. Increased construction related impacts
to upland and riparian habitat would result in more direct and indirect
impacts to nesting birds through more disturbance to nesting and foraging
habitat as compared to the Tunnel Alternative. In addition, this described
condition could result in more direct and indirect impacts to roosting bats
through more disturbance to roosting and foraging habitat. The
construction of the double box culvert will take place in previously
disturbed areas without removal of roosting habitat; therefore, there would
not be any impact associated with this activity.
Increased construction activities in Reach 8 through residential property
could result in more construction related impacts to special-status
amphibians and reptiles and San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat, and
special-status invertebrates as compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
Increased construction related impacts to upland and riparian habitat
could result in more direct and indirect impacts to amphibians and reptiles
through more disturbance to foraging habitat. Construction of the double
box culvert through Reach 8 along Hale Avenue, through the Britton
School athletic fields, and under Del Monte Avenue will take place on
previously disturbed, developed areas. However, flows would bypass
approximately 1,820 feet of the existing channel between Hale Avenue
and the Del Monte Avenue/West 2nd Street intersection, leaving this
section dry except for local runoff thus reducing the availability of wetland
habitat (see Section 4.4, Botanical Resources, for detailed discussion). It
is unlikely, however, that special-status amphibians and reptiles would be
occupying this section due to the surrounding urbanization; therefore,
there would not be significant impacts from this activity. Impacts to
special-status invertebrates are unlikely given the lack of serpentine
grasslands present. The construction of the double box culvert would not
impact special-status serpentine associated invertebrates, because the
location of the culvert would be through an existing urban environment
and there would be no likelihood of serpentine grassland to occur there.
Under the Culvert Channel Alternative, the double box culvert constructed
could potentially be used for night roosts (H.T. Harvey & Associates
2013e). Culverts would need to be periodically inspected and debris
removed. Maintenance activities may displace or directly harm bats using
this structure; loss of individual special-status bats would be a significant
impact. West Little Llagas Creek would travel through the culvert instead
of the segment of the channel between Hale Avenue and Del Monte
Avenue. Vegetation and sediment management activities and associated
in channel activities would be increased for this alternative; therefore,
maintenance impacts to this species would be increased compared to the
Tunnel alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-47

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

All other construction related impacts to the aforementioned wildlife are
similar to those described in Tunnel Alternative; therefore, implementation
of BMPs and mitigation would reduce impact as discussed and described
in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) activities, such as vegetation and
minor maintenance, would be similar to those described in the Tunnel
Alternative, except for the maintenance of the channel between West 2nd
Avenue and West Dunne Avenue. Vegetation and sediment
management activities and associated with in channel activities would be
increased for this alternative compared to the Tunnel Alternative; however
the use of project BMPs would reduce the potential for impacts as
described in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
O&M related impacts to common and special-status nesting birds and
special-status amphibians and reptiles are similar to those described in
Tunnel Alternative, except that maintenance would be increased through
downtown Morgan Hill in Reach 8 due to more channel to maintain. In
addition, O&M related impacts to special-status invertebrates, migratory
mammals, are similar to those described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.5.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative differs from the Tunnel Alternative in that
it would construct a bypass channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek
and Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek to carry flows over the 10 year
event. The bypass would run east through open fields, continue under
Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101, then connect to Reach 14. East Little
Llagas Creek downstream of the bypass (Reach 14) would be designed
to carry the extra flow from the upstream channel capacity. The
construction approach and duration for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
would be similar to the Tunnel Alternative except for the following: no
creek modifications in Reaches 5 and 6 downstream of bypass, greater
channel widening in Reach 14 as compared to Tunnel Alternative
(approximately two times greater), control structures (hydraulic gates) at
Reach 6, three bridge constructions at U.S. 101 and Murphy Road,
maintenance roads would be constructed at the top of banks on both side
of the bypass channel, and culvert modification at Reach 14. Project
activities for the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, 7B, and 14
(downstream of E. San Martin Avenue to the confluence with Llagas
Creek reach) and for the downstream Reach 4 would remain the same as
described for the Tunnel Alternative. Maintenance of Reaches 5 and 6
would be conducted under the SCVWD SMP since these reaches are not
part of this alternative. All other maintenance activities (e.g., vegetation
removal, sediment removal, and other minor activities) would be
maintained according to the BMPs outlined in Section 2.5.5.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-48

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

There are several features unique to the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative that
could result in direct and/or indirect impacts to common and
special-status nesting birds, to common and special-status amphibians
and reptiles, including Western pond turtle and CTS, and to migratory
mammals, including deer, San Joaquin kit fox and American badger.
Greater channel widening in Reach 14 (approximately two times wider
than under the Tunnel Alternative) would result in greater losses of
nesting bird habitat and could potentially lead to greater direct impacts to
nesting birds and losses of aquatic habitat. Construction activities
associated with Reach 6 Bypass, including construction of maintenance
roads on top of both side of the bypass channel, could result in direct
impacts to nesting birds and common and special-status amphibians and
reptiles, including Western pond turtle and CTS, and to migratory
mammals, including San Joaquin kit fox and American badger if
construction equipment and personnel kill, injury, or crush ground nesting
wildlife. Indirect impacts to the aforementioned wildlife could occur if
construction activities modified the habitat such that habitat suitability for
this wildlife was reduced or destroyed (i.e., through the removal of
suitable nesting trees along the maintenance road ROWs). Construction
of hydraulic control structures at Reach 6 would have similar direct and
indirect impact to nesting birds, as construction activities of the Reach 6
Bypass.
Agriculture dominates the area surrounding Reach 14. Reach 14 is
ephemeral and typically dry in summer and fall months; and the channel
contains a combination of annual grasses and bare ground. Vegetation
along the channel also contains native trees. Because the channel is
ephemeral, the potential for occurrence of aquatic reptiles and
amphibians is reduced; however, agricultural drainages and ditches (in
particular, drainages with emergent vegetation) adjacent to the planted
fields could provide suitable habitat for species, such as the WPT.
Construction of hydraulic control structures at Reach 6 would have similar
direct and indirect impact to amphibians and aquatic reptiles as
construction activities of the Reach 6 Bypass. Any construction activities
requiring night lighting could cause disorientation and change natural
behaviors of special-status amphibians and reptiles resulting in
vulnerability to predators or traffic, reduced foraging or mating.
Construction of three new bridges at Murphy Avenue, and U.S. 101
southbound and northbound would have an impact if construction and
staging areas associated with the construction activity removed suitable
nesting habitat and suitable aquatic foraging and/or breeding habitat.
However, upon the completion of the bridge construction, some species
of nesting birds (e.g., swallows) may utilize the bridge for nesting; thus
the impact would be beneficial. In addition, upon the completion of the
bridge construction, some species of bats found within the Project area,
would utilize the bridge for roosting; thus, the impact would be beneficial
to common and special-status roosting bats. Construction of the bridges
would not impact woodrats, as they are not expected to occur at the
proposed bridge locations which are currently in agricultural use.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-49

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, no channel modification would
occur in Reaches 5 and 6 downstream of the bypass; this would remove
the impacts to nesting birds, roosting bats, and reduce impacts to
special-status amphibians and reptiles, as compared to proposed
activities under the Tunnel Alternative at these reaches. Project activities
for upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, 7B and 14 (downstream of E. San
Martin Avenue), and for downstream Reach 4, would be the same as
described under the Tunnel Alternative; thus, the types and levels of
impacts would be the same. Reduced construction activities in Reaches
5 and 6 downstream of the bypass would reduce potential impacts to San
Francisco dusky-footed woodrat as compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
Reduced construction activities in Reaches 5 and 6 downstream of the
bypass would reduce impacts to special-status invertebrates as
compared to the Tunnel Alternative Construction activities associated with
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative have the potential to result impacts to
common and special-status bats. Greater channel widening in Reach 14
would result in greater loss of roosting bat foraging areas and/or roosting
trees, in addition to potential for direct loss of individual bats. Construction
of Reach 6 Bypass, and its associated maintenance/access roads and
hydraulic control structures, would also reduce roosting bat habitat if
construction activities removed suitable roosting trees. Direct impacts
would occur if individual bats and maternal colonies were lost or abandon
as a result of construction related disruption (e.g., noise, increase human
presence etc.). If night work requiring light occurs, it could result in delay
of their nightly emergence in the presence of lighting, which could result
in shortened feeding time, difficulty in foraging, or increased mortality due
to impairment of night vision.
Impacts to common and special-status roosting bats could occur as a
result of maintenance of hydraulic gates at the bypass channel,
maintenance of access roads for the bypass channel, and maintenance of
bridges built at Murphy Avenue, and U.S. 101 northbound and
southbound. The pallid bat could potentially use the newly constructed
structure as a night-roost and during the warmer months (H.T. Harvey &
Associates 2013e).
Features of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative that could result in direct
and/or indirect impacts to San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat include
construction of the bypass through Reach 6, construction of hydraulic
control structures at Reach 6, and construction of access and
maintenance roads to the bypass. Construction equipment and
personnel may kill, injury, or displace woodrats and their dens. If night
work occurs in the vicinity of these nests, it could result in delay of their
nightly emergence in the presence of lighting, which could result in
shortened feeding time, difficulty in foraging, or increased mortality due to
impairment of night vision. There would be greater channel widening and
deepening through Reach 14, as compared to the Tunnel Alternative;
however, construction activities associated with this reach would likely not
have a significant impact on San Francisco dusky-footed wood rat as the
area is open and does not provide high habitat suitability for woodrats.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-50

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Opler’s longhorn moth and Bay checkerspot butterfly have the potential to
occur within the Project area and in adjacent grasslands where their host
plants could occur. Construction activity that resulted in the removal of
grasslands, particularly in serpentine soils, adjacent to the channel, and
upland grading for access and maintenance road would have the
potential to remove and/or destroy larval food plant. Construction
activities associated with Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would result in
construction of a bypass channel through Reach 6 and additional
widening of Reach 14 (upstream of E. San Martin Avenue). If serpentine
soils are within or adjacent to the construction zone, there is potential to
directly and indirectly impact serpentine associated special-status
invertebrates, including Bay checkerspot butterfly.
Many moths are attracted to artificial lights and stay in close proximity to
the light as long as it is turned on. This could result in use of excessive
energy, which could result in interference in mating or make them easy
prey for nocturnal predators, such as bats if night-time lighting is required
for construction. Construction impacts, both direct and indirect, could
occur as a result of construction activities from installation of three
bridges under this alternative if the construction areas and staging area
occurs in serpentine soils.
Potential habitat occurs within the Project area that could provide suitable
migratory corridors for common and special-status species, such as
coyote, deer, bobcat, San Joaquin kit fox, and American badger. Wildlife
could use the habitats within the Project area and habitat adjacent to the
Project area for foraging, water, and as refugia.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) impacts to nesting birds,
special-status amphibians and reptiles, San Francisco dusky-footed
woodrat, migratory mammals, such as San Joaquin kit fox and American
badger, and special-status invertebrates are similar to those described in
Tunnel Alternative, except for the maintenance of hydraulic gates to the
bypass channel, maintenance of access roads to the bypass channel,
and the maintenance of bridges built under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative. Impacts from hydraulic gates and access roads at the bypass
could occur if the aforementioned wildlife are disturbed, killed, or injured
by maintenance activities. Impacts from bridge maintenance work would
occur if there were swallows nesting on the structure. O&M activities
have the potential to directly impact roosting bats through killing or
injuring an individual that may be roosting upon the structure or if roosting
trees are disturbed or removed as a result of the maintenance activity.
Although unlikely, impacts from hydraulic gates and access roads at the
bypass could occur if special-status invertebrates are disturbed, killed, or
injured by maintenance activities. No impacts to special-status
invertebrates would be expected to occur from bridge maintenance since
this does not involve vegetation management. Maintenance of Reaches 5
and 6 downstream of the bypass would be carried out through the
SCVWD SMP, since these reaches would not be improved under this
alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-51

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.5.4

Summary of Impacts to Wildlife Resources
There are several sensitive wildlife resources identified as occurring or having
the potential to occur within Project area and having the potential to be impacted
from Project-related activities. These resources include common and
special-status nesting birds, special-status reptiles and, special-status and
common bats, San Francisco dusky-footed woodrats, special-status
invertebrates, and migratory mammals (including special-status San Joaquin kit
fox and American badger).
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Wildlife Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.6

AQUATIC RESOURCES
4.6.1

Introduction
This section describes the impacts on aquatic biological resources were
qualitatively evaluated using an approach that links Project activities to direct and
indirect effects on special-status aquatic species and their habitats. Effects on
aquatic biological resources can be direct, as in the mortality of individual
specimens (i.e., during construction), and indirect, as in effects that do not cause
the immediate mortality of an individual, but that may reduce the habitat or
eliminate the species over time.

4.6.2

No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential
areas of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue. The diversion channel in
Reach 7A would not be constructed under the No Action Alternative. Under the
No Action Alternative there would be no fish habitat improvement features
installed.
No channel modification or improvements would be constructed. Structures
(grade control structures and culverts) that could affect upstream migration of
adult steelhead would not be installed within the Project area. As such, no
impacts to upstream or downstream migrating adult steelhead due to
construction-related activities would occur in the Project area.
No channel modification or improvements would be constructed. As such, no
construction impacts to steelhead spawning habitat usage and quality, steelhead
rearing habitat, and aquatic species due to construction would occur in the
Project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-52

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Maintenance activities in the channel would be carried out according to SCVWD
SMP (see description in Section 2.5.5 and Appendix B of this EIS). The
environmental impacts for the SCVWD SMP were analyzed in a Final EIR, which
was certified in January 2012. The SMP would continue under the No Action
Alternative similar to the past 10 years. The SMP incorporated a wetland and
riparian mitigation program, a series of resource protection policies, and BMPs to
reduce environmental impacts from maintenance activities. Maintenance of the
Upper Llagas Creek facilities would be conducted in accordance with the
guidelines established in the SMP Update.
As discussed in Section 3.6.3, DO levels within Lake Silveira do not meet water
quality objectives established by the Regional Water Quality Control Board
(Central Coast Region) Water Quality Control Plan (Basin Plan) for the Llagas
Creek watershed (RWQCB 2011) that state “for waters not mentioned by a
specific beneficial use, DO concentration shall not be reduced below 5.0 mg/L at
any time. Median values should not fall below 85 percent saturation as a result of
controllable water quality conditions. Additionally, outflow from Lake Silveira
causes higher water temperatures downstream in Reach 6, varying from 9–14°F
greater than upstream of the lake in summer, in some cases exceeding water
quality objectives established in the Basin Plan (RWQCB 2011) which states “at
no time or place shall the temperature of any water be increased by more than
5°F above natural receiving temperature”. Warming within Lake Silveira raises
downstream temperatures above optimal temperature range for juvenile
steelhead (59–65°F). Daily average temperatures in late August exceeded 75°F,
which are stressful and potentially lethal to rearing juvenile steelhead. The DO
and temperature water quality effects under existing conditions are significant
ongoing impacts to steelhead rearing.
Outside of the active channel, maintenance of access roads and the top of bank
would occur as part of vegetation and sediment maintenance. On the
maintenance roads, vegetation would be cleared as needed for access and to
reduce fire hazard. Top of bank areas in all reaches would be maintained
annually to facilitate access and observation and to reduce fire hazard.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.6.3

Action Alternatives

4.6.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative would provide an increased level of flood
protection for urban areas, specifically: a 1-percent flood in Morgan Hill
(Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B); 10 percent flood management for the
semi-urban area around East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14); and, avoid
induced flooding elsewhere on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to
upstream improvements. The components of the alternative include:
Project wide channel improvements including deepening and widening,
some limited planform re-alignment, excavation and construction of a
diversion channel for flows from West Little Llagas Creek to Llagas Creek
which would divert flows from entering East Little Llagas Creek,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-53

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

construction of permanent access roads on both banks within permanent
easements for construction and maintenance access, construction of
reinforced concrete boxes (culverts) and in-stream aquatic habitat
enhancements to provide cover and rearing for fish in Reaches 4, 5, 6,
and 7A; Reach 8 hydraulic structures including a 250-foot-long sediment
trap and an inlet weir (diversion) structure, replacement of 2,400 feet of
earthen channel with a 48-inch-diameter low flow RCP culvert, a
2,100-foot-long tunnel under Nob Hill and Nob Hill Terrace, and two
2,750-foot-long high flow bypass culverts conveying flow to the tunnel;
Reach 7B hydraulic structures including two high flow bypass culverts
conveying flow from the tunnel exit to West Little Llagas Creek;
restoration of the remnant Llagas Creek channel and creation of a new
wetland and riparian woodlands at Lake Silveira; and stream operation
and maintenance activities. A detailed description of the construction
features and activities, and maintenance activities are provided in
Sections 2.5 and 2.7.
Construction activities, described in Section 2.6, including channel
deepening and widening, installation of grade control structures,
installation of box culverts/culvert replacements, a new mid-channel bar
at the downstream end of Reach 5, installation of instream flow structures
for aquatic habitat, and construction of a 2,100-foot-long tunnel, a
sediment retention basin and inlet weir, a 2,400 foot reinforced concrete
pipe culvert for low flows to existing creek, and restoration of the remnant
Llagas Creek channel and creation of a new wetland and riparian
woodlands at Lake Silveira) could potentially affect steelhead spawning if
these activities occur during their during their spawning period. Steelhead
could potentially migrate upstream from the Pacific Ocean through the
Pajaro River from December to March during storms large enough to
create hydrologic connectivity from the Pajaro River through Reaches 4,
5, and 6, and the Lake Silveira project element to spawning habitat in
Llagas Creek upstream of Monterey Road to Chesbro Dam, or to
spawning habitat within any of the Project reaches (Reaches 4 to 6) and
within the Lake Silveira mitigation element. Construction would take place
year round, but would occur to the extent feasible during the dry season,
typically between May 1 and October 15, during which time adult
steelhead are unlikely to be migrating upstream. During wet years,
steelhead may migrate upstream either earlier than October 15 or later
than May 1, during which times construction activities could impede
upstream migration. The construction activities may still take place in the
channel, even if the channel is not dry, by dewatering reaches.
Dewatering would be limited to the areas of active construction and would
ensure fish passage through Reach 6 and Lake Silveira on Llagas Creek,
but could still prevent spawning if steelhead are diverted away from
potential spawning habitat or damage or destroy pre-existing redds.
The channel configurations in Reaches 4, 5, and 6, which contain critical
migration habitat for adult S-CCC steelhead, and the new mid-channel
bar at the downstream end of Reach 5, could impede fish passage if the
low-flow channel is too shallow for passage of adults; or if the low flow
channel is too narrow, thereby increasing water velocity above a critical
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-54

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

threshold for migration. Under the Tunnel Alternative, Reaches 4, 5, and
6 would be receiving winter flows from Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 that under
existing conditions would either flow into East Little Llagas Creek and
eventually into Reach 14 or cause flooding adjacent to Reaches 7B and
8. Under the Tunnel Alternative, the winter flows would be contained
within Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8, then routed through Reaches 4, 5, and 6,
potentially increasing water velocity within the channel. The channels in
Reaches 4, 5, and 6 would be properly sized for sediment transport and
to allow for unimpeded fish passage, but increased flow may increase
water velocity above a critical threshold that prevents steelhead adult
migration. In general, adult steelhead require minimum depths of
approximately 7 inches and maximum velocities of 8 feet per second to
enable upstream migration (Bjornn and Reiser 1991). A low-flow
channel, approximately 8 inches deep conveying approximately 2 cfs,
would meander along the channel bottom within the bankfull channel,
potentially deep enough for adult upstream migration. Smith (2007) noted
that the low flow channel in the flood control channel in Llagas Creek
downstream of the reservoir may allow smolt emigration at flows as low
as 3 cfs, but is dry in most years by April. Smith (2007) also concluded
that the biggest limiting factor for maintaining steelhead in Llagas Creek is
regular emigration of smolts the dry reach below U.S. 101.
Channel widening for hydraulic improvement in Reaches 4, 5, and 6
would be limited to one bank, where possible, to preserve existing mature
vegetation. The total top width of the modified channel would be
approximately 125 feet, which is 30 to 60 feet wider than the existing
channel. Channel depths would range up to approximately 14 feet, which
is typically about 4 to 5 feet deeper than existing conditions. Vegetation
maintenance in the flood conveyance channels would be performed to
maintain the composite design roughness requirements (hydraulic
roughness, or Manning’s n-value). The existing composite hydraulic
roughness in Reaches 4, 5, and 6 ranges from 0.055 (moderately dense
stemmy grass, weeds, or tree seedlings; brushy moderately dense
vegetation similar to 1 to 2-year-old willows in dormant season) to 0.070
(8 to 10-year-old willow or cottonwood trees inter- grown with weeds and
brush) and would be maintained at or above 0.064 in all three reaches
under the Tunnel alternative (Table 2.5-5). Each portion of the channel
cross section will have an applied set of maintenance activities that will
vary from reach to reach. On the bench, the bankfull bank (slope
between bench and channel bottom) and the channel bottom, woody
vegetation would be cleared from Reaches 4 and 5, management in
Reach 6 would be similar to Reaches 4 and 5 with the additional provision
to prevent the spread of willows on the bankfull bank. The improved
slopes of the channel would be revegetated, using native species,
consistent with requirements for maintaining hydraulic capacity.
A new mid-channel bar would be constructed within Reach 5 at the
confluence with Reaches 4 and 14. The bar would split the flow, with the
main channel flowing north of the bar and a smaller channel with less flow
following the current channel configuration (to the south). The design
could potentially affect spawning substrate through increased scour or
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-55

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

deposition, which would reduce quantity or quality of spawning habitat. As
noted in Chapter 2, channels would be designed to create a stable
channel form (i.e., not aggrading or degrading) that would prevent scour
and deposition, including through Reach 5 and the new mid-channel bar.
The impact of the new mid-channel bar on S-CCC spawning habitat and
usage would be less than significant.
Channel modifications in Reaches 5 and 6 could result in the excavation
of up to 455,000 CY of material (Section 2.5.3). Reach 5 is dry most of
the year, and contains little usable spawning habitat, while Reach 6 is
perennial down to San Martin Avenue, fed by flows from Chesbro and
Uvas Dams and contains the highest quality spawning habitat within the
Project area. The excavation of gravel and cobble would be offset by
returning the material to the channel. Construction activities could also
potentially affect steelhead spawning if these activities result in the
increase of fine sediment within potential spawning habitat. Greater
volumes of fine sediment within spawning gravel will likely reduce
eventual spawning success (Kondolf 2000). Survival to emergence of
steelhead fry from redds begins to decrease at 20 percent
embeddedness of the redd by fine sediment, and is completely restricted
at 80 percent embeddedness (Bjornn and Reiser 1991; Kondolf 2000).
As such, if construction activities cause an increase in fine sediment
within potential spawning gravel, it could impact spawning habitat quality.
Several types of hydraulic structures would be installed within the Project
area that could affect upstream migration of adult steelhead. Grade
control structures would be installed in all reaches (two in Reach 4; two in
Reach 5; 26 in Reach 6; seven in Reach 7A; four in Reach 7B; 1 in
Reach 8; 21 in Reach 14, and one below Lake Silveira), culverts added or
replaced in Reach 7B (two culverts added to existing triple culverts), and
Reach 8 (replace one existing with larger designs). Llagas Creek from the
Pajaro River to Chesbro Dam is identified as S-CCC steelhead critical
habitat by NMFS (2006). Construction of grade control structures could
limit access to critical habitat within (Reaches 4 through 6) and upstream
(to Chesbro Dam) of the Project area. The existing fish ladder just
downstream of Buena Vista Avenue would be removed.
High flow bypass box culverts would be installed. An inlet weir, sediment
detention basin, low flow reinforced concrete pipe and 2,100-foot-long
tunnel would be installed in Reach 8. Reaches 7A, 7B, 8, and 14 do not
currently support S-CCC steelhead spawning or contain critical spawning
habitat for S-CCC steelhead (NMFS 2005b; CDFW 2013), thus grade
control structures, culverts, and other hydraulic features installed in these
reaches would not affect spawning habitat. Within Reaches 4, 5, and 6,
and Llagas Creek near Lake Silveira, which contain critical spawning
habitat for S-CCC steelhead, hydraulic structures could affect spawning
habitat if they cause scour that erodes spawning habitat or deposition that
degrades spawning habitat. However, under the Tunnel Alternative,
channels would be designed to create a stable channel form (i.e., not
aggrading or degrading) that would prevent scour and deposition. The

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-56

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

impact of hydraulic structures on S-CCC spawning habitat and usage
would be less than significant.
Instream complexity features would be installed and maintained in
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A, and as part of the Lake Silveira project element.
The complexity features are intended to assist with migration of
anadromous fish during moderate to high flows by providing hydraulic
cover. Further, the structures would provide escape cover for upstream
migrating steelhead. The following structures would be installed and
maintained in the Project area: clusters of log-root wad structures, stream
boulders, triangular boulder clusters, and divide logs, wing deflectors, and
groupings of large woody debris. Refer to Section 2.5.5.6 for the number
and types of instream structures proposed for each reach (examples of all
types of habitat structures are shown in Appendix M). These features
would be maintained by the SCVWD to insure they continue to provide
their designed environmental benefits. The greatest concentration of
complexity features would be installed in Reach 6, as this is currently a
perennial stream reach (down to San Martin Avenue) and likely contains
the highest quality steelhead habitat in the Project area. The structures
would provide resting places for upstream migrating adult steelhead
where no resting places currently exist, improving migration success
within the Project and through the Project area to potential spawning
habitat in Llagas Creek below Chesbro Dam. These structures would
provide a benefit to upstream migrating adult steelhead.
The complexity features are intended to assist with migration of
anadromous fish during moderate to high flows by providing hydraulic
cover. Further, the structures would provide escape cover for upstream
migrating steelhead. These features would be maintained by the SCVWD
to maintain their designed environmental benefits. The greatest
concentration of complexity features would be installed in Reach 6, as
this is currently a perennial stream reach (down to San Martin Avenue)
and contains the highest quality steelhead habitat in the Project area.
The structures are intended to provide resting places for upstream
migrating adult steelhead, but could cause localized scour and deposition
that creates spawning sites for S-CCC steelhead where none currently
exist, likely improving spawning success within the Project. These
structures would provide a benefit to S-CCC steelhead spawning habitat
and usage.
The Lake Silveira mitigation element on Llagas Creek, upstream of
Reach 6 and Reach 7, which is called out as mitigation for all of the action
alternatives (see description in Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3), would
create approximately 3.5 acres of wetlands and 1.3 acres of riparian
woodland by filling part of Lake Silveira, restoring flows to the abandoned
channel, and by replanting and reseeding. An open channel flow split
structure on Llagas Creek would apportion flows to the newly restored
wetland and open water section and the rewatered Llagas Creek channel.
A proposed short section of excavated pilot channel at the flow split
structure would help establish a stable channel segment at the split
leading into the rewatered abandoned channel segment. A new v-notch
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-57

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

outlet would be installed at the lake outlet to tie the restored wetland and
open water section of the lake back into Llagas Creek. Channel
modifications as part of the Lake Silveira mitigation element, would
maintain adult S-CCC steelhead upstream migration through Lake
Silveira, but with the added opportunity of migrating through the original
channel. However, both the split structure and v-notch outlet structure
could limit access to habitat upstream and could be a significant impact.
Mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 would ensure that these
hydraulic features are designed to allow fish passage following the fish
passage criteria detailed in Anadromous Salmonid Passage Facility
Design (NMFS 2008). As such, impacts from operation of the channel
modifications and hydraulic features as part of the Lake Silveira project
element on adult S-CCC steelhead upstream migration would be less
than significant with mitigation.
The Lake Silveira could contain suitable spawning habitat; but is likely
limited to Llagas Creek upstream and downstream of the lake. See
Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 for a description of all the features related
to the Lake Silveira element. The Lake Silveira mitigation element would
likely provide suitable spawning and rearing habitat for S-CCC steelhead
in the rewatered historic channel segment around the lake. However,
there has been no quantification of habitat types available in the
abandoned channel. Field observations of the inlet channel to the lake
indicate that there are spawning sized gravels carried by Llagas Creek.
As such, there is likely some spawning habitat in the existing Llagas
Creek inlet channel to the lake, and potentially some limited spawning
habitat in the outlet channel, as well as downstream of the lake,
particularly through the perennially watered section of Reach 6.
However, the natural transport and coarse sediment delivery to Reach 6
downstream of the current Lake Silveira, including spawning sized
gravels, would have been substantially reduced since Lake Silveira was
created in the 1980s. The lake probably captures nearly all gravels in
transport from upstream. Consequently Lake Silveira would have
effectively prevented the recruitment of new gravels and other coarse
sediment supplies to the channel immediately downstream from the lake.
The reestablishment of the abandoned channel would promote more
natural gravel transport, around Lake Silveira, and could benefit S-CCC
spawning habitat quality downstream.
Adult S-CCC steelhead do not spawn in Lake Silveira, so converting
4.8 acres of open water to wetland and riparian habitat would have no
impact on spawning habitat usability and quality in the lake. The
reestablishment rewatering of 1,980 feet of abandoned Llagas Creek
channel would be allowed to form by scouring and natural formation of a
stable channel. Long-term operation of the rewatered channel would
potentially increase S-CCC steelhead spawning and rearing habitat
availability and usage in Llagas Creek, as no spawning currently occurs in
the dry abandoned channel. This would be a Project benefit. Short-term
operation of the initial rewatering of the abandoned channel could
potentially mobilize old fine sediments and organic material that may
increase deposition of fine sediments deposit downstream (Reaches 4, 5,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-58

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and 6), as the pilot channel naturally scours and with the transport of any
fine sediments that have accumulated in the abandoned channel. This
potential increase in deposition of fine sediments would likely last only as
a first flush, so it would be temporary and would be flushed out of
spawning and rearing areas during with the first high flow events. Given
that the Llagas Creek channel downstream in Reach 6 would be
disturbed (in Phase 2 construction after the Lake Silveira element is
completed), for purposes of channel widening and deepening and that
high flows will likely occur well before utilization of spawning and rearing
areas by S-CCC steelhead, there would be no impact to spawning area
habitat quality and usage downstream in Reaches 4, 5, and 6. There has
been no quantification of potentially suitable spawning habitat in the
abandoned channel, and there is no planned construction of spawning
habitat as part of the Tunnel Alternative and the Lake Silveira element.
The Lake Silveira element would have no short-term impact on S-CCC
steelhead spawning habitat usage and quality.
Decreases in riparian canopy related to channel widening could increase
water temperatures (by up to 5°F) in Reach 6, especially during low flow
(either during seasonal low flow or during dry years) (Systech
Engineering, Inc. 2004). Water temperatures under existing conditions
may already limit juvenile steelhead within Reach 6. Systech Engineering,
Inc. (2004) reported daily average summer water temperatures of
70-75°F in Reach 6 in 2000 and 2001; and Smith (2007) reported
summer water temperatures of 68–79°F. Temperatures above 72°F are
potentially stressful to juvenile steelhead, while temperatures above 77°F
are potentially lethal (Bjornn and Reiser 1991). Reaches 4, 5, and 6
would be maintained with a similar type and density as under existing
conditions (Table 2.5-5); but increased channel width may increase
insolation of the water surface, thereby increasing water temperature.
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 may also potentially bring warm water from
upstream into Reach 6. These reaches would be maintained to design
roughness values that are lower than Reach 6: 0.038-0.084 (Reach 7A
moderately dense stemmy grass, weeds, or tree seedlings; brushy
moderately dense vegetation similar to 1 to 2-year-old willows in dormant
season), 0.038-0.069 (Reach 7B, dense growth of flexible turf grass or
weeds where depth of flow is at least two times height of vegetation;
supple tree seedlings such as willow, cottonwood where average depth of
flow is three times height of vegetation), and 0.035 (Reach 8)
(Table 2.5-5). Systech Engineering Inc. (2004) found that flow from
Reach 7 could increase average annual temperatures at the upstream
end of Reach 6 by up to 2°F, depending on flow (greater temperature
increases with greater flow). The benches that are part of the channel
design also provide opportunities for natural recruitment of riparian
vegetation, and if appropriate, for active plantings, which may increase
shade over the channel. Even with BMPs, temperatures could increase
from stressful (>72°F) to lethal (>75°F) during the summer rearing period
for juvenile steelhead.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-59

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Construction activities that occur outside of the active channel are not
expected to directly impact aquatic species, but may indirectly impact
them through runoff of sediments or pollutants. Maintenance roads would
be constructed along Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7A, and the existing Reach 14
maintenance road would be relocated. Reach 7A would be constructed
through agricultural fields.
Flood conveyance channels would be managed to provide adequate
capacity for the design flow. The active channel would be regularly
inspected for the build-up and removal of trash (non-living material) or
other obstruction to flow. Sediment removal and vegetation maintenance
are the two main activities that are periodically needed to maintain design
flow capacity. Sediment removal and vegetation management generally
would be conducted between June 15 and October 15, as outlined in
Section 2.5.5. However, if the fall season remained dry, work could
continue until the first significant rainfall event occurred. A significant
rainfall event is defined as local rainfall of 0.5 inch or greater within the
watershed over a 24-hour period (SCVWD 2011).
Sediment removal would be done in a manner that is sensitive to
protection of aquatic resources. As vegetation develops within Project
area channels, and woody debris and other fish habitat enhancements
are installed, there is potential for sediments to locally deposit reducing
flood conveyance capacity. At the confluence of Reaches 14, 4, and 5,
the design includes a mid-channel bar that bifurcates the channel flow.
This confluence site is designed for sediment accumulation to help
reduce the need for sediment removal in downstream locations. It is
anticipated that sediment removal at the confluence site would be less
frequent than once every 10 years. Sediment management would be
performed in an adaptive manner, identifying depositional patterns and
tendencies and updating management techniques accordingly. Heavier
sedimentation may occur after episodic events, such as wild fires and
large flows. After such an event the Project should be inspected to
identify and address large deposits that may impact channel capacity.
Vegetation maintenance in the flood conveyance channels shall be
performed to maintain the composite design roughness requirements.
Methods would include herbicide, hand pruning, hand removal, and
mowing. The application of herbicide would occur instream and on bank
bench areas, as well as on maintenance roads, along fence lines, and
similar non-instream areas.
Maintenance at the Lake Silveira project element is expected to be
relatively minor once vegetation begins to be established. Maintenance
work would include sediment removal at the inlet structure, minor
vegetation clearing around the inlet and outlet structures, and along the
inlet of the channel to keep the flow split structure functioning. No
maintenance would be performed for purposes of flood management.
Each portion of the channel cross section will have an applied set of
maintenance activities that will vary from reach to reach. On the bench,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-60

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

the bankfull bank (slope between bench and channel bottom) and the
channel bottom, woody vegetation would be cleared and excess sediment
removed from Reaches 4 and 5, management in Reaches 6, 7A, and 7B,
and would be similar to Reaches 4 and 5 with the additional provision to
prevent the spread of willows on the bankfull bank. Reach 14 in-channel
maintenance (clearance of woody vegetation, removal of excess
sediments) would only occur on the channel bottom. Sediment
maintenance would likely occur every 10 years and vegetation
management would likely occur every 5 years.
Outside of the active channel, maintenance of access roads and the top
of bank would occur as part of vegetation and sediment maintenance. On
the maintenance roads, vegetation would be cleared as needed for
access and to reduce fire hazard. Top of bank areas in all reaches would
be maintained annually to facilitate access and observation and to reduce
fire hazard.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.6.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative would be similar to the Tunnel Alternative with the
notable exception that channel improvements would be made through
Reach 8 instead of the construction of a tunnel and high flow conveyance
structures as proposed under the Tunnel Alternative. Other differences to
Reach 8 and Reach 7B under the NRCS would include:


Widen and deepen approximately 3,000 feet of channel between
West Dunne Avenue and Main Avenue to form a trapezoidal
vegetated channel, a channel with two vertical walls, or a hybrid
section (Figures 2.5-3, 2.5-4, 2.5-5, respectively), as appropriate
depending upon the ROW available.



Replace approximately 2,200 feet of the existing creek between
Main Avenue and Wright Avenue with two 10-foot wide by 7- to
8-foot deep reinforced concrete box culverts following the existing
stream alignment, but under Hale Avenue. Replace culverts at
West Main Avenue and Wright Avenue (Table 2.6-1).



Replace five additional existing undersized culverts with new
culverts, 10 feet wide by 9 feet deep, at the following locations:
5th Street, 4th Street/Monterey Highway, 3rd Street, 2nd
Street/Del Monte Avenue, and Warren Avenue.



The existing culvert from Ciolino Avenue to West Dunne Avenue
would be replaced with a 674-foot long box culvert that is 8 feet
wide and 8 feet deep.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-61

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Due to the similarities between the NRCS and the Tunnel alternatives for
Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14, and for the Lake Silveira mitigation
element, impacts would be the same for the NRCS Alternative, except
that channel improvements would be made through Reach 8 instead of
the construction of a tunnel and high flow conveyance structures as
proposed under the Tunnel Alternative.
The construction approach for the NRCS Alternative would be the same
throughout all of the Project reaches as previously described for the
Tunnel Alternative, with the key differences in Reach 8 that 3,000
additional feet of channel would be widened and deepened with channel
profiles appropriate for the ROW available and RCB culverts replacing the
earthen channel of West Little Llagas Creek along Hale Avenue instead
of a low flow RCP and high flow RCB culverts; and in Reach 7B that the
existing culvert from Ciolino Avenue to West Dunne Avenue would be
replaced along its existing alignment. Construction duration for the NRCS
Alternative would be 5.5 years, with the construction lasting for about
36 months in Reach 8, which is the same as the time to construct
Reach 8 of the Tunnel Alternative (Table 2.5.2). Construction activities
would be the same as that described for the Tunnel Alternative, except
that in Reach 8 more channel widening and deepening would occur, more
grade control structures would be installed and that the tunnel under the
Nob Hill Terrace neighborhood, and a sediment detention basin and weir
near Wright Avenue and Hale Avenue would not be constructed. The
construction fill and disposal material volumes for the NRCS Alternative
are virtually the same as for the Tunnel Alternative, as shown in Table
2.5.3.
For the channel modifications proposed in Reach 8 under the NRCS
Alternative, operation and maintenance impacts to upstream migrating
adult steelhead, BMPs, and mitigation measures would be the same as
described in the Tunnel Alternative as channel modifications in all other
reaches (Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14) and as part of the Lake
Silveira project element would be the same as under the Tunnel
Alternative. While S-CCC steelhead do not currently occur in Reach 8 (or
adjacent Reaches 7A and 7B) other aquatic species (e.g., mosquitofish)
may be present; although, no special-status aquatic species occur under
existing conditions. Within and outside the active channel, operation and
maintenance impacts to aquatic species, BMPs, and mitigation measures
would be the same as described in the Tunnel Alternative. The
operations and maintenance of channel modifications and hydraulic
structures in Reach 8 would have a minimal adverse impact on aquatic
species within and outside the active channel. Reach 8 or adjacent
Reaches 7A and 7B do not currently support upstream migration of adult
S-CCC steelhead or contain upstream migration critical habitat for adult
S-CCC steelhead (NMFS 2005b; CDFW 2013). The channel
modifications and hydraulic structures within Reach 8 would not create or
allow upstream S-CCC steelhead migration. The operations and
maintenance of channel modifications and hydraulic structures in Reach 8
would have no adverse impact on adult S-CCC steelhead upstream
migration.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-62

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.6.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would be similar to the Tunnel
Alternative with the notable exception that the tunnel and high flow
conveyance structures as proposed under the Tunnel Alternative would
not be constructed in Reach 8. Channel Modifications in Reach 8 under
the Culvert/Channel Alternative are most similar to those under the NRCS
Alternative with the elimination of the need for channel deepening and
widening through residential properties. Other modifications to Reach 8
would include:


Realign an 800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box
culverts that, in the NRCS design, would be parallel to Hale
Avenue through the Britton School athletic fields up to Del Monte
Avenue;



Continue the double box culvert under Del Monte Avenue
approximately 900 feet to West 2nd Street; and



From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue, the same channel
widening and deepening, along with culvert replacements at 2nd,
3rd, 4th, and 5th Streets as described for the NRCS Alternative
would be performed in Reach 8. The upstream-most portion of
the Culvert/Channel Alternative from Llagas Road to Wright
Avenue would remain the same as the NRCS Alternative. All
other reaches would have exactly the same design as previously
described for the NRCS Alternative.

Due to the similarities between the Culvert/Channel and Tunnel
Alternatives for Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14, and for the Lake Silveira
mitigation element, construction impacts are similar, except for
realignment of an 800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box
culverts that, in the NRCS design, would be parallel to Hale Avenue
through the Britton School athletic fields up to Del Monte Avenue and
continuation of the double box culvert under Del Monte Avenue
approximately 900 feet to West 2nd Street. From West 2nd Street to
West Dunne Avenue, the same channel widening and deepening, along
with culvert replacements at 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th Streets as described
for the NRCS Alternative, would be performed in Reach 8 under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative. Channel modifications in all other reaches
(4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14) and as part of the Lake Silveira element would
be the same as under the Tunnel Alternative. The construction approach
for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be the same throughout all of
the Project reaches, as previously described for the Tunnel Alternative;
and construction duration would be 5.5 years, with the construction
lasting for about 36 months in Reach 8, same as the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-63

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Construction activities, equipment, and crew size would be the same as
that described for the Tunnel and NRCS alternatives (Table 2.5-4), except
that in a segment of Reach 8, construction would occur through athletic
fields and along Del Monte Road to West 2nd Street, rather than through
a section of residential homes between West Main Avenue and West 2nd
Street. The construction fill and disposal material volumes for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative are virtually the same as for the Tunnel
Alternative, as shown in Table 2.5-3.
For the channel modifications proposed in Reach 8 under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative, operation and maintenance impacts to
upstream migrating adult steelhead, BMPs, and mitigation measures
would be the same as described in the Tunnel Alternative, as channel
modifications in all other reaches (Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, 7B, and 14) and
as part of the Lake Silveira mitigation element would be the same as
under the Tunnel Alternative. Reach 8 (or adjacent Reaches 7A and 7B)
do not currently support upstream migration of adult S-CCC steelhead or
contain upstream migration critical habitat for adult S-CCC steelhead
(NMFS 2005b; CDFW 2013). The construction of a culvert within Reach
8 would not create or allow upstream S-CCC steelhead migration. The
culvert/channel would have no impact on adult S-CCC steelhead
upstream migration, steelhead rearing habitat, and minimal adverse
impact on aquatic species.
The construction fill and disposal material volumes for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative are virtually the same as for the Tunnel
Alternative, as shown in Table 2.5-3. While S-CCC steelhead do not
currently occur in Reach 8 or adjacent Reaches 7A and 7B, other aquatic
species (e.g., mosquitofish) may be present; although, no special-status
aquatic species occur under existing conditions. Construction impacts
within and outside the active channel to aquatic species, BMPs, and
mitigation measures would be the same as described in the Tunnel
Alternative. Construction of the culvert in Reach 8 would have no
adverse impact on aquatic species.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.6.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be largely similar to the Tunnel
Alternative with the notable exception that a high flow bypass channel
would be constructed between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of
East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so that no
improvements would be needed along Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas
Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Reaches 8, 7A, 7B, and 4
would remain the same as that described for the Tunnel Alternative. The
bypass would convey the future extra flow (i.e., new capacity) from
Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B, directly to Reach 14. East Little Llagas Creek
downstream of the bypass (Reach 14), would be designed to carry the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-64

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

extra flow from the upstream channel capacity. The existing flow capacity
in Reaches 5 and 6 downstream from the bypass channel would continue
to be maintained.
The proposed high flow bypass would start near the upstream end of
Reach 6, about 0.5 mile downstream of the confluence of the proposed
West Little Llagas Diversion (Reach 7A) with Llagas Creek Reach 6 and
include a hydraulic control structure to divert flows greater than a
10-percent exceedance flood event into the bypass. The hydraulic control
structure would include a trapezoidal-shaped weir and five 6-foot by
6-foot-individual working sluice gates at the entrance of the high flow
bypass channel. For the 10-percent exceedance flood event, the five
sluice gates would be fully opened. The weir and five gates would be
designed to divert 1,200 ft3/sec from Reach 6 of Llagas Creek to
Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. Automatic control devices would
be installed to operate gates to control the flow into the bypass channel
and maintain existing flow condition in Reach 6.
Since Reach 5 and Reach 6 downstream of the Bypass would be
maintained in its existing form, there would be no impacts to aquatic
resources within these sections of Llagas Creek under the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative. Reach 6 upstream of the bypass would be modified
as under the Tunnel Alternative. A bypass channel from Reach 6 to
Reach 14 to convey flows above the 10-year recurrence interval,
construction of a hydraulic control structure to divert flow into the bypass
channel and Reach 6, and a tunnel in Reach 8 would be constructed
instead of channel modifications proposed in the NRCS Alternative. The
construction approach for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative for Reaches
7A, 7B, and 8 would be the same as previously described for the Tunnel
Alternative. Reach 14 construction would be similar to that in the other
alternatives, but with a greater amount of channel widening and
deepening. There would be no construction needed to widen the channel
in Reach 6 below the bypass or in Reach 5.
Reach 4 flood conveyance improvements would be the same as
described for the Tunnel Alternative. Three new bridges and additional
culverts would require construction. Construction duration for the Reach
6 Bypass Channel segment would be 24 months, and the entire Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would require 5.5 years to complete the Project
construction.
Construction activities, equipment, and crew size is shown in Table 2.5-4,
and is nearly the same as that described for the Tunnel Alternative,
except that the new bypass channel segment would require construction
between Reach 6 to Reach 14. The construction fill and disposal material
volumes for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative are less than for the Tunnel
Alternative, as shown in Table 2.5-3. Reach 6 downstream of the bypass
and Reach 5 would not be modified under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative and would not be impacted by construction. This Alternative
would also require temporary roads and traffic detour routing on Murphy
Avenue and on both northbound and southbound lanes of U.S. 101. The
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-65

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

construction fill and disposal material volumes for the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative are less than for the Tunnel Alternative, as shown in
Table 2.5-3. Reach 6 downstream of the bypass and Reach 5 would not
be modified under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative and would not be
impacted by construction. S-CCC steelhead do not occur in and do not
spawn in the Reach 6 Bypass Channel or Reach 14. Consequently,
construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Channel and widening of Reach 14
would have no impact on S-CCC steelhead spawning habitat usage and
quality. Construction impacts to S-CCC steelhead spawning habitat and
usage, BMPs, and mitigation measures would be the same as described
for Reaches 4, 7A, 7B, 8, the portion of Reach 6 upstream of the bypass,
and the Lake Silveira mitigation element. These BMPs and mitigation
measures would reduce adverse direct construction impacts on S-CCC
steelhead spawning habitat usage and quality.
Additionally, under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, upstream migrating
adult steelhead could potentially be more likely to enter Reach 14 during
their upstream migration because of enhanced flow provided by the
bypass. The fish entering Reach 14 would be forced to migrate up the
reach and through the bypass channel, which is a trapezoidal channel
without the low-flow, bankfull channel, or bench features added to other
Project reaches under all other alternatives. A portion of Reach 14 would
be a widened trapezoidal channel (also without low-flow, bankfull
channel, or bench features added to other Project reaches), while the
remaining portion would be similar to the design proposed in the Tunnel
Alternative. Modifications to Reach 14 under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative and under the Tunnel Alternative do not include instream flow
structures that may provide hydraulic cover and velocity breaks for
migrating steelhead. As such, upstream migrating adult steelhead
entering the reach may be subject to high velocities that limit migration.
Given that Llagas Creek downstream of Reach 6 may dry quickly due to
percolation of surface water to the aquifer, the time period available for
adults to reach spawning habitat is limited. Entering Reach 14 may
impede migration, or cause delays in migration that causes adults to miss
spawning opportunities.
Similarly, downstream migrating juvenile steelhead could potentially enter
the bypass channel through the hydraulic diversion structure, instead of
migrating downstream through Reach 6. The bypass channel is a
trapezoidal channel without low-flow, bankfull channel, or bench features
added to other Project reaches under all the alternatives, and may not
allow migration if flows recede too rapidly, or if the channel is too shallow.
A portion of Reach 14 would be a widened trapezoidal channel (also
without low- flow, bankfull channel, or bench features added to other
Project reaches), while the remaining portion would be similar to the
design proposed in the Tunnel Alternative. Modifications to Reach 14
under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative and under the Tunnel Alternative
do not include instream flow structures that may provide hydraulic cover
and velocity breaks for migrating steelhead. As such, downstream
migrating juvenile S-CCC steelhead entering the bypass and reach may
be stranded within the reach.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-66

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

For the bypass channel proposed in Reach 6 under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative, operation and maintenance impacts to S-CCC steelhead
spawning habitat and usage, to upstream migrating adult steelhead, to
S-CCC steelhead rearing habitat, to juvenile S-CCC steelhead
downstream migration, and to aquatic species, would be the same as the
Tunnel alternative for Reaches 4, 7A, 7B, 8, the portion of Reach 6
upstream of the bypass, and the Lake Silveira mitigation element. No
instream complexity features would be added to Reach 5 or Reach 6
downstream of the Reach 6 Bypass. There would be no benefit to
steelhead spawning habitat in these portions of Llagas Creek, unlike
other build alternatives. The Reach 6 Bypass Channel and Reach 14 do
not currently support S-CCC steelhead spawning or contain critical
spawning habitat for S-CC C steelhead (NMFS 2005b; CDFW 2013).
The construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Channel and widening of
Reach 14 would not create S-CCC steelhead spawning habitat. The
bypass and other potential infrastructure in Reach 6 would have no
impact on S-CCC steelhead spawning habitat usage or quality, to
upstream migrating adult steelhead, to S-CCC steelhead rearing habitat,
to juvenile S-CCC steelhead downstream migration, and to aquatic
species.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.6.4

Summary of Impacts to Aquatic Resources
South-Central California Coastal steelhead are the only sensitive aquatic
resource that occurs within the Project area. Adverse impacts from construction
of all Project Alternatives would be reduced with implementation of SCVWD
BMPs. Implemented BMPs for the Project construction would be the same for all
Project alternatives. Impacts from the operations and maintenance of all Project
alternatives would be reduced with implementation of SCVWD BMPs and
mitigation measures. Implemented BMPs and mitigation measures for the
Project operations and maintenance would be the same for the Tunnel
Alternative, the NRCS Alternative, and the Culvert Channel Alternative.
Implemented BMPs and mitigation measures for the Project operations and
maintenance of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be the same as for all
other Project Alternatives except with the implementation of two additional
mitigation measures; Construction of Fish Screen and Fish Bypass Facility
Upstream End of the Bypass Channel and Construction of Fish Exclusion Barrier
at the Downstream End of Reach 14.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Aquatic Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-67

Chapter 4

4.7

Environmental Consequences

AGRICULTURAL AND FOREST RESOURCES
4.7.1

Introduction
The potential impact of the various alternatives, including the No Action
Alternative, on agricultural and forest resources is considered in this section.
The focus of this section is on agricultural lands as the
project area is not forested and impacts to forest resources are not anticipated.
There are no forestlands in the vicinity of the project area. The focus of this
analysis is on how the various alternatives may affect agricultural lands in the
vicinity of the project area. First, the impact of construction and the location of
Project features on agricultural lands are assessed. Project features within the
Project footprint may lead to conversion of agricultural lands. As such, an
additional potential impact (location of Project features) is considered in this
section, along with construction and operations and maintenance. Table 4.7-5
shows the approximate number of acres of Important Farmlands and Williamson
Act Lands subject to permanent and temporary conversion by alternative. This
calculation accounts for the overlap of Important Farmlands and Williamson Act
Lands.

Table 4.7-5

Number of Acres of Williamson Act and Important Farmlands Subject to
Conversion Under the Action Alternatives1

Classification
Important Farmlands
Williamson Act Lands2
Lands Classified as Both
Important Farmlands and
Williamson Act Lands
Net Important Farmlands and
Williamson Act Lands Subject
to Conversion3

Alternative
Reach 6 Bypass2
All Other Action Alternatives1
Permanent
Temporary
Permanent
Temporary
39.6
17.3
50.0
19.0
4.3
1.1
16.8
1.4
0.4
0.2
5.1
0.4

43.5

18.2

63.7

20.0

1

Acreages were calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying Williamson Act and Important Farmlands Maps within
the Project footprint.
2

Calculated by taking total from Project footprint and removing lands from Reach 5 and portions of Reach 6 from the
total. It should be noted that the location of the actual bypass also lies with lands designated as Prime Farmland.

3

Does not include active croplands in areas not designated as Important Farmland and/or Williamson Act parcels.

The alternatives have the potential to permanently convert agricultural lands to
non-agricultural use. Lands classified as Important Farmlands, such as Prime
Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Local and Statewide Importance,
along with agricultural lands under Williamson Act contracts, are of particular
interest for this analysis. Next, the implications of flooding on agricultural lands
under the various alternatives are compared with the No Action Alternative.
Potential impacts from periodic flooding events on agricultural lands are
considered temporary; and, thus, would not directly lead to conversion of
non-agricultural use. Regardless, all action alternatives would reduce the amount
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-68

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

of Important Farmlands subject to flooding under a 1-percent flood scenario. The
number of acres of important agricultural and Williamson Act flooded lands under
a 1-percent flood scenario for the various alternatives is provided in Table 4.7-6.
As noted above, Williamson Act Lands and other important agricultural lands are
not mutually exclusive (e.g., Farmlands of Statewide Importance may also be
enrolled in Williamson Act contracts).
Table 4.7-6

Acres of Williamson Act and Important Agricultural Lands Flooded Under
1-Percent Flood Scenario by Alternative1,2
Classification

Williamson Act Lands3
Prime Farmland
Farmland of Statewide Importance
Unique Farmland
Farmland of Local Importance

Number of Acres
No-Action Alternative
All Other Alternatives
569
228
860
294
21
7
127
69
39
21

1

Acreages were calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying flood scenario maps with Williamson Act and Important
Farmlands Maps.

2

Calculations include only those lands north of Buena Vista Avenue.

3

Williamson Act Lands are not mutually exclusive from the Important Farmlands (Prime, Statewide Importance,
Unique and Local Importance) classifications.

4.7.2

No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, and
Farmland of Statewide Importance would not change. No farmland conversions
would occur; therefore, there would be no impact. However, the benefits of
reduced flooding on agricultural lands under a 1-percent flood scenario would not
be realized, as compared to the action alternative.
There would be no construction associated with this alternative; therefore, there
would be no impact associated with other changes in the existing environment
that could result in the conversion of farmland.
Maintenance and operational activities would continue under the SMP and would
have no impact under this alternative.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

4.7.3

Action Alternatives

4.7.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative with the tunnel feature has the least land use
conversion through the urban reach of the Project area. However, as
discussed in Section 3.8.3, lands zoned specifically for agriculture are
primarily along Reaches 4, 7A.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-69

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

About 20 acres of important agricultural lands within the Project footprint
would be used during construction for related activities, such as
temporary construction easements for access, equipment and material
staging, and work. Construction activities may compact soils and
potentially lead to soil loss and erosion. This impact would not be limited
to the Important Farmlands, but to active croplands in the area too. The
SCVWD would remove all construction equipment and clean any spills or
equipment leaks on these agricultural lands. This conversion of
agricultural lands would be temporary, but still constitutes a significant
impact.
The Project footprint includes about 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique
Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance; and these
lands are subject to conversion to non-agricultural use under this
alternative. These lands would be converted, as Project features
described in Section 2.7.1 would replace these Important Farmlands.
This impact is significant, because agricultural lands being removed from
production cannot be replaced.
Some areas (about 1.4 acres) designated under the Williamson Act may
be temporarily used for construction related activities. A small proportion
(about 0.4 acre) of the Williamson Act parcels are also designated as
Important Farmlands. Similar to Important Farmlands, these agricultural
lands would be potentially impacted during construction due to soil
compaction. These impacts would not just be limited to Williamson Act
parcels, but also to other active croplands within the Project footprint.
The conversion of these lands would be temporary and would be reduced
with the incorporation of mitigation.
The Project footprint includes about 17 acres of lands designated under
the Williamson Act subject to permanent conversion. It should be noted
that 5 acres of the Williamson Act Lands in the Project footprint are the
same as lands classified as Prime Farmland or Unique Farmland.
Although there are only 17 acres within the Project footprint, there is also
the possibility that the Project may decrease the acreage of existing
Williamson Act Lands so as the lands no longer qualify; this would
increase the number of acres subject to mitigation. The conversion of
Williamson Act Lands and land zoned for agricultural use is a significant
impact, because lands applied for agricultural use cannot be replaced.
The Tunnel Alternative would not be expected to lead to other changes
that would result in further conversion of farmlands to non-agricultural
use. This impact would occur if agricultural lands protected from flood by
this alternative become attractive and available for future residential or
commercial development. However, land use designation and changes
to land use are not within the authority of SCVWD. Further, it is
speculative to project the future, potential land-use changes based on a
reduced flooding risk.
Periodic maintenance and the operation would utilize the existing and
proposed maintenance access roads constructed as part of the Project.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-70

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

No additional land would be required; therefore, the operations and
maintenance of this alternative would not further convert farmland to
non-agricultural use.
Operations and maintenance do not have an impact on Williamson Act
contracts or existing zoning, because these activities do not require the
alteration or conversion of these lands.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.7.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The primary feature of the NRCS Alternative is within Reach 8, which
includes portions of Morgan Hill where the channel would be deepened
and widened. However, Reach 8 is generally urbanized and the impacts
to agricultural resources in the reach are minimal. Impacts within the
other Project reaches would be the same as the Tunnel Alternative.
About 20 acres of important agricultural lands within the Project footprint
would be used during construction for related activities, such as
temporary construction easements for access and work. Construction
activities may compact soils and potentially lead to soil loss and erosion.
This impact would not be limited to the Important Farmlands, but to other
active croplands in the area too. The SCVWD would remove all
construction equipment and clean any spills or leaks from equipment on
these agricultural lands. This conversion of agricultural lands would be
temporary, but still constitutes an impact.
The Project footprint includes about 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique
Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance; and these
lands are subject to conversion to non-agricultural use under this
alternative. These lands would be converted, as Project features
discussed in Section 2.6.1 would replace these Important Farmlands.
Construction under this alternative is not anticipated to further convert
farmland to non-agricultural use.
About 1.4 acres, designated under the Williamson Act, may be
temporarily used for construction related activities. Approximately
0.4 acre is also designated as other Important Farmlands. Similar to
Important Farmlands, these agricultural lands would be potentially
impacted during construction due to soil compaction. These impacts
would not just be limited to Williamson Act parcels, but also to other
active croplands within the Project footprint. The conversion of these
lands would be temporary and would be reduced with the incorporation of
mitigation.
The Project footprint includes about 17 acres of lands designated under
the Williamson Act subject to permanent conversion. It should be noted
that 5 acres of the Williamson Act Lands in the Project footprint are the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-71

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

same as lands classified as Prime Farmland or Unique Farmland.
Although there are only 17 acres within the Project footprint, there is also
the possibility that the Project may decrease the acreage of existing
Williamson Act Lands so as the lands no longer qualify under county
provisions discussed above; this would increase the number of acres
subject to mitigation. The conversion of Williamson Act Lands and land
zoned for agricultural use is an adverse impact, because lands applied for
agricultural use cannot be replaced.
The NRCS Alternative would not be expected to lead to other changes
that would result in further conversion of farmlands to non-agricultural
use. This impact would occur if agricultural lands, protected from flood by
this alternative, become attractive or available for future residential or
commercial development. However, land use designation and changes
to land use are not within the authority of SCVWD. Further, it is
speculative to project the future, potential land-use changes based on a
reduced flooding risk.
Operations and maintenance activities would not have an impact on
Williamson Act contracts or existing zoning, because these activities do
not require the alteration of these lands. The operations and
maintenance of this alternative would not further convert farmland to
non-agricultural use.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.7.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
Potential impacts under the Culvert/Channel Alternative are expected to
be similar to the Tunnel Alternative. The key features of this alternative
include:


Realign an 800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box
culverts that, in the NRCS design, would be parallel to Hale
Avenue through the Britton School athletic fields up to Del Monte
Avenue;



Continue the double box culvert under Del Monte Avenue
approximately 900 feet to West 2nd Street; and



From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue perform the same
channel widening and deepening, along with culvert replacements
at 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th Streets as described for the NRCS
Alternative for Reach 8.

Some important agricultural lands (about 20 acres) within the Project
footprint would be used during construction for related activities, such as
temporary construction easements for access and work. Construction
activities may compact soils and potentially lead to soil loss and erosion.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-72

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

This impact would not be limited to the Important Farmlands, but to active
croplands in the area too. The SCVWD would remove all construction
equipment and clean any spills or equipment leaks on these agricultural
lands. This conversion of agricultural lands would be temporary, but still
constitutes an adverse impact that would be reduced with mitigation.
The Project footprint includes about 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique
Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance; and these
lands are subject to conversion to non-agricultural use under this
alternative. These lands would be converted, as Project features
discussed in Section 2.8.1 would replace these Important Farmlands.
This is an adverse impact because agricultural lands being removed from
production cannot be replaced.
Some areas (about 1.4 acres) designated under the Williamson Act may
be temporarily used for construction related activities. A small proportion
(about 0.4 acre) are also designated as other Important Farmlands.
Similar to Important Farmlands, these agricultural lands would be
potentially impacted during construction due to soil compaction. These
impacts would not just be limited to Williamson Act parcels, but also to
other active croplands within the Project footprint. The conversion of
these lands would be temporary and would be reduced with the
incorporation of mitigation.
The Project footprint includes about 17 acres of lands designated under
the Williamson Act subject to permanent conversion. It should be noted
that 5 acres of the Williamson Act Lands in the Project footprint are the
same as lands classified as Prime Farmland or Unique Farmland.
Although there are only 17 acres within the Project footprint, there is also
the possibility that the Project may decrease the acreage of existing
Williamson Act Lands so as the lands no longer qualify; this would
increase the number of acres subject to mitigation. The conversion of
Williamson Act Lands and land zoned for agricultural use is an adverse
impact, because lands applied for agricultural use cannot be replaced.
Similar to the NRCS Alternative, it would not be expected to lead to other
changes that would result in further conversion of farmlands to
non-agricultural use. This impact would occur if agricultural lands
protected from flood by this alternative become attractive and available
for future residential or commercial development. However, land use
designation and changes to land use are not within the authority of
SCVWD. Further, it is speculative to project the future, potential land-use
changes based on a reduced flooding risk.
Periodic maintenance and the operation of the flood protection
modifications would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance access
roads; therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative would
not further convert farmland to non-agricultural use. The operations and
maintenance of this alternative would not further convert farmland to
non-agricultural use Operations and maintenance do not have an impact

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-73

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

on Williamson Act contracts or existing zoning, because these activities
do not require the alteration of these lands.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.7.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative primary feature is the bypass at the
upstream boundary of Reach 6 that would run east through open fields,
continue under Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101, and connect to Reach 14.
This alternative would not convert agricultural lands along Reach 5. The
portion of Reach 6 within the Project footprint necessary to complete this
alternative includes about 0.9 acre of Prime Farmland and no Williamson
Act Lands. However, a substantial portion of the bypass west of U.S. 101
is designated as Prime Farmland. In total, this results in a reduction in
the conversion of designated agricultural lands compared to the other
action alternatives.
Some important agricultural lands (about 17 acres) within the Project
footprint would be used during construction related activities, such as
temporary construction easements for access and work. This is about
2 acres less than the other action alternatives. Construction activities may
compact soils and potentially lead to soil loss and erosion. This impact
would not be limited to the Important Farmlands, but to active croplands
in the area too. The SCVWD would remove all construction equipment
and clean any spills or leaks on these agricultural lands. This conversion
of agricultural lands would be temporary, but still constitutes an adverse
impact that would be reduced with mitigation.
The Project footprint for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative includes about
40 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide
or Local Importance within the Project footprint; and these lands are
subject to conversion to non-agricultural use under this alternative.
Additionally, the portion of the bypass, west of U.S. 101, lies in large part
within areas designated as Prime Farmland. These lands would be
converted, as Project features described in Section 2.9.1 would replace
these Important Farmlands. This is an adverse because agricultural
lands being removed from production cannot be replaced. Construction
under this alternative would not further convert farmland to
non-agricultural use.
Similar to the other action alternatives, it would not be expected to lead to
other changes that would result in further conversion of farmlands to
non-agricultural use. This impact would occur if agricultural lands
protected from flood by this alternative become attractive and available
for future residential or commercial development. However, land use
designation and changes to land use are not within the authority of
SCVWD. Further, it is speculative to project the future, potential land-use
changes based on a reduced flooding risk.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-74

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Some areas (about 1 acre) designated under the Williamson Act may be
temporarily used for construction related activities. Similar to Important
Farmlands, these agricultural lands would be potentially impacted during
construction due to soil compaction. These impacts would not just be
limited to Williamson Act parcels, but also to other active croplands within
the Project footprint. The conversion of these lands would be temporary
and would be reduced with the incorporation of mitigation.
The Project footprint for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative includes about
4 acres of lands designated under the Williamson Act subject to
permanent conversion. Although there are only 4 acres within the Project
footprint, there is also the possibility that the Project may decrease the
acreage of existing Williamson Act Lands so as the lands no longer
qualify; this would increase the number of acres subject to mitigation.
The conversion of Williamson Act Lands and land zoned for agricultural
use is an adverse impact, because lands applied for agricultural use
cannot be replaced.
Periodic maintenance and the operation of the flood protection
modifications would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance access
roads; therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative would
not further convert farmland to non-agricultural use. Operations and
maintenance do not have an impact on Williamson Act contracts or
existing zoning, because these activities do not require the alteration of
these lands.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.7.4

Summary of Impacts to Agricultural and Forest Resources
In this section, impacts to agricultural and forest resources are considered.
There are no forest resources in the project area and impacts to forest resources
are not discussed. All of the action alternatives would lead to agricultural land
conversion to non-agricultural use within the Project footprint. The Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would have the least amount of agricultural land conversion
compared to the other alternatives because there would be no conversion of
agricultural lands along Reach 5 and the amount of conversion along Reach 6
would be less.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Agricultural and Forest Resources are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-75

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-76

Chapter 4

4.8

Environmental Consequences

LAND USE AND PLANNING
4.8.1

Introduction
In this section, existing land uses and zoning categories within the project area
are reviewed for potential impacts or conflicts with aspects of the various
alternatives.
In order to assess whether an alternative is likely to divide a community, in
addition to evaluating construction and the operation of the various alternatives,
the Project footprint is compared to existing conditions to determine if any
existing, currently undivided, communities would be separated as a result of an
alternative. Applicable policies and designations that focus on avoidance or
mitigation of environmental effects are reviewed to determine if the Project would
conflict with these policies or designations. Other sections of this EIS also
consider land use changes and implications. Land Use changes to parks and
recreational resources are considered in Section 4.15, Recreational Resources.
Section 4.4, Botanical Resources, addresses changes in the riparian zones.
Land use changes on agricultural lands are addressed in Section 4.7, Agricultural
and Forest Resources. Potential changes to public services attributable to the
Project are considered in Section 4.14, Utilities and Public Services, while the
potential for change in housing is addressed in Section 4.16, Population and
Housing. Also, issues pertaining to habitat conservation, including the tiger
salamander, are discussed in Section 4.5, Wildlife Resources. Additionally,
regulations and potential impacts related to air quality (Section 4.11), and noise
(Section 4.12) are discussed in other sections of the report. In addition to
impacts attributable to construction and operations and maintenance,
consideration for changes to land use, as a result of new Project features within
the Project footprint, are evaluated. Project features to be included within the
Project footprint are described in Sections 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, and 2.9.
Land use types within the Project footprint are shown in Tables 3.8-1 and 3.8-2.
The data presented includes only those inundated areas that are north of Buena
Vista Avenue. In general, the alternatives, less the No-Action Alternative, would
improve flood protection, particularly in urbanized areas. The reduction of
flooding in lands currently designated for agricultural is about 19.4 percent.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-77

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.8-5

Land Use Designations Flooded Under the Various
Alternatives (Acres) 1,2,3

River Reach

No Project Alternative All other Alternatives % Reduction

Agriculture

681

549

19.4

Residential 4
Commercial 5

1582

637

59.7

89

0

100

Industrial

61

0

100

Mixed Use

17

0

100

Open Space

371

1

99.7

Public Facilities

21

0

100

167

4.8

Major Gas and Electric Utilities 175
1

Calculated by Cardno ENTRIX by overlaying flood scenarios on Land Use map.

2

Does not include roads.

3

Includes only lands north of Buena Vista Ave.

4

Includes Rural Residential, Multi and Single Family Low and Medium Density Residential, and Residential Estate.

5

Includes Commercial and Non-Retail Commercial.

Santa Clara County General Plan
The Santa Clara County General Plan, 1995–2010 (1994) defines land use
planning issues within the county, explains relationships between various
governmental entities, and describes planning policies within its jurisdiction. The
plan also designates land uses for unincorporated portions of the county. The
county defers to a local jurisdiction’s (in this case, Morgan Hill’s) General Plan for
land use in incorporated areas. The policies and implementation measures (both
countywide and specific to rural unincorporated areas) have application to the
various alternatives considered in this analysis. In some cases, the statements
and measures are paraphrased; these are found in Book B of the county’s
General Plan at:
(http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/PlansPrograms/GeneralPlan/Documents/
GP_Book_B.pdf).

San Martin Planning Area
San Martin is an unincorporated community between Morgan Hill and Gilroy
within Santa Clara County and is designated by the General Plan as a “special
planning area”. Countywide policies and those specific to unincorporated areas
apply in the San Martin area. Policy R-LU 114 states “…San Martin shall remain
a rural community, predominately non-urban and residential in nature”.

City of Morgan Hill General Plan
The City of Morgan Hill General Plan (2010a) includes applicable policies from
the Public Health and Safety Element, Open Space and Conservation Element,
and Community Development Element that pertain to lands under SCVWD’s
jurisdiction. The Morgan Hill General Plan incorporates policies from the Santa
Clara Joint Area Plan (SCJAP), adopted in 1989. The plan was adopted by the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-78

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

county, along with the cities of Morgan Hill and Gilroy, to provide consistency
related to community development and environmental management.

City of Gilroy
The southern portion of Reach 4 (approximately 42 acres, roughly 14 percent of
the Project footprint) lies within the City of Gilroy’s SOI, and may eventually be
within the city’s jurisdiction. Santa Clara LAFCO does consider goals and
applicable policies of the city within the SOI (2003 policy document). In 2006,
Santa Clara LAFCO (2006) reviewed the City of Gilroy’s public services along
with the city’s SOI. The report suggests that both the county and the city call for a
continuation of non-urban uses in these areas. Also, the City of Gilroy adopted
the SCJAP in 1989; therefore, the policies related to flood prevention are similar
to those shown for the City of Morgan Hill. In addition, Gilroy has policies and
regulations specific to flooding risks. However, for the purpose of this analysis,
the Project footprint and the area expected to be flooded under the various
alternatives lies outside the city’s current jurisdictional area; therefore, the county
land use designations, zoning and policies still apply to this area. Consequently,
the City of Gilroy’s policies and regulations are not provided in detail in this
section.
4.8.2

No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative would not physically divide an established community,
and there would be no construction of physical barriers that have the potential to
divide portions of neighborhoods or communities.
There would be no construction activities associated with the No Action
Alternative; therefore the construction impact is not applicable.
Periodic maintenance and operational activities would continue; however, these
would not separate established communities. Ongoing operations under the No
Action Alternative conflicts with at least two county policies: Health and Safety
Policy C-HS 34 and Health and Safety Policy C-HS (i) 32; and a City of Morgan
Hill policy (General Plan 4i). To the extent that the Project would improve flood
protection, the benefits of reduced flooding, under a 1-percent flood scenario,
would not be realized; thus, the local agency goals and policies related to flood
protection would not be realized. In contrast, the action alternatives are intended
to address the goals of applicable flood protection policies. This impact is
significant since it does not provide for flood protection which conflicts with local
jurisdictions’ policies designed to avoid an environmental effect.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

4.8.3

Action Alternatives

4.8.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative would be consistent with but does not necessarily
implement all Santa Clara County General Plan policies regarding health
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-79

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and safety, San Martin Planning Area policies related to floodway
development and protection, the City of Morgan Hill General Plan policies
related to public health and safety, flooding and open space and
conservation, and the City of Gilroy policies and regulations specific to
flooding risks.
This alternative would not divide established communities, as the Project
generally follows existing creek beds (which already naturally divide
communities), or will be underground and the factors that currently
connect the communities, such as roads, sidewalks, and bridges, will not
be permanently affected by construction under this alternative, therefore
there is no impact.
Construction-related activities would occur temporarily within the Project
footprint and would be consistent with local health and safety and
environmental regulations. Lands impacted by construction would be
restored after construction is completed. These activities are outlined in
Sections 2.5.3 and 2.7.2 in the Project Description. Therefore,
construction would result in no impact.
Construction of this alternative would affect lands designated and zoned
for residential, commercial, and agricultural uses, among others, as
indicated in Tables 3.8-1 and 3.8-3. As such, these areas would be
permanently converted for the purposes of flood prevention. The
conversion of these lands for this purpose is consistent with local health
and safety and environmental regulations and policies listed in
Section 4.8.1.
Periodic maintenance and long-term operations of the flood control
improvements would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance
access roads and channel improvements, which follow existing creek
features; therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative
would not divide established communities in the vicinity of the project
area. The maintenance of the Tunnel Alternative would not conflict with
existing policies and regulations. On the contrary, the flood protection
provided by this plan would substantially reduce the number of acres of
land subject to a 1-percent flooding event and, thus, the Project would be
consistent with land use policies related to flood protection and public
safety. The operations and maintenance of this alternative would be
generally beneficial or no impact under NEPA. Permanent conversion of
zoned lands for flood prevention would result in a beneficial impact or no
impact under NEPA.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.8.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
The NRCS Alternative would be consistent with, but does not necessarily
implement, all Santa Clara County General Plan policies regarding health
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-80

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and safety, San Martin Planning Area policies related to floodway
development and protection, the City of Morgan Hill General Plan policies
related to public health and safety, flooding and open space and
conservation, and the City of Gilroy policies and regulations specific to
flooding risks. Potential impacts under the NRCS Alternative would be
the same as the Tunnel Alternative; although, the Project footprint within
Reach 8 is larger for this alternative.
Construction of the NRCS Alternative would not divide established
communities, as the Project generally follows existing creek beds (which
already naturally divide communities), or will be underground and the
factors that currently connect the communities such as roads, sidewalks,
and bridges, will not be permanently affected by construction under this
alternative.
The Project footprint generally follows existing creek beds and this would
not physically divide the established community; therefore, there is no
impact.
Construction-related activities would occur temporarily within the Project
footprint and would be completed consistent with local health and safety
and environmental regulations. Areas impacted by construction would be
restored after construction is completed. These activities are outlined in
Sections 2.5.3 and 2.6.2 in the Project Description. Therefore,
construction would result in no impact.
This alternative would affect lands designated and zoned for residential,
commercial, and agricultural uses, among others, as indicated in
Tables 3.8-1 and 3.8-3. As such, these areas would be permanently
converted for the purposes of flood prevention. The conversion of these
lands for this purpose is consistent with local health and safety and
environmental regulations and policies listed in Section 4.8.1. Permanent
conversion of zoned lands for flood prevention would result in a
less-than-significant impact.
Periodic maintenance and long-term operations of the flood control
improvements would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance
access roads and channel improvements, which follow existing creek
features; therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative
would not divide established communities in the vicinity of the project
area. The maintenance of the NRCS Alternative would not conflict with
existing policies and regulations. On the contrary, the flood protection
provided by this plan would substantially reduce the number of acres of
land subject to a 1-percent flooding event and, thus, the Project would be
consistent with land use policies related to flood protection and public
safety. The operations and maintenance of this alternative would be
beneficial or no impact under NEPA .
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-81

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.8.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culver/Channel Alternative would be consistent with, but does not
necessarily implement, all Santa Clara County General Plan policies
regarding health and safety, San Martin Planning Area policies related to
floodway development and protection, the City of Morgan Hill General
Plan policies related to public health and safety, flooding and open space
and conservation, and the City of Gilroy policies and regulations specific
to flooding risks. Potential impacts under the Culvert/Channel Alternative
would be similar to the NRCS Alternative. However, the amount of lands
subject to land use change would be reduced under this alternative for
areas along Reach 8 compared to the NRCS Alternative but greater than
the Tunnel Alternative, because there would be more land required for
this alternative in Reach 8.
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would not divide established
communities, as the Project generally follows existing creek beds (which
already naturally divide communities), or will be underground and the
factors that currently connect the communities, such as roads, sidewalks
and bridges will not be permanently affected by construction under this
alternative, therefore, there is no impact.
Construction-related activities would occur temporarily within the project
footprint and would be completed consistent with local health and safety
and environmental regulations. Areas impacted by construction would be
restored after construction is completed. These activities are outlined in
Sections 2.5.3 and 2.8.2 in the Project Description. Therefore,
construction would result in no impact.
Construction of this alternative would affect lands designated and zoned
for residential, commercial, and agricultural uses, among others, as
indicated in Tables 3.8-1, and 3.8-3. As such, these areas would be
permanently converted for the purposes of flood prevention. The
conversion of these lands for this purpose is consistent with local health
and safety and environmental regulations and policies listed in
Section 4.8.1. Permanent conversion of zoned lands for flood prevention
would result in a less-than-significant impact.
Periodic maintenance and long-term operations of the flood control
improvements would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance
access roads and channel improvements, which follow existing creek
features; therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative
would not divide established communities in the vicinity of the project
area. The maintenance of the Culvert/Channel Alternative would not
conflict with existing policies and regulations. On the contrary, the flood
protection provided by this plan would substantially reduce the number of
acres of land subject to a 1-percent flooding event and, thus, the Project
would be consistent with land use policies related to flood protection and
public safety. The operations and maintenance of this alternative would
be beneficial.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-82

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.8.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative is consistent with, but does not
necessarily implement, all Santa Clara County General Plan policies
regarding health and safety, San Martin Planning Area policies related to
floodway development and protection, the City of Morgan Hill General
Plan policies related to public health and safety, flooding and open space
and conservation, and the City of Gilroy policies and regulations specific
to flooding risks. Potential impacts under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
would be similar as the Tunnel Alternative. However, there will be no
construction along Reaches 5 or 6 under this alternative; therefore, land
use changes along these reaches would be reduced compared to other
alternatives even when accounting for the lands that would need to be
converted to build the Bypass from Reach 6 to Reach 14.
Similar to the Tunnel Alternative, this alternative would not divide
established communities, as the Project generally follows existing creek
beds (which already naturally divide communities), or would be
underground and the factors that currently connect the communities, such
as roads, sidewalks, and bridges, would not be permanently affected by
construction under this alternative.
The Project footprint generally follows existing creek beds and this would
not result in existing communities being disconnected. In fact, the area
impacted by this alternative is reduced, because construction is not
necessary along Reaches 5 and 6. A short, high-flow bypass would be
constructed between Reach 6 to Reach 14 under Highway 101.
However, this alternative would not physically divide the established
community; therefore, there is no impact.
Construction-related activities would occur temporarily within the Project
footprint and would be completed consistent with local health and safety
and environmental regulations. Areas impacted by construction would be
restored after construction is completed. These activities are outlined in
Sections 2.5.3 and 2.9.2 in the Project Description. Therefore,
construction would result in no impact.
This alternative would affect lands designated and zoned for residential,
commercial, and agricultural uses, among others, as indicated in
Tables 3.8-1 and 3.8-3. As such, these areas would be permanently
converted for the purposes of flood prevention. However, land use
changes would not be necessary along Reaches 5 and 6, as Project
construction along these reaches is not required under this alternative.
Likely, the total conversion of lands would be less, as is shown in the
table. The conversion of these lands for this purpose would be consistent
with local health and safety and environmental regulations and policies
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-83

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

listed in Section 4.8.1. Permanent conversion of zoned lands for flood
prevention would result in a beneficial impact or no impact under NEPA.
Periodic maintenance and long-term operations of the flood protection
modifications would utilize the existing and proposed maintenance access
roads and channel improvements, which follow existing creek features;
therefore, the operations and maintenance of this alternative would not
divide established communities in the vicinity of the project area. The
maintenance of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would not conflict with
existing policies and regulations. On the contrary, the flood protection
provided by this plan would substantially reduce the number of acres of
land subject to a 1-percent flooding event and, thus, the Project would be
consistent with land use policies related to flood protection and public
safety. The operations and maintenance of this alternative would be
beneficial.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.8.4

Summary of Impacts to Land Use and Planning
Although the action alternatives would require a conversion of land uses for the
purposes of flood management, no significant impacts are identified and no
mitigation is necessary. The least amount of land conversion would occur under
the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative because of the tunnel in Reach 8 and the lack of
improvements in Reaches 5 and 6 downstream of the bypass. A significant
impact was identified under the No Action Alternative; the impact relates to local
policies regarding flood management.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Land Use and Planning are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.9

CULTURAL RESOURCES
4.9.1

Introduction
This section describes the consequences of implementing the Project on cultural
resources. Where impacts are identified, mitigation measures are proposed to
reduce those impacts to less-than significant levels.
Cultural Resources in the Project APE (Area of Potential Effect)
Cardno ENTRIX conducted a records search and intuitive pedestrian survey of
the Project to identify cultural resources for the Project (Cardno ENTRIX 2012).
The survey was performed by an archaeologist and an architectural historian.
Areas not inventoried as part of this effort included two staging areas that were
inaccessible at the time of the fieldwork, one staging area which was only

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-84

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

partially accessible, and areas previously surveyed as part of earlier projects in
the Llagas Creek watershed. The investigations resulted in the identification of
four previously identified prehistoric archaeological resources, which were
identified during the records search: three located in Reach 4 and one located in
Reach 14. Cardno ENTRIX was not able to relocate artifacts or other indications
of human use or habitation at the four previously recorded prehistoric sites.
DPR 523A Series form Continuation Sheet updates were completed for all four
sites indicating observations made and areas visited during the relocation effort.
Additionally, a bridge, constructed in 1925, resides in Reach 6 where Llagas
Avenue crosses Llagas Creek. Bridge 37C0550 was found not eligible for the
NRHP or the CRHR and is not listed as a historic or heritage resource under the
City of Morgan Hill and Santa Clara County’s General Plans.
The USACE - San Francisco District archaeologist conducted the cultural
resources study in two phases. Phase I consisted of research of archaeological
records and literature on file with the State of California and in the project files of the
USACE office. Phase II consisted of an archaeological survey to identify and, as
necessary, evaluate cultural resources for their eligibility for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The records search and survey was
conducted to comply with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 (PL89-665, as amended) to consider the effects upon historic properties
and historic properties eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places.
The USACE delineated the APE, defined as the geographical area within which a
project may cause changes, directly or indirectly, in the character or use of
historic properties located in the APE. The APE for this project is comprised of
the six reaches, totaling approximately 12.7 miles, situated on the main branch of
Llagas Creek, West Little Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek. It
encompassed the stream channels and strips of land running parallel on both sides
of the streams.
Although the cultural resource reports identified five sites “along” the streams in the
APE, the USACE observed that no cultural materials from the sites extended in the
footprint of the any of the Action Alternatives. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude
that the APE does not contain prehistoric cultural resources, and an evaluation of
NRHP eligibility of the sites is not necessary. The USACE previously coordinated
with the Native American Heritage Commission and Native American Tribes and no
additional information regarding cultural resources was revealed. Concurrent with
this EIS, the USACE is consulting with the State Historic Preservation Officer
(SHPO) to solicit and request comment on the findings and conclusions of the
identification and evaluation efforts.
Paleontological Resources
Paleontology is defined as the science dealing with the life of past geological
periods as known from fossil remains. Paleontological resources include fossil
remains, as well as fossil localities and formations that have produced fossil
material. Such locations and specimens are important nonrenewable resources.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-85

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

NEPA offers protection for these sensitive resources and requires that they be
addressed during the EIS process.
A search of the University of California Museum of Paleontology collections
database did not identify any paleontological resources within the Project APE.
The database search did identify paleontological resources in Santa Clara
County, which indicates that the area may be sensitive for the presence of
paleontological resources.
4.9.2

No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative would have no construction and, therefore,
construction related impacts on cultural resources within the Project APE are not
applicable.
The No Action Alternative would have no impacts on cultural resources within the
Project APE. However, continued flooding and degradation of the creek could
expose previously unidentified cultural resources. Existing maintenance
practices include standard BMPs for the discovery of previously unknown cultural
resources.
The No Action Alternative would have no construction and, therefore, no impacts
on known cultural resources within the Project APE.
There are no known cultural resources in areas that are currently maintained by
the SCVWD for operations and maintenance activities. The No Action
Alternative would have no impacts on known cultural resources within the Project
APE; however, there is the potential to impact previously unidentified cultural
resources in these areas during additional flooding, which may occur in the future
under this alterative. Although flooding may occur, no cultural resources were
observed on or near the banks of the creek. Therefore, any effect of flooding
could result a less-than-significant impact to cultural resources known in the
vicinity.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

4.9.3

Action Alternatives

4.9.3.1 Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
The Tunnel Alternative in Reach 8 would include construction of a tunnel
within an area with no known cultural resources. Operations and
maintenance under the Tunnel Alternative in Reach 8 would include a
sediment detention basin that would require periodic sediment cleanout.
In addition, road maintenance would need to occur along the access
route, providing ingress and egress to the sediment detention basin.
Any ground disturbing activities associated with the Project have the
potential to impact archeological resources, paleontological resources,
and human remains. A cultural resources inventory of the entire Project
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-86

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

APE has not been completed. Known cultural resource sites in the
portions of the Project APE inventoried are presented in Table 4.9-1.
Table 4.9-1
Site Number
CA-SCL-400
CA-SCL-401
CA-SCL-403
CA-SCL-452
Llagas Creek Bridge
(Bridge 37C0550)

Cultural Resources adjacent to the Project APE

Site Type
Prehistoric-Lithic scatter, fire cracked rock
Prehistoric-Lithic scatter, fire cracked rock
Prehistoric-Lithic scatter, fire cracked rock
Prehistoric-Habitation, possible midden soil, multiple artifact classes
Historic-Transportation/Bridge

Reach
4
4
4
14
6

Construction of access roads, diversion channels, and utilities relocation
for flood management could impact undiscovered cultural or
paleontological resources or human remains. The SCVWD implements
standard BMPs in the event that resources are uncovered during
construction, which ensures that the Project would not result in a
significant impact to cultural resources. Flood management would be
beneficial to the preservation of unknown cultural resources by preventing
future erosion.
Construction activities near known cultural resources could result in an
unintentional damage to these resources if not adequately protected,
which is a potentially significant impact. A Project mitigation measure
requires that known resources be marked in the field and an
archaeologist be on site during activities adjacent to these resources.
Implementation of this measure would reduce the potential impact.
Operation and maintenance activities common to all alternatives and
specific to the Tunnel Alternative are outlined in Chapter 2, Sections 2.5.5
and 2.7.5, respectively. Operation and maintenance activities that could
result in ground disturbance include sediment removal and bank repair;
however, neither of these activities generally occur in native soil.
maintenance activities that may occur near known cultural resources
would be required to comply with mitigation measures to reduce potential
impacts to a less-than-significant level.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.9.3.2 Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative
This alternative would widen and deepen the creek along Reach 8,
resulting in increased possibility for encounters with unanticipated cultural
resources.
Any ground disturbing activities associated with the Project have the
potential to impact archeological resources, paleontological resources,
and human remains. A cultural resources inventory of the entire Project
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-87

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

APE has not been completed. Known cultural resource sites in the
Project APE are presented in Table 4.9-1.
Construction of access roads, diversion channels, and utilities relocation
for flood management could impact undiscovered cultural or
paleontological resources or human remains. The SCVWD implements
standard BMPs in the event that resources are uncovered during
construction, which ensures that the Project would not result in a
significant impact to cultural resources. Flood management would be
beneficial to the preservation of unknown cultural resources by preventing
future erosion.
Construction activities near known cultural resources could result in an
unintentional damage to these resources if not adequately protected,
which is a potentially significant impact. Mitigation measures require that
known resources be marked in the field and an archaeologist be on site
during activities adjacent to these resources. Implementation of this
measure would reduce the potential impact.
Operation and maintenance activities common to all alternatives and
specific to the NRCS Alternative are outlined in Chapter 2, Sections 2.5.5
and 2.6.5, respectively. Operation and maintenance activities that could
result in ground disturbance include sediment removal and bank repair;
however, neither of these activities generally occur in native soil.
Maintenance activities that may occur near known cultural resources
would be required to comply with mitigation measures as described in
Chapter 5 of this EIS to reduce potential impacts to a less-than-significant
level.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.9.3.3 Culvert/Channel Alternative
This alternative would require a smaller ROW in Reach 8, reducing the
amount of vegetation to be removed along the existing West Little Llagas
channel and would allow easier maintenance access, relative to the
Tunnel Alternative. Impact determinations for potential impacts to
unidentified cultural resources caused by ground disturbing activities and
impacts to known cultural resources are the same as for the Tunnel
Alternative.
Any ground disturbing activities associated with the Project have the
potential to impact archeological resources, paleontological resources,
and human remains. A cultural resources inventory of the entire Project
APE has not been completed. Known cultural resource sites in the
Project APE are presented in Table 4.9-1.
Construction of access roads, diversion channels, and utilities relocation
for flood management could impact undiscovered cultural or
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-88

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

paleontological resources or human remains. The SCVWD implements
standard BMPs in the event that resources are uncovered during
construction, which ensures that the Project would not result in a
significant impact to cultural resources. Flood management would be
beneficial to the preservation of unknown cultural resources by preventing
future erosion.
Construction activities near known cultural resources could result in an
unintentional damage to these resources if not adequately protected,
which is a potentially significant impact. A proposed mitigation measure
requires that known resources be marked in the field and an
archaeologist be present on site during activities adjacent to these
resources. Implementation of this measure will reduce the potential
impact.
Operation and maintenance activities common to all alternatives and
specific to the Culvert/Channel Alternative are outlined in Chapter 2,
Sections 2.5.5 and 2.8.5, respectively. Operation and maintenance
activities that could result in ground disturbance include sediment removal
and bank repair; however, neither of these activities generally occur in
native soil. Maintenance activities that may occur near known cultural
resources would be required to comply with mitigation measures to
reduce potential impacts.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.9.3.4 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high-flow bypass
channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little
Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so that no flood capacity
improvements would be needed along Reach 5 or Reach 6 of Llagas
Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Flood conveyance
improvements for the upstream Project Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B, and for
the downstream Reach 4 would remain the same as that described for
the Tunnel Alternative. Operations and maintenance would be nearly the
same as described for the Tunnel Alternative, with the exception of
maintenance for the bypass channel hydraulic control structure in
Reach 6.
Any ground disturbing activities associated with the Project have the
potential to impact archeological resources, paleontological resources,
and human remains. A cultural resources inventory of the entire Project
APE has not been completed. Known cultural resource sites in the
Project APE are presented in Table 4.9-1.
Construction of access roads, diversion channels, and utilities relocation
for flood management could impact undiscovered cultural or
paleontological resources or human remains. The SCVWD implements
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-89

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

standard BMPs in the event that resources are uncovered during
construction, which ensures that the Project would not result in a
significant impact to these resources. Flood management would be
beneficial to the preservation of unknown cultural resources by preventing
future erosion.
Construction activities near known cultural resources could result in an
unintentional damage to these resources if not adequately protected,
which is a potentially significant impact. The proposed mitigation
measure requires that known resources be marked in the field and an
archaeologist be on site during activities adjacent to these resources.
Implementation of this measure would reduce the potential impact.
Operation and maintenance activities common to all alternatives and
specific to the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative are outlined in Chapter 2,
Sections 2.5.5 and 2.9.5, respectively. Operation and maintenance
activities that could result in ground disturbance including sediment
removal and bank repair; however, neither of these activities generally
occur in native soil. Maintenance activities that may occur near known
cultural resources would be required to comply with mitigation measures
as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS to reduce potential impacts.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.9.4

Summary of Impacts to Cultural Resources
All impacts to cultural resources can be reduced by implementing mitigation
measures and BMPs as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS. The Tunnel
Alternative and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative have less ground disturbance in
Reach 8, thus are less likely to impact unknown cultural resources in that area of
the Proposed Project compared to the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Cultural Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.10

TRAFFIC AND CIRCULATION
4.10.1 Introduction
This section presents an analysis of traffic conditions is focused primarily on
construction-related effects, such as road closures, detours, deterioration of road
conditions related to construction and hauling, and interruptions in transit service.
Operations and maintenance related traffic effects after construction is completed
are also discussed and addressed.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-90

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The Tunnel Alternative and other action alternatives discussed below are not
expected to cause a permanent increase in traffic, as they do not include any
traffic-generating land uses. Maintenance operations would be widely dispersed
and sporadic in nature, would not be regularly occurring, and maintenance would
take place almost entirely from off-roadway maintenance roads that would be
specifically built for access to the channel. Likewise, the action alternatives
would not result in a permanent increase in parking demand. Traffic resulting
from operations of the Project alternatives is estimated to be nominal, and no
traffic-related impacts are forecasted to occur. Therefore, this traffic analysis
evaluates potential impacts of temporary construction traffic resulting from the
implementation of Project alternatives on the local circulation network, access,
and safety.
The traffic and circulation analysis included examination of the following
information:


Transportation Study for the Llagas Creek Flood Control Improvements
Project prepared by Alta Planning, May 9, 2013



65% Design Plans (SCVWD 2013)

For the action alternatives discussed below, this analysis assumes an excavation
truck capacity of 12 cubic yards (CY).
The traffic analysis relies on construction vehicle trip estimates, as described in
Table 4.10-2.
Table 4.10-2 provides a summary of the approximate number of truck trips per
day during construction in an associated reach as it relates to disposal of
excavated materials, which makes up the vast majority of the truck trips2, as well
as excavation crew and support/materials trips per day for all action alternatives,
except the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.
The table below shows quantities for the Tunnel Alternative. Excavation
quantities for the NRCS, Tunnel, and Culvert/Channel alternatives are very
similar; therefore, the Tunnel Alternative is used as a comparative benchmark in
the tables below and encompasses approximate quantities for the NRCS,
Tunnel, and Culvert/Channel action alternatives. For the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives, excavation quantities and truck trips are the same
in all reaches, with the exception of Reach 8. Refer to Table 2.5-3 for more detail
on estimates of earthwork quantities for all action alternatives.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, the number of daily construction-related trips by reach
ranges between a daily average of 42 and 258 trips per day.

2

For purposes of this report, a “truck trip” is always identified and calculated numerically as two trips. There is one
trip out from the Project site with a load of excavated material plus an additional, second return trip back to the Project
site. As such, disposal of one dump truck load of material is reported here as two truck trips.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-91

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.10-2 Tunnel Alternative Total Average Daily Construction-Related Trips

Reach

Average
Excavation
Truck Trips
per Day

Excavation
Crew per
Day

Excavation
Crew Trips
per Day

4
5 and 6
7A
7B
8
14

120
90
242
40
18
56

2
3
3
2
2
2

4
6
6
4
4
4

Support Crew/
Support Crew/
Total
Materials
Materials Deliveries Construction
Deliveries per Day
Trips per Day
Trips per Day

5
15
5
10
10
5

10
30
10
20
20
10

134
126
258
64
42
70

Source: Alta Planning and Design (2013)

Table 4.10-3 Reach 6 Bypass Alternative Total Average Daily Construction-Related Trips

Reach

Average
Excavation
Truck Trips
per Day

Excavation
Crew per
Day

Excavation
Crew Trips
per Day

4
6
7A
7B
8
14

120
8
242
40
18
94

2
2
3
2
2
2

4
4
6
4
4
4

Support Crew/
Support Crew/
Total
Materials
Materials Deliveries Construction
Deliveries per Day
Trips per Day
Trips per Day

5
15
5
10
10
5

10
30
10
20
20
10

134
42
258
64
42
108

Source: Alta Planning and Design (2013)

Table 4.10-3 provides a summary of the approximate number of truck trips per
day during construction for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. As shown in Table
4.10-3, the number of construction-related trips would be approximately 42 trips
per day in Reach 6 to construct the bypass channel segment. There are no
construction-related trips in Reach 5, because there is no construction in this
reach. This would result in an overall reduction in truck trips for the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative in comparison to the other action alternatives.
Table 4.10-4 provides a summary of the average daily truck trips by construction
year associated with disposal of excavated earth materials and with the
additional labor crew and materials delivery trips for the Tunnel Alternative (and
by extension the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives). The average daily
truck trips related to excavation disposal is broken down by year to determine the
average number of daily truck trips needed to dispose of the excavated earth
materials. Average daily truck trips are calculated based on the forecast soil
disposal volume by reach, the duration of the construction period, and the
anticipated year of construction by reach. For purposes of this analysis, it is
assumed that a 12-CY dump truck capacity is used.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-92

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.10-4 Average Daily Truck Trips by Year—Tunnel Alternative
Reach
4
5 and 6
7A
7B
8
14
Total

1
134
258

392

2
134
126
258
42
70
630

Construction Year
3
4
134
126
126
64
42
70
436

5

6

126

126

64
42

42

232

168

126

It is important to note the differences between Tables 4.10-2 and 4.10-4, which
shows all the construction related truck trips that would occur in a given reach in
a given year. Work does not happen in all reaches in all years, as the
construction work is phased. Table 4.10-2 does not distinguish in which year
work happens in each reach; rather it shows the calculation for the average daily
truck trips whenever construction occurs in any particular reach.
As shown in Table 4.10-4, the daily trips by year range between 126 and
630 trips per day (see last row of table) for the Tunnel Alternative and, by
extension, the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives. The majority of the truck
trips shown in Table 4.10-4 are forecasted to travel to Anderson Dam through an
established haul route along Cochrane Road (discussed below); however, a
portion of the total truck trips would not travel to Anderson Dam. Approximately
275,000 CY of material to be excavated from Reach 7A will be used for filling in
Lake Silveira for purposes of wetland and riparian habitat mitigation, as
discussed in Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 of this EIS. This 275,000 CY
represents approximately 22,900 truckloads (using 12-CY truck capacity) or
45,800 truck trips (22,900 truckloads x 2 trips per load = 45,800). Over the 290day duration of the Reach 7A construction period, between Years 1 and 2, this
represents an average of about 158 truck trips per day that will be routed to Lake
Silveira rather than to Anderson Dam. The total number of truck trips to
Anderson Dam over the 6-year construction period would be 223,866.
Table 4.10-5 provides a summary of the excavation truck trips for the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative by year to determine the average daily number of trips.
Table 4.10-5 Average Daily Truck Trips by Year—Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
Reach
4
6
7A
7B
8
14
Total

1
134
258

2
134
42
258

392

42
108
584

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Construction Year
3
4
134
42
42
64
42
108
390

5

6

42

64
42

42

148

84
December 2015

4-93

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

As shown in Table 4.10-5, the daily trips by year ranges between 84 and 584
trips per day (excluding that there will be no trips in Year 6) for the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative. The majority of these trips are forecast to travel to Anderson
Dam, through the established haul route along Cochrane Road. As discussed
above, approximately 158 trips per day between construction Years 1 and 2
would not travel to Anderson Dam from Reach 7A, but would instead travel to
Lake Silveira to be used for purposes of developing wetland and riparian habitat,
as discussed in Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 of this EIS.
Traffic Control Plan
In order to minimize impacts of construction-related traffic and staging on existing
daily vehicle traffic and area road use, a construction Traffic Control Plan will be
prepared as part of the Project to address construction traffic routes, construction
equipment staging, construction vehicle parking, lane closures and blockages,
detours, maintenance of access to residences and businesses, transit access,
public notification, and maintenance of emergency vehicle access during
construction. This plan will be reviewed and approved by Caltrans, the City of
Morgan Hill Public Works Department, and County of Santa Clara Roads and
Airports Department prior to any construction- or site-preparation activities.
Elements of the Traffic Control Plan would include, but not be limited to, the
following:


Full and Partial Street Closure Advance Notice. Advance notice shall be
given to the local agency public works department staff to coordinate
planned full and partial closures of roadways. Closures notices will be
provided with 2 weeks’ notice, and planned detour routes will be
established in advance of the notice. The notification should be
consistent with the BMPs (Appendix C) as included in the SCVWD, Best
Management Practices Handbook, Revision A, May 22, 2008.



Designated Access Routes. Appropriate construction vehicle routes from
each Project reach to U.S. 101 have been identified and discussed.
Vehicle and haul routes will be confirmed with local agencies prior to the
start of excavation. All traffic traveling from the highway would use the
major arterial roadways.



Maximum Speed Limits. Maximum speed limits will be identified for
trucks and heavy equipment traveling to Project reach segments located
within residential neighborhoods.



Weekend Construction. Within Morgan Hill city limits, construction
activities shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and prohibited on
Sundays and holidays (per local ordinance). Construction may occur in
the evenings during some circumstances.



Limited Travel during Commute Times. Construction vehicles will avoid,
to the extent feasible, the peak commute hours of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 to 6:00 p.m.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-94

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences


Pedestrian and Bicycle Access. Bicycle and pedestrian access along all
roadways affected by Project construction shall be maintained during
construction to the maximum extent feasible.



Fencing and Barricades. Construction areas will be blocked off from
vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic by such measures as temporary
barriers or fencing.



Lane Closure/Blockage Timing. Lane closures will be limited to
non-commute times, to the extent feasible, such as the peak commute
hours of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 to 6:00 p.m.



Lane Closure/Blockage Monitor. Determine locations where a public
safety monitor or flagperson is needed during lane closures/blockages to
regulate vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic through the construction
zone.



Signage. Warning signage will be visible during construction to alert
motorists of potential lane closures/blockages and detours and to alert
pedestrians and bicyclists of any safety hazards along the road.



Lane Closure Detour Plans. For construction activities that will result in
full or partial lane closures, the SCVWD contractor shall submit a detailed
detour plan to the local agency for review and approval. The local agency
public works department will be responsible for approving detour routes,
time periods, and locations of signage (such as changeable message
signs) Detour plans will be developed where roadways must be
completely closed to motor vehicle traffic. Detour plans shall include
alternate routes for motorists, transit vehicles, emergency vehicles,
bicyclists, and pedestrians.



Agency Traffic-Related Permits. Permits will be obtained from local
agencies and Caltrans for traffic detours required for construction
activities.



Local Business Access. Full pedestrian access to businesses along
Monterey Road will be maintained at all times during construction.
Signage should direct patrons to alternate parking locations on side
streets.



Crew Parking. For construction within downtown Morgan Hill, policies will
be developed for parking construction crew vehicles offsite, such as at a
local shopping center and carpooling to the Project area, to limit vehicles
parked within the staging area.



Phone Number for Complaints. The SCVWD, or appropriate designee,
shall post at least one sign during active construction that includes the
name and telephone number of the staff person the public may contact to
register complaints about construction traffic or access. The SCVWD
shall ensure that a written record of all such complaints is kept and that

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-95

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

the problems registered by the public are investigated and resolved within
1 week of receiving the complaints.


Transit Access. VTA bus access shall be provided along Project area
roadways at all times during construction. VTA will be notified of the time
and duration of planned lane closures at least 1 week in advance of such
closures. A public safety monitor will be present during all lane closures
to ensure bus access through the area.



Emergency Vehicle Access. Emergency vehicle access shall be provided
along Project area roadways at all times during construction. The local
fire and police departments (Morgan Hill Police Department and Santa
Clara County Fire Department) will be notified of the time and duration of
planned lane closures, at least 1 week in advance, of such closures. A
public safety monitor will be present during all lane closures to ensure
emergency vehicle access through the area.

Caltrans requires preparation of a Transportation Management Plan (TMP)
whenever closures are planned on freeway facilities to minimize motorist delay
and provide public notification regarding closures and impacts. The Traffic
Control Plan would be prepared to be compliant with Caltrans TMP requirements
if impacts to U.S. 101 are anticipated. The TMP identifies times allowed for
closure and details regarding notification of the public, including a public
awareness campaign.
4.10.2 No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential
areas of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue. Storm runoff would
continue through the West Little Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and
Llagas Creek channel reaches. The bypass channel in Reach 7A would not be
constructed under the No Action Alternative, and channel bank erosion and
widening would likely continue. Maintenance of the Upper Llagas Creek facilities
would be conducted in accordance with the guidelines established in the SMP
Update 2012–2022 (SCVWD 2011).
No channel modification or improvements would be constructed; therefore, no
impacts would occur as a result of construction.
Existing maintenance activities established by the SCVWD include a SMP. The
SMP established procedures for routine maintenance of stream channels
involving sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and
associated minor activities.
Instream sediment removal and bank protection work is carried out from June 15
to October 30, or the first significant rainfall (0.5 inch of rain in a 24-hour period)
after October 15, whichever occurs first.
Sediment removal, bank stabilization, vegetation management, and minor
maintenance and repairs are typical SMP activities that require the use of
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-96

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

maintenance equipment. In the past, sediment maintenance has occurred only
in Reach 14 and near the Church Pond inlet in Reach 6; although, sediment
maintenance could occur in other locations in the future. Maintenance
equipment is transported to and from maintenance sites and moved once
projects are completed. Equipment is not stored permanently at maintenance
sites. Nearly all maintenance occurs along existing SCVWD maintenance roads
located at the top of channel banks or through planned access roads down the
banks to the channel bottom. Maintenance activities rarely occur from public
roadways and, therefore, would not interfere with traffic patterns. Mobilization
and demobilization of equipment from public roadways to SCVWD maintenance
roads may briefly interfere with access to residences and businesses; however,
SMP activities are temporary and intermittent and would not affect traffic loads on
the local street system.
The SCVWD performs routine maintenance activities within the Project area,
conducted in accordance with the SCVWD’s established BMPs under the SMP
(2011). BMPs are implemented to reduce the impacts.
The nearest Congestion Management Program (CMP) facilities to the Project
area are U.S. 101 and State Route 152. No channel modification or
improvements would be constructed under the No Action Alternative; therefore,
no construction- related impacts to CMP facilities would occur.
Existing maintenance activities established by the SCVWD include the SMP,
which established procedures for routine maintenance of stream channels
involving sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and
associated minor activities. As mentioned above, the nearest CMP facilities to
the Proposed Project are U.S. 101 and State Route 152. Most of the Project
area runs parallel to U.S. 101. Maintenance vehicles may use U.S. 101 to travel
to access maintenance sites; however, maintenance work would be intermittent
and for short durations. The SMP is implemented to maintain the structural and
functional integrity of SCVWD facilities and to maintain existing flow capacity.
During the dry season, when SMP activities are implemented, maintenance
vehicles and construction equipment are needed to conduct the maintenance
work. Maintenance work typically occurs only a few days each year in a given
area, and the trucks and equipment primarily use existing maintenance roads
that are off of the public roadways to access the channel. Consequently,
maintenance activities do not create substantial traffic on public roads that would
interfere with emergency vehicle access. In addition, SMP maintenance
activities do not conflict with policies and adopted plans or programs supporting
alternative transportation.
Instream sediment removal and bank protection work is carried out from June 15
to October 30, or the first significant rainfall (0.5 inch of rain in a 24-hour period)
after October 15, whichever occurs first. Sediment removal, bank stabilization,
vegetation management, minor maintenance, and repairs are typical SMP
activities that require the use of maintenance equipment. In the past, sediment
maintenance has occurred only in Reach 14 and near the Church Pond inlet in
Reach 6; although, sediment maintenance could occur in other locations in the
future. Maintenance equipment is transported to and from maintenance sites
and moved once projects are completed. Equipment is not stored permanently
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-97

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

at maintenance sites. Nearly all maintenance occurs along existing SCVWD
maintenance roads located at the top of channel banks or through planned
access roads down the banks to the channel bottom. Maintenance activities
rarely occur from public roadways and, therefore, would not interfere with traffic
patterns. Mobilization and demobilization of equipment from public roadways to
SCVWD maintenance roads may briefly interfere with access to residences and
businesses; however, SMP activities are temporary and intermittent and would
not affect traffic loads on the local street system.
Under the No Action Alternative, the current magnitude and frequency of flooding
would still occur, which would periodically increase the potential need for
emergency vehicles and which can result in interference and inadequate
emergency access during flooding events. Therefore, impacts to emergency
vehicle access would be significant. In addition, under the No Action Alternative,
the current magnitude and frequency of flooding would still occur during storm
events, which may result in interference with public transit, bicycle, and
pedestrian facilities in the Project area; therefore, impacts would be significant.
Finally, since no channel modification or improvements would be constructed;
therefore, no impacts related to inadequate emergency access and no impacts
related to interference with alternative transportation policies and plans would
occur as a result of construction. In conclusion, under the No Action Alternative
there would be no traffic related impacts, including no damage to existing roads
would occur as a result of construction.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.10.3 Action Alternatives

4.10.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

The key feature of the Tunnel Alternative is to use an underground
concrete tunnel instead of channel widening and deepening proposed
through Reach 8 in downtown Morgan Hill. The tunnel would be
constructed under the Nob Hill Terrace neighborhood, and a sediment
detention basin would be constructed in the 600 feet of channel between
Wright Avenue and Hillwood Lane with an 18-foot-wide
maintenance/access road for maintenance access to the sediment
detention basin.
Construction duration for the Tunnel Alternative would be 6 years, with
construction lasting for about 36 months, with the last 3 years required for
the mitigation plantings establishment period. Under the Tunnel
Alternative, a total of 1,618,200 CY of soil would be excavated and
disposed, with 1,343,200 CY hauled offsite (after accounting for
275,000 CY to be used at Lake Silveira for mitigation purposes) for
storage and later use at Anderson Dam. Construction of the Tunnel
Alternative would require loading approximately 111,933 trucks for a
roundtrip to Anderson Dam over the 3-year construction life of the Project.
Since a truck trip actually requires a roundtrip, one outbound to the dam
and one return trip to the Project site to obtain another load, this is
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-98

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

considered two trips for each load or 111,933 x 2 = 223,866 truck trips
(with a 12 CY truck capacity).
The tunnel would be excavated toward the south from the Hale Avenue
Portal work area toward Del Monte Avenue near Dunne Avenue. The
Project would use conventional mining equipment and methods to
excavate the tunnel, namely roadheaders, excavators, and controlled
detonations. Portions of the tunnel would have a small amount of cover
between the top of the tunnel and the street. At these locations, it would
be necessary to inject grout into the loose soil to bind the soil together,
which would allow the tunnel to be excavated without causing surface
settlement. The three areas to be pre-grouted are Hale Avenue
southeast of Warren Avenue (250 feet), the intersection of Nob Hill
Terrace and Del Monte Avenue (180 feet on Nob Hill Terrace and 70 feet
on Warren Avenue), and Del Monte Avenue (approximately 150 feet north
of Dunne Avenue for a length of 70 feet). The equipment used for
pre-grouting is a drill rig truck and a grouting truck.
Overall, the Tunnel Alternative would not result in any permanent traffic
impacts, as no existing roadways will be altered, no new public roadways
will be developed, and there is no additional traffic added to local
roadways, since this is a flood-management Project.
However, construction activities are anticipated to interfere with local
traffic patterns in the Project area. Construction activities in all reaches
that are anticipated to interfere with local traffic patterns include
temporary road closures, traffic delays due to construction vehicle
access, temporary loss of parking, and construction activities, including
material hauling and disposing. Construction activities will take place
Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and Saturdays from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Temporary road closures and construction related
impacts for the Tunnel Project are discussed below by reach.
Temporary Road Closures
Construction of specific segments of the Tunnel Project would take place
on public roadways, which could require temporary closures of roadway
lanes. Construction may require complete street closure, or partial
closure of some lanes. Below is description of temporary road closures
that would occur for the Tunnel Alternative by reach:


Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 4 construction
may include Masten Avenue, Rucker Avenue, and Buena Vista
Avenue.



Reach 5 construction activities are expected to occur without
closing local roadways, as Reach 5 does not intersect roadways,
with the exception of U.S. 101. The U.S. 101 bridges that pass
over Reach 5 are not expected to be impacted during construction
activities.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-99

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences


Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 6 construction
may include Llagas Avenue, San Martin Avenue, and Church
Avenue.



Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 7A construction
may include La Crosse Drive, Watsonville Road, and Middle
Avenue.



Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 7B construction
may include Dunne Avenue, Ciolino Avenue, Spring Avenue,
Cosmo Avenue, Edes Avenue, Del Monte Avenue, Edmundson
Avenue, and La Crosse Drive.



Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 8 construction
may include Hale Avenue, Wright Avenue, Main Avenue, and
Warren Avenue.



Roadways with temporary closures due to Reach 14 construction
may include San Martin Avenue and Church Avenue.

Closure of travel lanes along local roadways for construction activities
would have the potential to disrupt local business and residential access
and would represent a temporary, significant impact to local traffic and
circulation during construction. With implementation of the Traffic Control
Plan as part of the Project and with implementation of traffic mitigation
measures and BMPs as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS, which
involves maintaining access to local residences and business, impacts
would be reduced with mitigation.
Construction Vehicle Access
Several types of vehicles would be involved in construction activities
along Llagas Creek that could interfere with local traffic patterns. These
include the following:


Excavation trucks are those used to transport excavated materials
out of a particular reach. Excavation trucks will collect material for
distribution to Anderson Dam where the earth materials will be
stored for later reuse in another project. The northern reaches for
the Proposed Project will be able to access Anderson Dam using
the Cochrane Road overpass without accessing U.S. 101;
excavation in other reaches would need to utilize U.S. 101.
Approximately 80 percent of soil excavated from Reach 7A is
scheduled for disposal at Lake Silveira, located near southern end
of Reach 7A just west of Monterey Road.



Construction and hauling support trips are primarily local trips by
road ready vehicles and trips for hauling of heavy equipment to
the site. The local trips are ordinarily within a particular reach, or
at most, to an adjacent reach. The equipment hauling trips

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-100

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

typically originate from two sources: northern Santa Clara County
or from nearby rental businesses within south Santa Clara County.


Crew trucks are vehicles needed to transport workers to and from
the work site on a daily basis.

Construction crews may travel to and from multiple locations; but, likely,
will come from urbanized communities to the north or south of the work
site. Parking for construction workers would be provided within SCVWD
ROW and approved staging areas only.
Access and use of the local street system by construction vehicles,
described above, will also result in traffic impacts. A description of traffic
impacts from the Tunnel Alternative to the existing traffic load and local
street system is broken down by reach from south to north, as discussed
below.
Reach 4
Construction of Reach 4 involves widening and deepening of the existing
channel, resulting in a cross section with a low-flow channel, bankfull
channel, benches, and engineered banks. All-weather
maintenance/access roads would be provided along Reach 4 on both
sides of the creek. The road surface would be located at the top of bank
for winter flood management, maintenance, and inspection activities.
Access to the maintenance roads would be at Masten Avenue, Rucker
Avenue, Buena Vista Avenue, and Denio Avenue. Approximately
2.3 acres of vacant land along Masten Avenue and No Name Uno near
the U.S. 101 interchange on the south side of the channel, as well as
4.6 acres in an agricultural field at the end of Denio Avenue just north of
Buena Vista Avenue on the south side of the channel, would be used as
staging areas during Reach 4 construction.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reach 4 construction-related trips total to
134 daily trips per day during construction, which would be dispersed
over multiple area roadways. Construction staff trips would occur during
the early morning and early afternoon, before peak traffic periods, while
excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
periodically throughout the workday. The Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
volumes for U.S. 101 from Masten Avenue to State Route 152 are
98,000 ADT (Table 3.10-1). The addition of an average of 134 daily trips
for construction Years 1, 2, and 3, as shown in Table 4.10-4, is a very
small additional percentage of traffic and is not expected to affect local
traffic patterns. Therefore, the addition of Reach 4 construction-related
trips to the local roadway network would be considered less than
significant.
The preferred haul route between U.S. 101 and Reach 4 is provided via
Masten Avenue to the U.S. 101 ramps. Alternate haul routes, which
require local approval, include use of Rucker Avenue, Buena Vista
Avenue, a portion of Masten Avenue between Columbet Avenue and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-101

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Center Avenue, and No Name Uno (frontage just east of U.S. 101). If all
the forecast construction-related daily trips for each reach were added to
U.S. 101, the percent change would be less than 1 percent. This nominal
addition to existing traffic along U.S. 101 would occur throughout the day;
and conservatively assumes construction of all reaches occurs
concurrently (which is not the case as construction occurs in phases) and
that all trips travel in the same direction. If distribution to the north, south,
or west were included, along with timing of reach construction, then the
percent change on U.S. 101 would be lower. Therefore, the addition of
Reach 4 construction-related trips to the regional roadway network
(U.S. 101) would be considered less than significant.
Reach 5 and Reach 6
Construction of Reach 5 involves widening and deepening the existing
channel, resulting in a cross section with a sinuous low-flow channel,
bankfull channel, benches, and engineered banks. All-weather
maintenance/access roads would be provided along Reach 5 on both
sides of the creek. The road surface would be located at the top of bank
for winter flood management, maintenance, and inspection activities.
Access to the maintenance roads would be at Kannely Lane and Lena
Avenue. Reach 5 construction activities are not planned to affect local or
regional roadways, as no local roadways cross Reach 5 and U.S. 101
crosses Reach 5 with existing bridge structures. Permits may be required
from Caltrans for construction activities below the U.S. 101 bridges
serving northbound and southbound traffic.
Construction of Reach 6 is similar to that of Reach 5. Access to the
maintenance roads would be at Llagas Avenue, Kimble Court, East San
Martin Avenue, Church Avenue, and Murphy Avenue.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reaches 5 and 6 construction-related trips
total to 126 daily trips, which are expected to be dispersed over multiple
area roadways. Construction staff trips would occur during the early
morning and early afternoon prior to peak traffic periods, while
excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
periodically throughout the workday.
The preferred haul route between U.S. 101 and Reaches 5 and 6 is
provided via Masten Avenue and Llagas Avenue to San Martin Avenue to
the U.S. 101 ramps. ADT volumes for this portion of U.S. 101 are
109,000 ADT (Table 3.10-1). The addition of approximately 126 daily
trips for construction Years 2 through 6, as shown in Table 4.10-4, is a
very small increase and would not affect local traffic patterns. This is a
nominal addition to local roadways and to the regional U.S. 101 road
network. The additional traffic to U.S. 101 conservatively assumes that
all trips travel in the same direction. If distribution to the north, south, or
west were included, and if timing of reach construction were included,
then the percent change on U.S. 101 would be lower. Therefore, the
addition of Reaches 5 and 6 forecast construction-related trips to the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-102

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

regional roadway network (U.S. 101) would be considered less than
significant.
On the west side of the channel, 0.13 acre of SCVWD-owned lands at the
Church Avenue percolation ponds on the west side of the channel;
1.4 acres in an agricultural field at the southeast corner of San Martin
Avenue and Kimble Court on the east side of the channel; and 7.0 acres
in an agricultural field between Llagas Avenue and the Union Pacific
railroad tracks at Monterey Road, on the north side of the channel,
opposite the Nature Quality Inc., food-processing facility with 0.38 acre for
an access road from an adjoining parcel will all be used as staging areas
for Reaches 5 and 6. No traffic related impacted are anticipated from the
use the staging areas for Reach 5 and Reach 6, because the use of
staging areas are temporary in nature and construction vehicles and
equipment would be moved to and from staging areas as needed
intermittently.
The onsite parking provided for the food processing company (Nature
Quality) in Reach 6 would be affected by the proposed widening of Llagas
Creek, requiring relocation of some facility parking spaces. Construction
would result in temporary loss or modification of existing parking supply to
accommodate excavation, construction vehicles, and equipment.
Reach 7A
Reach 7A is a proposed new channel to divert flows from West Little
Llagas Creek. Reach 7A involves construction of a newly excavated
channel and widening and deepening the existing diversion channel just
upstream of Watsonville Road. The Reach 7A channel would have
features similar to Reaches 4, 5, and 6. Existing roads would provide
shared access for maintenance, where possible. Access to the
maintenance roads would be at Middle Avenue, Watsonville Road, La Via
Azul Court, and La Crosse Drive. Seven acres along Middle Avenue,
south of Monterey Road, would be used as a staging area during
construction for Reach 7A.
Approximately 80 percent of soil excavated from Reach 7A is scheduled
for disposal at Lake Silveira, located near southern end of Reach 7A just
west of Monterey Road. The remaining 20 percent of excavated soil
would be disposed of at Anderson Dam. The preferred haul route
between U.S. 101 and Reach 7A is provided via Watsonville Road to
Monterey Road to San Martin Avenue to the U.S. 101 ramps.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reach 7A construction-related trips total to
258 daily trips that would be dispersed over multiple area roadways.
Reach 7A construction is anticipated to take place in construction Years 1
and 2, as shown in Table 4.10-4 and would add approximately 258 daily
trips over each of those 2 years; and is, therefore, not expected to affect
local traffic patterns. Construction staff trips would occur during the early
morning and early afternoon, prior to peak traffic periods, while
excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-103

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

periodically throughout the workday. The ADT volumes for local
roadways range from 112,000 along U.S. 101 to 9,900 on Watsonville
Road (Table 3.10-1).
If all of the forecast construction-related daily trips for each reach were
added to U.S. 101, the percent change would be nominal (between 0.2 to
2 percent depending on the roadway). This forecast of nominal addition
to U.S. 101 would occur throughout the day; and conservatively assumes
that construction of all reaches would occur concurrently and that all trips
would travel in the same direction. If distribution to the north, south, or
west were included, and if timing of reach construction were included,
then the percent change on U.S. 101 would be lower. Therefore, the
addition of Reach 7A forecast construction-related trips to the regional
roadway network (U.S. 101) would be reduced.
The SCVWD has a maintenance easement along the roadway section
that is also the West Little Llagas Creek Trail (Reaches 7A and 7B). The
trail provides opportunities for walking, biking, and other trail related
activities. The trail runs along the creek from Spring Avenue (about
0.25 mile south of downtown) through Watsonville Road. The trail is on
both sides of the channel from La Crosse Drive south to Watsonville
Road. This multi-use paved path surface would be replaced by an
aggregate surfaced maintenance road that would be constructed on the
improved bank. Additionally, the existing pedestrian bridge over West
Little Llagas Creek just upstream from Watsonville Road would be
removed. However, all the Action Alternatives described proposed to
replace this existing bridge crossing with clean fill where the existing trail
can be restored. Improvements for public use as a future trail and/or bike
path would be subject to an agreement between the SCVWD and the City
of Morgan Hill (City). Per the Joint Use Agreement between the City and
SCVWD, the trail cannot “unreasonably interfere” the SCVWD goal of
using these lands for flood protection; therefore, the trail was always
potentially subject to modification. Such a future improvement would
require a separate action and approval from this Project. The opportunity
for the City to re-surface the proposed aggregate maintenance road is not
foreclosed by the proposed construction and, therefore, remains
supportive of the City’s policies in regards to trails and bikeways as
alternative forms of transportation. Additionally, there are other
alternative routes for pedestrians in the area, and the temporary or
permanent loss of a single pedestrian facility in an area where other
alternative pedestrian pathways exist would be a less than significant
impact.
Reach 7B
Construction activities and features for Reach 7B are similar to those
described for Reaches 4, 5, and 6. One acre of vacant land along La
Jolla Drive at Via Navoana, upstream from Watsonville Road on the south
side of the channel, would be used as a staging area during construction
for Reach 7B.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-104

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Temporary closure of Ciolino Avenue is planned for construction activities
related to Reach 7B. Ciolino Avenue is a two-lane undivided roadway
approximately 950 feet in length (between Del Monte Avenue and
Monterey Road). Ciolino Avenue serves commercial and residential
properties and is a low traffic-volume roadway. However, the temporary
detour of Ciolino Avenue traffic, due to construction activity from
Reach 7B, would be considered a temporary significant impact. With
implementation of the Traffic Control Plan and traffic mitigation measures,
which involves maintaining access to local residences and businesses,
impacts would be reduced with mitigation.
In Reach 7B, the Tunnel Project construction would avoid the downtown
Morgan Hill area, reducing the need for road closures near businesses.
Temporary road closures in Reach 8 would be reduced in the Tunnel
Alternative and would likely only include Hale Avenue, Wright Avenue,
Main Avenue, and Warren Avenue.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reach 7B forecast construction-related trips
total to 64 daily trips, which would be dispersed over multiple area
roadways. Reach 7B construction is anticipated to take place in
construction Years 3 and 4, as shown in Table 4.10-4, and would add
approximately 64 daily trips over each of those 2 years and is, therefore,
not expected to affect local traffic patterns. Construction staff trips would
occur during the early morning and early afternoon avoiding peak traffic,
while excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
periodically throughout the workday. ADT volumes for local roadways
range from 112,000 along U.S. 101 to 6,580 along Dunne Avenue.
Therefore, the addition of Reach 7B forecast construction-related trips to
the local roadway network would be reduced.
The preferred haul route between U.S. 101 and Reach 7B is provided via
Cosmo Avenue to Monterey Road to Tennant Avenue Road to the
U.S. 101 ramps. If all the forecast construction-related daily trips for each
reach were added to U.S. 101, the percent change would be less than
1 percent. This forecast of nominal addition to U.S. 101 would occur
throughout the day; and conservatively assumes that construction of all
reaches would occur concurrently and that all trips would travel in the
same direction. If distribution to the north, south, or west were included,
and if timing of reach construction were included, then the percent
change on U.S. 101 would be lower. Therefore, the addition of Reach 7B
forecast construction-related trips to the regional roadway network
(U.S. 101) would be reduced.
The West Little Llagas Creek Trail described above continues in
Reach 7B between Edes Court and La Crosse Drive on the south side of
the channel where the planned maintenance road and pathway would
overlap at a couple of locations. Where this occurs, the path would be
modified such that the SCVWD maintenance road and pathway would be
a shared use facility and the path would be unpaved. During construction
the pathway may not be safe or available for access. Other pedestrian
access is available in the area via sidewalks along surface streets, which
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-105

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

would allow for continued access. Additionally, with implementation of
BMPs as part of the Project, impacts would be reduced.
Reach 8
Approximately 1.4 acres of vacant land at the site of the PG&E
substation, on the southwest of the intersection of Hale Avenue and East
Main Avenue on the west side of the channel, would be used as a staging
area during construction for Reach 8. This staging site would be the main
location for equipment and materials needed to construct the portal inlet
and tunnel for the Tunnel Alternative.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reach 8 construction-related trips total to
42 daily trips, which would be dispersed over multiple area roadways.
Construction staff trips would occur during the early morning and early
afternoon while excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips
would occur periodically through the workday. Reach 8 construction is
anticipated to take place in construction Years 2 through 5, as shown in
Table 4.10-4, and would add approximately 42 daily trips over each of
those 4 years and is therefore, not expected to affect local traffic patterns.
Hale Avenue is a two-lane undivided roadway serving residential and
institutional land uses in the vicinity of Reach 8. Hale Avenue in the
Project vicinity currently accommodates approximately 6,200 vehicles per
day, as identified in the City of Morgan Hill General Plan Circulation
Update (2009). ADT volumes along Reach 8 where a tunnel would
replace channel widening and deepening from the NRCS Alternative
range between 6,130 ADT along Main Avenue and 125,000 ADT along
U.S. 101. Therefore, the addition of Reach 8 forecast
construction-related trips to the regional roadway network would be
reduced.
Temporary closures of Hale Avenue, Wright Avenue, Main Avenue, and
Warren Avenue are planned for construction activities related to Reach 8.
Since closures would be temporary and intermittent during construction
activities, the traffic operations on the roadway would be affected, causing
a substantial impact to traffic load and capacity on the road. Therefore,
the temporary detour of Hale Avenue traffic due to Reach 8 construction
activity is a temporary, significant impact on the local roadway network.
With implementation of the Traffic Control Plan and traffic mitigation
measures as described in Chapter 5, access would be maintained to the
extent possible and public noticing and safety measures, as well as
detours would be required to be posted and impacts would be reduced.
Temporary lane closures along Hale Avenue and Main Avenue for
construction activities could also affect local transit service provided by
VTA for fixed route Bus Line 68. Fixed route Bus Line 68 operates at
roughly 15-minute headways during peak morning and afternoon times.
While at least one travel lane would be open in each direction, traffic
congestion would cause delays along segments where lane closures are
in effect. This would be a temporary, significant impact. Implementation
of the Traffic Control Plan includes provisions for maintaining transit
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-106

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

access during construction. VTA would be notified of the time and
duration of planned lane closures in advance of such closures. A public
safety monitor would be present during all lane closures to ensure bus
access through the area.
The preferred haul route between U.S. 101 and Reach 8 is provided via
Hale Avenue to Tilton Avenue, to Monterey Road to Cochrane Road. If
all of the forecast construction-related daily trips for each reach were
added to U.S. 101, the percent change would be less than 1 percent.
This forecast of nominal addition to U.S. 101 would occur throughout the
day, and conservatively assumes construction of all reaches would occur
concurrently, and all trips would travel in the same direction. If
distribution to the north, south, or west were included, and if timing of
reach construction were included, then the percent change on U.S. 101
would be lower. Therefore, the addition of Reach 8 forecast
construction-related trips to the regional roadway network (U.S. 101)
would be reduced.
Temporary lane closures along Hale Avenue and Main Avenue for
construction activities could affect local transit service provided by VTA
for fixed route Bus Line 68. Fixed route Bus Line 68 operates at roughly
15-minute headways during peak morning and afternoon times. While at
least one travel lane would be open in each direction, traffic congestion
would cause delays along segments where lane closures are in effect.
This would be a temporary, significant impact. The Traffic Control Plan
includes provisions for maintaining transit access during construction.
VTA would be notified of the time and duration of planned lane closures in
advance of such closures. A public safety monitor would be present
during all lane closures to ensure bus access through the area.
During construction, temporary road closures and increased truck traffic
may obstruct safe access in the Project area, resulting in a temporary
significant impact. Impacts would be reduced by maintaining access to
local businesses and residences through the implementation of BMPs,
which would ensure public safety, including pedestrian safety and provide
safe access in the Project area.
Lack of access to residences and businesses during construction
activities may occur and would be a temporary significant impact;
however, access would be maintained to the extent possible through
mitigation measures. With implementation of mitigation measures
discussed in Chapter 5 of this EIS, impacts would be reduced.
The Tunnel Alternative would partially avoid the Morgan Hill Plaza
Shopping Center parking lot in Reach 8 as opposed to the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives (discussed in their respective sections);
however the Project construction alignment would affect the rear parking
area behind the shopping center. Construction would result in temporary
loss or modification of existing parking supply and potentially loading
areas during construction for the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-107

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Reach 14
Reach 14 construction features and activities are similar to Reaches 4, 5,
6, and 7B. Access to the maintenance roads would be at Sycamore
Avenue, East San Martin Avenue, and Church Avenue. Approximately
3.3 acres of vacant SCVWD-owned land, east of the southern end of
Kannely Lane on the west side of the channel and 5.9 acres of vacant
land at the northern intersection of Sycamore Avenue and San Martin
Avenue, would be used as staging areas during construction for
Reach 14.
As shown in Table 4.10-2, Reach 14 forecast construction-related trips
total to 70 daily trips, which would be dispersed over multiple area
roadways. Construction of Reach 14 is anticipated to take place in
construction Years 2 and 3, as shown in Table 4.10-4, and would add
approximately 70 daily trips on average over those 2 years; and is,
therefore, not expected to affect local traffic patterns. Construction staff
trips would occur during the early morning and early afternoon while
excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
periodically throughout the workday. ADT volumes are 109,000 ADT
along U.S. 101 and 970 ADT along Sycamore Avenue in the northern
portion of Reach 14. Therefore, the addition of Reach 14 forecast
construction-related trips to the local roadway network would be reduced.
The preferred haul route between U.S. 101 and Reach 14 is provided via
Sycamore Avenue to Center Avenue to Foothill Avenue to San Martin
Avenue to the U.S. 101 ramps. If all the forecast construction- related
daily trips for each reach were added to U.S. 101, the percent change
would be less than 1 percent. This forecast of nominal addition to
U.S. 101 would occur throughout the day; and conservatively assumes
construction of all reaches would occur concurrently and all trips would
travel in the same direction. If distribution to the north, south, or west
were included, and if timing of reach construction were included, then the
percent change on U.S. 101 would be lower. Therefore, the addition of
Reach 14 forecast construction-related trips to the regional roadway
network (U.S. 101) would be reduced.
Cochrane Road
Cochrane Road would be used primarily for access to Anderson Dam
vicinity where excavation materials are anticipated to be disposed.
The U.S. 101/Cochrane Road interchange is constructed with a partial
cloverleaf configuration. Traffic signals accommodate traffic volumes at
the interchange ramp junction with Cochrane Road. Cochrane Road is a
four-lane divided roadway (with raised median) just east of U.S. 101, and
narrows to a two-lane divided roadway (with painted median) east of
Mission Avenida. Cochrane Road east of San Rafael Street transitions to
a two-lane undivided roadway. Cochrane Road serves retail and
commercial land uses near U.S. 101 and transitions to residential land
uses east of Mission Avenida. Approximately 12 residential properties
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-108

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

have direct driveway access to Cochrane Road between Avenida Mission
and Malaguerra Avenue. The daily traffic volume capacity on Cochrane
Road likely varies between 20,000 and less than 10,000 daily vehicles.
The combined effect of excavation trips by year would contribute up to
630-daily truck trips added to Cochrane Road as soil is disposed at
Anderson Dam (see Table 4.10-4). The peak daily excavation truck trips
occurs in Year 2 of construction, with lower truck trips added to local
roadways. Accounting for approximately 10 percent of excavation trips
traveling to Lake Silveira directly from Reach 7A excavation instead of to
Anderson Dam, then approximately 474 daily truck trips are forecast to be
added to Cochrane Road in other construction years. The addition of
construction vehicle trips to Cochrane Road likely can be accommodated
from a traffic capacity perspective; however, a temporary traffic impact is
expected where the predominant land use is residential. While the
roadway can likely accommodate the increase in traffic volumes,
residents would view the additional truck trips on the roadway as an
impact from non-compatible vehicles (dump trucks). The traffic volume
increase is small in terms of percentage increase, but the effect on
context would likely be an impact to the community. Therefore, impacts
from the addition of construction-related trips to Cochrane Road would be
a temporary, significant impact.
The Tunnel Alternative would have potentially significant impacts
associated with the temporary closure of Ciolino Avenue in Reach 7B,
Hale Avenue in Reach 8, and from additional truck traffic on Cochrane
Road. These impacts would be reduced through the preparation of the
Traffic Control Plan and implementation of traffic mitigation measures as
described in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
The nearest Congestion Management Program (CMP) facilities to the
Proposed Project are U.S. 101 and State Route 152. There would be a
minor increase in traffic along and near U.S. 101 as demonstrated in the
reach discussions. For example, in Reach 4, ADT volumes for U.S. 101
from Masten Avenue to State Route 152 are 98,000 ADT (Table 3.10-1).
The addition of approximately 134 daily trips for construction Years 1, 2,
and 3, as shown in Table 4.10-4 is not expected to affect local traffic
patterns. Similar increases of less than a couple of percent to existing
traffic volumes are discussed throughout the reach. These increases to
existing ADT volumes are negligible.
During construction, temporary road closures and increased truck traffic
would apply to the Tunnel Alternative and may impede emergency access
in the Project area, resulting in a temporary significant impact. By
maintaining access to local businesses and residences and with
implementation of the Traffic Control Plan, which includes a provision for
emergency vehicle access so that emergency vehicle access would be
provided along project area roadways at all times during construction,
impacts would be reduced to less-than-significant levels. Additionally, as
part of the Traffic Control Plan, the local fire and police departments
(Morgan Hill Police Department and Santa Clara County Fire Department)
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-109

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

would be also notified of the time and duration of planned lane closures in
advance, and a public safety monitor would be present during all lane
closures to ensure emergency vehicle access through the area.
The following is a description of potential conflicts with alternative
transportation facilities and associated policies by reach. Construction in
Reaches 4, 5, 6 and 14 would not result in conflicts with alternative
transportation facilities. The General Plan for the City of Morgan Hill
promulagates the following policies with regard to supporting walking
trails and bikeways as alternative transportation facilities:


Policy 18l. Coordinate trails, parks, and recreation facilities with a
citywide bikeways system to include bicycle paths, lanes, and
routes.



Policy 7h. Where feasible, implement the bikeways system
concurrent with adjacent development. Establish priorities for
bikeways implementation based on improving safety and
enhancing both commute and recreational cycling. These
priorities shall be considered in directing resources and efforts to
obtain funding for implementation. Priorities shall be regularly
reviewed and updated as implementation proceeds. Current
priorities for implementation of the bikeways plan include the
following:



o

Live Oak High School Access

o

Little Llagas Creek Trail

o

Santa Teresa and Monterey Highway Corridor
Improvements

o

East West Connection to Coyote Creek Trail

Policy 7p. Promote extension of bicycle paths in conjunction with
flood control efforts

Travel of trucks and other heavy construction equipment on local roads
could cause damage to pavement from long-term hauling over 3 years
and construction activities. The later 3 years of construction involve the
mitigation plantings establishment period where it is expected light duty
trucks will be utilized to inspect, maintain, and establish the mitigation
plantings. Impacts on roadway facilities could also occur, as a result of
loading and maneuvering of oversize and heavy vehicles. Impacts to
roadways related to construction activities might be significant, but with
implementation of the mitigation measures described in Chapter 5,
impacts would be reduced.
After construction of the Tunnel Alternative, maintenance of stream
channels, such as sediment removal, vegetation management, and
associated minor activities, would occur. Traffic volumes from equipment
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-110

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and personnel accessing the channel to perform maintenance would be
far less, temporary and intermittent compared to construction levels.
Sediment removal, vegetation management, and minor maintenance and
repairs are typical maintenance activities that require the use of heavy
equipment. In the past, sediment maintenance has occurred only in
Reach 14 and near the Church Pond inlet in Reach 6. Sediment
maintenance could occur in other locations in the future, but the Project
contains design features that encourage any sediment to collect in a part
of Reach 6 and near the confluence of Reaches 4, 5, and 14, as well as
in Reach 8. Maintenance equipment is transported to and from
maintenance sites and moved once projects are completed. Equipment
is not stored permanently at maintenance sites. Nearly all maintenance
would occur from maintenance roads to be constructed located at the top
of channel banks or through planned access roads down the banks to the
channel bottom. Maintenance activities would rarely occur from public
roadways; and, therefore, would not regularly interfere with traffic
patterns. Mobilization and demobilization of equipment from public
roadways to SCVWD maintenance roads may briefly interfere with access
to residences and businesses; however, maintenance activities are
temporary and intermittent and would not affect traffic loads on the local
street system.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.10.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

The NRCS Alternative would provide flood management for urban areas,
specifically the following: a 1-percent flood in Morgan Hill (Reaches 8,
7A, and 7B); 10-percent flood management for the semi-urban area
around East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14); and avoid induced flooding
elsewhere on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to upstream
improvement.
The NRCS Alternative has similar impacts to traffic and circulation as the
Tunnel Alternative. The NRCS Alternative does not include the
construction of the tunnel within Reach 8 as with the Tunnel Alternative.
However, the NRCS Alternative requires excavation of materials along
West Little Llagas Creek from approximately West Main Street to Ciolino
Avenue. As a result, the net result is that the NRCS Alternative will have
slightly less material to be excavated, so with less expected truck trips.
Though the NRCS Alternative has slightly less truck trips, the NRCS
Alternative would impact more of the higher volume road with the
urbanized downtown section of the City of Morgan Hill. So, traffic and
circulation impacts would be greater or negligible as compared to the
Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-111

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Under the NRCS Alternative, 1,626,600 CY of earth materials from
excavation would be disposed of (1,355,500 bank cubic yards [bcy]3 x 1.2
for soil expansion factor after excavation from in-situ = 1,626,600 CY),
with 275,000 CY to be hauled from Reach 7A to nearby Lake Silveira for
habitat restoration, leaving approximately 1,351,600 CY to be hauled
offsite for disposal and storage at Anderson Dam. Construction of the
NRCS Alternative would require loading approximately 112,633 trucks for
a roundtrip to Anderson Dam over the 3-year construction life of the
Project. Since a truck trip requires a roundtrip, one outbound to the dam,
and one return trip to the Project site to obtain another load, this is
considered two trips for each load, or 112,633 x 2 = 225,266 truck trips
with a 12 CY truck capacity. Phase 1 of the Project would include
construction of the bypass channel in Reach 7A and the channel
improvements in Reach 4. During Phase 2, channel construction would
be sequenced from downstream, starting in Reach 5 to upstream, to
avoid induced flooding.
Temporary road closures would likely be necessary under the NRCS
Alternative at West 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th Streets, and along Monterey
Road in downtown Morgan Hill and through the Morgan Hill Plaza
Shopping Center parking lot (between West Dunne Avenue and Ciolino
Avenue). Construction for the NRCS Alternative is expected to last for
6 years, with the last 3 years involving the mitigation plantings
establishment period.
The NRCS alternative would not result in any permanent traffic impacts
as no existing roadways would be altered, no new roadways would be
developed, and there is no additional traffic added since this is a
flood-management Project. However, construction activities under the
NRCS Alternative are anticipated to temporarily interfere with local traffic
patterns including temporary road closures, traffic delays due to
construction vehicle access, and construction activities including material
hauling and disposing. Construction would take place Monday through
Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. As compared to the Tunnel Alternative, the NRCS Alternative
would involve similar traffic in Reach 7B and Reach 8, as described in the
Tunnel Alternative.
Reach 8
For the NRCS Alternative, Reach 8 involves channel widening and
deepening through downtown Morgan Hill. Approximately 1.4 acres of
vacant land at the site of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E)
substation, on the southwest of the intersection of Hale Avenue and East
Main Avenue on the west side of the channel (APN# 767-05-001), would
be used as a staging area during construction for Reach 8.

3

BCY is “bank cubic yards,” which is a measure of volume of sediment in-situ. The BCY expands by a factor of 1.2x
when it is excavated and placed into dump trucks for off-site hauling.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-112

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the NRCS Alternative are
slightly different than the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously and
as shown in Table 4.10-2. The Reach 8 forecast construction-related
trips and Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes are as described. As shown
in Table 4.10-2, Reach 8 construction-related trips total to 42 daily trips,
which would be dispersed over multiple area roadways. ADT volumes for
local roadways near Reach 8 range from 125,000 ADT along U.S. 101 to
6,210 ADT along Hale Avenue. Construction in Reach 8 is anticipated to
take place in construction Years 2 through 5, as shown in Table 4.10-4,
and would add approximately 42 daily trips over each of those 4 years;
which is a very small percentage of the local ADT and, therefore, would
not affect local traffic patterns. Construction staff trips would occur during
the early morning and early afternoon avoiding peak traffic, while
excavation, materials delivery, and support staff trips would occur
periodically throughout the workday.
Hale Avenue is a two-lane undivided roadway serving residential and
institutional land uses in the vicinity of Reach 8. Hale Avenue in the
Project vicinity currently accommodates approximately 6,200 vehicles per
day, as identified in the City of Morgan Hill General Plan Circulation
Update (2009). Temporary closure of Hale Avenue is planned for
construction activities related to Reach 8. Since Hale Avenue would be
intermittent during the temporary construction activities, the traffic
operations on the roadway would be affected, causing a substantial
impact to traffic load and capacity on the road. The temporary detour of
Hale Avenue traffic due to Reach 8 construction activity is a temporary,
significant impact. With implementation of the Traffic Control Plan and
the mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS, which
involve coordinating and maintaining access to local residences and
business, impacts would be reduced.
The preferred haul routes for the NRCS Alternative are the same as the
Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the NRCS Alternative would be greater than those O&M
activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 8. Instead of
the O&M of the proposed tunnel within Reach 8, the NRCS would instead
require O&M activities along West Little Llagas Creek between West Main
Street and Ciolino Avenue within the City of Morgan Hill. After
construction of the NRCS Alternative, maintenance of stream channels
such as sediment removal, vegetation management and associated minor
activities would occur. Traffic volumes from equipment and personnel
accessing the channel to perform maintenance would be far less,
temporary and intermittent compared to construction levels, but would
occur within the City of Morgan. These Reach 8 O&M activities
associated with the NRCS Alternative are not required under the Tunnel
Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-113

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Reach 7B
Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the NRCS Alternative are
similar to the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously and as shown in
Table 4.10-2. The Reach 7B forecast construction-related trips, Average
Daily Trip (ADT) volumes would be similar on the local roadways. The
preferred haul routes for the NRCS Alternative are the same as the
Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the NRCS Alternative would be similar to the O&M
activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 7B.
Reach 7A
Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the NRCS Alternative are
similar to the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously and as shown in
Table 4.10-2. The Reach 7A forecast construction-related trips, Average
Daily Trip (ADT) volumes would be similar on the local roadways. The
preferred haul routes for the NRCS Alternative are the same as the
Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the NRCS Alternative would be similar to the O&M
activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 7A.
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14
Traffic and congestion impacts to these reaches would be the same as
described in the Tunnel Alternative. The forecast construction-related
trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes for these Project reaches would
be same in these reaches as described in the Tunnel Alternative. The
preferred haul routes are the same for this Alternative as the Tunnel
Alternative for these reaches.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with this Alternative would be the same for these reaches as
described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.10.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

The key feature of the Culvert/Channel Alternative is elimination of the
need for channel deepening and widening through residential properties,
as proposed for the NRCS Alternative between West Main Avenue and
West 2nd Street in Reach 8. The construction approach for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative would be the same throughout all Project
reaches as previously described for the NRCS Alternative. Construction
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-114

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

duration for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be 6 years, with
construction lasting for about 36 months, with a 3 year post construction
mitigation plant establishment period, same as the NRCS Alternative.
Construction activities, equipment, and crew size would be the same as
that described for the NRCS Alternative, except that in a segment of
Reach 8; construction would occur through athletic fields and along Del
Monte Road to West 2nd Street, rather than through a section of
residential homes between West Main Avenue and West 2nd Street.
Road closures would likely be necessary under the Culvert/Channel
Alternative at West 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th streets, and along Monterey
Road in downtown Morgan Hill and through the Morgan Hill Plaza
Shopping Center parking lot (between West Dunne Avenue and Ciolino
Avenue).
Reach 8
Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the Culvert/Channel
Alternative are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously
and as shown in Table 4.10-2. The Reach 8 forecast construction-related
trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes would be similar on the local
roadways. Under the Culvert/Channel Alternative, 1,629,600 CY of earth
materials from excavation would be disposed (1,358,000 bcy x 1.2 for soil
expansion factor after excavation from in-situ = 1,629,000 CY) with
275,000 CY to be hauled from Reach 7A nearby for use at Lake Silveira,
leaving approximately 1,354,600 CY to be hauled offsite for disposal and
storage at Anderson Dam. Construction of the Culvert/Channel
Alternative would require loading approximately 112,833 trucks for a
roundtrip to Anderson Dam over the 6-year life of the Project, nearly the
same as for the NRCS Alternative. Since a truck trip requires a roundtrip,
one outbound to the dam, and one return trip to the Project site to obtain
another load, this is considered two trips for each load, or 112,833 x 2 =
225,766 truck trips with a 12 CY truck capacity. The preferred haul routes
for the Culvert/Channel are the same as the Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be similar to those
O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 8.
Reach 7B
Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the Culvert/Channel
Alternative are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously
and as shown in Table 4.10-2. The Reach 7B forecast
construction-related trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes would be
similar on the local roadways. The preferred haul routes for the
Culvert/Channel are the same as the Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be similar to the
O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 7B.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-115

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Reach 7A
Traffic and congestion impacts to this reach for the Culvert/Channel
Alternative are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as discussed previously
and as shown in Table 4.10-2. The Reach 7A forecast construction
related trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes would be similar on the
local roadways. The preferred haul routes for the Culvert/Channel
Alternative are the same as the Tunnel Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be similar to the
O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 7A.
Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 14
Traffic and congestion impacts to these reaches would be the same as
described in the Tunnel Alternative. The forecast construction-related
trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes for these Project reaches would
be same in these reaches as described in the Tunnel Alternative. The
preferred haul routes are the same for this Alternative as the Tunnel
Alternative for these reaches.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with this Alternative would be the same for these reaches as
described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.10.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative construction involves construction of a
high-flow bypass channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and
Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass would eliminate the
need for construction and improvements along Reach 6 downstream of
the proposed bypass channel (which is approximately 0.5 mile
downstream from Monterey Highway) or Reach 5 downstream of the
proposed bypass.
Under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, 1,196,400 CY of earth materials
from excavation would be disposed with 275,000 CY to be hauled from
Reach 7A nearby for Llagas Creek restoration at Lake Silveira, leaving
approximately 921,400 CY to be hauled offsite for disposal and storage at
Anderson Dam. Construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would
require loading approximately 76,783 trucks for a roundtrip to Anderson
Dam over the 5-year life of the Project, which is less than the other action
alternatives. Since a truck trip requires a roundtrip, one outbound to the
dam and one return trip to the Project site to obtain another load, this is
considered two trips for each load, or 76,783 x 2 = 153,566 truck trips
with a 12-CY truck capacity.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-116

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would not result in any permanent traffic
impacts once construction is completed, as it will not alter, reduce or add
roads, and would not generate new additional sources of traffic in
association with the flood-management Project. However, construction
activities are anticipated to interfere with local traffic patterns and with
traffic along U.S. 101 due to detours related to construction of bridges to
accommodate the Reach 6 bypass channel as shown in Table 4.10-3.
Construction activities that are anticipated to interfere with local traffic
patterns include temporary road closures, traffic delays due to
construction vehicle access, and construction activities including material
hauling and disposing. Impacts related to the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
would be very similar to the Tunnel Alternative in all Project reaches,
discussed above, with the exception of Reaches 5, 6, and 14 as
described below.
Reaches 5, 6 and 14
Construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative requires building three
new bridges on existing roadways in Reaches 5 and 6 serving local and
regional traffic: at Murphy Avenue, and U.S. 101 southbound and
northbound (see Figures 2.9-3, 2.9-4, and 2.9-5). Construction of the
bridges would require diversion of traffic onto a temporary roadway
around the construction zone. The temporary roadway diversions would
require extensive permitting and design coordination with Santa Clara
County and Caltrans.
Staging of construction activities is planned through construction of a
temporary bypass for both northbound and southbound U.S. 101 traffic.
The temporary bypass would be localized to the area of construction and
would not divert traffic onto the local circulation system. A temporary
bypass would be constructed adjacent U.S. 101, and traffic would be
realigned during an overnight and/or weekend closure. Caltrans will likely
require the U.S. 101 realignment to accommodate high-speed travel while
the bridges are constructed. Upon re-opening of U.S. 101, after diversion
of traffic onto the bypass, U.S. 101 traffic would travel through the
construction zone with nominal delays. The total number of days for the
two-phase construction of U.S. 101 bridges for the Reach 6 Bypass is
approximately 250 days, with traffic diverted on the temporary bypass for
90–180 days, depending on the direction of travel. Upon the completion
of the bridge construction, an overnight and/or weekend closure would
again occur to return traffic to the mainline freeway, utilizing the new
bridges as they pass over the Reach 6 Bypass.
Caltrans requires preparation of a TMP whenever closures are planned
on freeway facilities to minimize motorist delay and provide public
notification regarding closures and impacts. The Traffic Control Plan will
be prepared to be compliant with Caltrans TMP requirements. The TMP
identifies times allowed for closure and details regarding notification of the
public, including a public awareness campaign. While closure of U.S. 101
to construct the detour routes would be facilitated through the TMP, the
closures of the U.S. 101 would remain a temporary impact for overnight
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-117

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and/or weekend closures when traffic is rerouted onto a temporary
freeway alignment for northbound and southbound traffic. The
construction of the two new bridges for Reach 6 Bypass will not close
U.S. 101 for the entirety of the 250-day construction duration, as closures
would be limited to overnight and/or weekend closures. Since U.S. 101
would be temporarily closed, related to staging of the bypass, a
temporary impact is forecast to occur for overnight and/or weekend
closures of U.S. 101.
Construction of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would not require any
construction in Reach 5 and would require construction in a portion of
Reach 6 for the bypass channel itself. A portion of Reach 14,
downstream of the Reach 6 bypass confluence with Reach 14 would
have to be excavated greater in width than the other Action Alternatives.
Therefore, Reach 14 related truck trips would be greater, Reach 6
(including the Bypass), would be very similar in related truck trips as the
other Action Alternatives. Therefore, excavation quantities and
disposal-related truck trips would only be slightly reduced relative to the
other Action Alternatives within these reaches.
Construction staff trips would occur during the early morning and early
afternoon, avoiding peak traffic while excavation, materials delivery, and
support staff trips would occur periodically throughout the workday.
Temporary rerouting of traffic on Murphy Avenue for construction of a
new bridge would be necessary for construction activities related to the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. Murphy Avenue is a two-lane undivided
roadway serving residential, agricultural, and industrial land uses.
Murphy Avenue, in the vicinity of the bypass, extends to Middle Avenue
on the north and San Martin Avenue on the south. The temporary detour
of Murphy Avenue traffic due to Reach 6 Bypass Alternative construction
activity is a temporary, significant impact on the local roadway network.
With implementation of a Traffic Control Plan and mitigation measures,
access would be maintained to the extent possible and public noticing
and safety measures, as well as detours would be required to be posted.
Impacts would be reduced with mitigation. The preferred haul route
between U.S. 101 and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative is provided via Llagas
Avenue and Sycamore Canyon to San Martin Avenue to the U.S. 101
ramps. ADT Volumes in this area are 109,000 along U.S. 101 and
10,600 on Monterey Road. If all the forecast, construction-related daily
trips for each reach were added to U.S. 101, the percent change would
be less than 1 percent. This forecast of nominal addition to U.S. 101
would occur throughout the day, and conservatively assumes that
construction of all reaches would occur concurrently, and that all trips
would travel in the same direction. If distribution to the north, south, or
west were included, and if timing of reach construction were included,
then the percent change on U.S. 101 would be lower.
Temporary rerouting of traffic on U.S. 101 for construction of three new
bridges is planned for construction activities related to the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative. Therefore, the temporary detour of U.S. 101 traffic
due to Reach 6 Bypass Alternative construction activity is a temporary,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-118

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

significant impact on the regional roadway network (U.S. 101). A Traffic
Control Plan would be prepared and implemented to maintain access, to
the extent possible, and provide public noticing and safety measures.
However, given the extent of use of U.S. 101 as part of a regional
commute network and the likelihood of slow-downs for the detour over an
extended 0.75-year period, this impact is significant and unavoidable.
Reaches 7A, 7B and 8
Traffic and congestion impacts to these reaches would be the same as
described in the Tunnel Alternative. The forecast construction-related
trips, Average Daily Trip (ADT) volumes for these Project reaches would
be same in these reaches as described in the Tunnel Alternative. The
preferred haul routes are the same for this Alternative as the Tunnel
Alternative for these reaches.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with this Alternative would be the same for these reaches as
described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.10.4 Summary of Impacts to Traffic and Circulation
The Tunnel Alternative and the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would not require
construction on a portion of West Little Llagas Creek through downtown Morgan
Hill which would result in less construction-related interference in Reach 8 with
commercial and residential areas as compared with the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives.
The potential environmental concerns related to traffic and circulation identified
for the Project reaches would primarily occur during the construction phase and
would involve interference with local traffic patterns. Activities, such as heavy
equipment access, construction-related traffic, truck trips related to proposed
disposal of fill in the vicinity of Anderson Dam, deterioration of local roads,
temporary detours on U.S. 101 (Reach 6 Bypass Alternative only), and
temporary impacts to parking spots at the Morgan Hill Plaza Shopping, all have
the potential for temporary significant impacts as they relate to all action
alternatives. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative will require temporary detours on
U.S. 101 for bridge construction which would remain a significant impact to traffic
and circulation.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Traffic and Circulation are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-119

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-120

Chapter 4

4.11

Environmental Consequences

AIR QUALITY AND GREENHOUSE GASES
4.11.1 Introduction
During construction activities, the Project would cause criteria and GHG
emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels (i.e., gasoline and diesel) used to
operate off-road equipment, portable equipment, and vehicles in the vicinity of
Morgan Hill and San Martin located in southern Santa Clara County. In addition,
fugitive dust (as PM10 and PM2.5) would be generated by earthmoving tasks.
This section evaluates Project emissions to determine overall effects of the four
variants—Tunnel Alternative, NRCS Alternative, Culvert/Channel Alternative, or
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative—in relation to established thresholds of significance.
As described in Section 3.11, operation of off-road equipment, on-road vehicles,
and portable equipment would result in emissions of criteria pollutants (NOX,
VOC, CO, SOX, PM10, PM2.5) and GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O) in engine exhaust
and fugitive dust (PM10 and PM2.5) from earthmoving tasks. Preliminary lists of
equipment and estimated usage were established and are shown in Appendix K,
Table 4.11-h. Emission calculations (Appendix K, Tables 3.11-h, -i, -j) were
performed for the year 2017 using the most recent (2008)2 emission factors and
algorithms published by the South Coast Air Quality Management District
(SCAQMD)3 and the USEPA (2011b, 2012b, 2012c). For the 6-year Project,
construction is expected to require about 5 to 8 months of planned work activities
annually during the dry season (generally mid-March through mid-November)
depending on the reaches being altered in any given year (phase). Deviations
from this schedule would not affect the air quality analysis, because it is based
on maximum daily emissions (pounds per day) and total Project emissions (tons),
which would remain unchanged.
Estimated criteria air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions of the four
variants— NRCS Alternative; Tunnel Alternative; Culvert/Channel Alternative;
and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative—are shown in Tables 4.11-11 through 4.11-21
for peak daily, average annual, and Project total timeframes. Total emissions for
the alternatives are compared side-by-side in Tables 4.11-17 and 4.11-21. Peak
daily criteria emissions are evaluated with respect to BAAQMD thresholds of
significance in Tables 4.11-11, 4.11-12, and 4.11-13; no other numeric
thresholds for criteria pollutants or GHGs apply to the Project. Note that for
evaluation purposes, the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives would have
approximately the same activity levels; therefore, approximately the same
emissions.

2

On a preliminary basis, 2017 is possibly the earliest year that maximum activity levels could occur, i.e., Years 2 or 3 of the
Project.
3

BAAQMD does not publish its own emission factors per se; the SCAQMD off-road factors are based on federal standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 89.112; SCAQMD on-road factors are based on 40 CFR 86 et seq. vehicle category standards; the SCAQMD
factors are output from CARB’s OFFROAD and EMFAC applications which reference the above cited regulations, respectively.
These are the same emission factors used in the statewide general-purpose land-use model CalEEMod (California Emissions
Estimator Model) which has been officially adopted by air districts including BAAQMD.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-121

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.11-10 Significance Thresholds for Criteria Pollutants - BAAQMD (2010)
Applicability

VOC

Operation, tons/year

10

Operation, pounds/year
Operation, pounds/day
Construction, pounds/day

20,000
54
54

CO

SOX

NOX

CAAQS

1

CAAQS

1

20,000

80,000

CAAQS

1

54

―

CAAQS

1

10

40

54

2
2

―

PM10

PM2.5

15

10

30,000

20,000

82

54

82

3

54 3

No violation of CAAQS for CO (9 ppmv for 1 hour, 20 ppmv for 8 hours)
PSD, annual only; no applicable BAAQMD threshold for SO (attainment).
3
For construction projects, applies to exhaust emissions only, BMPs required for fugitive dusts
4
Since the Project does not meet the definition of a land use development project, stationary source project, or
planning activity, no GHG thresholds apply. There are no GHG thresholds for construction-related emissions from
mobile and portable sources used in building stationary or nonstationary source projects.
5
BAAQMD nonattainment pollutants to which CEQA thresholds apply are ozone (as VOC and emissions), PM And
PM2.5.Sources: BAAQMD 2012b, 2010c (see note 4), 40 CFR 51.166
1
2

Table 4.11-11 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with NRCS or
Culvert/Channel Alternatives
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

38

210

260

0.5

14

12

62

8

Year 3

38

207

257

0.5

13

12

62

8

Year 4

19

104

128

0.3

7

6

31

4

Year 5

19

104

128

0.3

7

6

21

3

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

38

210

260

0.5

14

12

62

8

LTS

LTS

S

―

LTS

LTS

―

―

Project Phase

Significance

Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same)
"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation; *B = beneficial under
NEPA Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-122

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.11-12 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Tunnel Alternative
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

44

242

303

0.6

16

15

64

9

Year 3

44

240

300

0.6

16

14

64

9

Year 4

25

136

171

0.3

9

8

33

5

Year 5

25

136

171

0.3

9

8

23

3

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

44

242

303

0.6

16

15

64

9

LTS

LTS

S

―

LTS

LTS

―

―

Project Phase

Significance

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation; *B = beneficial under
NEPA Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Table 4.11-13 Estimated Peak Daily Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

13

72

88

0.2

5

4

21

3

Year 2

40

221

277

0.5

15

13

55

8

Year 3

40

219

274

0.5

14

13

55

8

Year 4

21

115

145

0.3

8

7

24

4

Year 5

21

115

145

0.3

8

7

14

2

Year 6

7

36

44

0.1

2

2

10

1

Peak Day

40

221

277

0.5

15

13

55

8

LTS

LTS

S

―

LTS

LTS

―

―

Project Phase

Significance

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation; *B = beneficial under
NEPA Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-123

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.11-14 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with NRCS or
Culvert/Channel Alternatives
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

lbs/day

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.1

17.1

21.2

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.5

0.6

Year 3

3.2

17.2

21.4

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.6

0.6

Year 4

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.02

0.6

0.6

2.5

0.3

Year 5

1.7

9.5

11.8

0.02

0.6

0.6

1.8

0.2

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.2

17.2

21.4

0.04

1.1

1.0

4.6

0.6

Project Phase

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation; *B = beneficial under
NEPA Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Table 4.11-15 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Tunnel
Alternative
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.7

20.1

25.2

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Year 3

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Year 4

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.03

0.8

0.8

2.7

0.4

Year 5

2.3

12.5

15.7

0.03

0.8

0.8

1.9

0.3

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.7

20.3

25.3

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.7

0.7

Project Phase

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-124

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.11-16 Estimated Average Annual Criteria Emissions for Project with Reach 6
Bypass Alternative
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

tons/yr

Year 1

1.0

5.6

6.8

0.01

0.4

0.3

1.4

0.2

Year 2

3.5

19.2

24.0

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.2

0.6

Year 3

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.3

0.6

Year 4

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.03

0.8

0.7

2.2

0.3

Year 5

2.1

11.6

14.5

0.03

0.8

0.7

1.5

0.2

Year 6

0.7

3.6

4.4

0.01

0.2

0.2

0.9

0.1

Highest Year

3.5

19.3

24.1

0.05

1.3

1.2

4.3

0.6

Project Phase

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Table 4.11-17 Estimated Total Criteria Emissions for All Project Alternatives
VOC

CO

NOX

SOX

C-PM10

C-PM2.5

F-PM10

F-PM2.5

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

tons

NRCS or Culvert/Channel

11.5

62.7

77.4

0.15

4.0

3.7

16.5

2.2

Tunnel Alternative

13.7

74.7

93.2

0.18

4.9

4.5

17.2

2.4

Reach 6 Bypass

12.9

71.3

88.9

0.17

4.7

4.3

15.5

2.2

Project Options

"C" prefix denotes combustion byproduct particulate matter; "F" prefix denotes fugitive dust particulate matter
LTS = Less than significant; S = Significant; LTSM = Less than significant with mitigation; *B = beneficial under
NEPA Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2011b

Table 4.11-18 Estimated GHG Emissions for NRCS or Culvert/Channel Alternatives
CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,380

0.3

0.1

3,422

Year 3

3,406

0.3

0.1

3,449

Year 4

1,893

0.1

0.1

1,917

Year 5

1,893

0.1

0.1

1,917

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

3,406

0.3

0.1

3,449

Project Phase

Highest Year

1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same) Sources: SCAQMD
2008, USEPA 2012b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-125

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Table 4.11-19 Estimated GHG Emissions for Tunnel Alternative
CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,977

0.3

0.1

4,027

Year 3

4,003

0.3

0.1

4,054

Year 4

2,491

0.2

0.1

2,522

Year 5

2,491

0.2

0.1

2,522

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

4,003

0.3

0.1

4,054

Project Phase

Highest Year

1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b

Table 4.11-20 Estimated GHG Emissions for Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

Year 1

1,084

0.1

0.0

1,097

Year 2

3,808

0.3

0.1

3,855

Year 3

3,834

0.3

0.1

3,882

Year 4

2,321

0.2

0.1

2,350

Year 5

2,321

0.2

0.1

2,350

Year 6

714

0.1

0.0

723

3,834

0.3

0.1

3,882

Project Phase

Highest Year

1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Sources: SCAQMD 2008, USEPA 2012b

Table 4.11-21 Estimated Total GHG Emissions for All Project Alternatives
CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2e

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

MT/yr

NRCS or Culvert/Channel Alternative

12,386

0.9

0.4

12,543

Tunnel Alternative

14,777

1.1

0.5

14,962

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

14,179

1.0

0.5

14,354

Project Phase

1 metric tonne (MT) = 1,000 kilograms or 2,204.6 pounds
Culvert/Channel Alternative same as NRCS Alternative (estimated emissions are the same) Sources: SCAQMD
2008, USEPA 2012b

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-126

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.11-22 Screening Health Risk Assessment for Excavation Activity
DPM Screen Parameter
Onsite Emission Rate

Receptor Distance

Units

Reach 7A

Reach 7B

Reach 8

lb/day

0.526

0.351

0.526

g/sec

2.76E-03

1.84E-03

2.76E-03

meters

20

20

10

Modeled Hourly Concentration

µg/m

3

2.478

1.652

5.588

Corrected Annual Concentration

µg/m3

0.248

0.165

0.559

3 -1

Unit Risk Value (70-year MEI)

(µg/m )

3.00E-04

3.00E-04

3.00E-04

Activity Duration

days

5

12

20

Annual MEI Correction

fraction

2.0E-04

4.7E-04

7.8E-04

Cancer Risk

probability

1.5E-08

2.3E-08

1.3E-07

per million

0.01

0.02

0.13

per million

10

10

10

significance

LTS

LTS

LTS

Regulatory Threshold

DPM = diesel particulate matter (PM10)
70-year maximally exposed individual = 25,550 days = 613,200 hours
LTS = less than significant; S = significant
Sources: NOAA 2008, USEPA 1992, USEPA 2011c, OEHHA 2009, WC 2013, BAAQMD 2012b, 2010c

DPM is considered a toxic (carcinogenic) air contaminant in California (17 CCR
Subchapter 7, Section 93000). Table 4.11-22 presents the results of a screeninglevel HRA for DPM (as C-PM10) using conservative methodology for maximum
excavation activity levels and timeframes. For the modeled point sources (i.e.,
mid-size diesel-powered excavating machines), release parameters for the
engine exhaust pipes (stacks) were determined (i.e., height, diameter,
temperature, and exit velocity), taking into account that the machines would most
likely be operating in the channels (depressions), which reduces overall release
height by several feet, roughly parallel with the surrounding receptors (5 feet or
1.5 meters). For two or three machines operating in combination, depending on
location, the similar stacks were merged into one equivalent stack, pursuant to
USEPA modeling guidance (1992). This was done to facilitate the screening
procedure, provide additional conservatism, and eliminate small differences in
dispersion, which would have little effect on overall results.
The screening version, AERSCREEN of the AERMOD dispersion model
developed by USEPA (2011c), was used to determine worst-case ambient
concentrations of emissions. For DPM, an organic air toxic with published
emission factors and unit risk values (OEHHA 2009), cumulative cancer risk was
determined for the nearest sensitive receptors, 33 to 66 feet (10 to 20 meters)
away from excavations in Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 for maximum working periods
of 5, 12, and 20 days, respectively. Thus, the 70-year (613,200 lifetime hours)
unit risk value for DPM was corrected to reflect these actual lengths of time (120
hours, 288 hours, and 480 hours, respectively). AERSCREEN predicts “worstcase” 1-hour, 3-hour, 8-hour, 24-hour, and annual concentrations—without the
need for site-specific hourly meteorological data—that are equal to or greater
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-127

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
than generated by AERMOD; however, the degree of conservatism varies
depending on the application. Appendix K, Tables 3.11-d and 3.11-k contain
calculation templates and dispersion modeling outputs.

4.11.2 No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, no construction activity would occur and
therefore, no emissions of criteria pollutants (NOX, VOC, CO, SOX, PM10,
PM2.5) and no emissions of GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O) in engine exhaust or
fugitive dust (PM10 and PM2.5) from earthmoving tasks would occur. In
addition, since no construction would occur and no odors would be emitted.
Under the No Action Alternative, maintenance to clear sediment and debris within
the existing creekbed, described in Section 2.5.5,, would be higher than the other
alternatives; however, emissions would not be in excess of applicable daily
significance thresholds shown in Table 4.11-10. In addition, emissions would not
be in excess of applicable daily significance thresholds shown in Table 4.11-22.
Maintenance with the no action alternative would cause very small incremental
amounts of GHG emissions. However, no new odors would be emitted.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.11.3 Action Alternatives

4.11.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

The key feature of the Tunnel Alternative is to use an underground
concrete tunnel instead of channel widening and deepening proposed
through Reach 8 in downtown Morgan Hill. The tunnel would be
constructed under the Nob Hill Terrace neighborhood, and a sediment
detention basin would be constructed in the 600 feet of channel between
Wright Avenue and Hillwood Lane with an 18-foot-wide
maintenance/access road for maintenance access to the sediment
detention basin. Construction duration for the Tunnel Alternative would be
6 years, with construction lasting for about 36 months in Reach 8.
Refer to Tables 4.11-12, 4.11-15, 4.11-19, and 4.11-22. Under the Tunnel
Alternative, seasonal construction activity would occur over the course of
6 years in the Project area. Emissions of criteria pollutants (NOX, VOC,
CO, SOX, PM10, PM2.5) in engine exhaust and fugitive dust (PM10 and
PM2.5) from earthmoving tasks would occur as a result of the
construction activity. Also emitted would be DPM as PM10 in diesel
engine exhaust.
As shown in Tables 4.11-12 and 4.11-15, the Project would have a limited
potential to incrementally contribute to existing regional violations of state
and federal air quality standards (i.e., nonattainment) in the Project
vicinity (i.e., SFBAAB) for O3, PM10, and PM2.5 , as discussed in 3.11.3
Environmental Setting, primarily through diesel engine exhaust and
fugitive dust emissions during construction activities. However,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-128

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
incremental impacts would be small, temporary, and would permanently
cease upon Project completion.
Except for peak daily NOX emissions comprising onsite and offsite mobile
sources, no applicable quantitative emissions thresholds would be
exceeded in BAAQMD. Due to geographic dispersion and effective onsite
fugitive dust mitigation measures, no local ambient air quality violations
would occur solely due to Project emissions for any other pollutant,
including CO, PM10, and PM2.5. Daily NOX emission thresholds would
be exceeded using fleet-average equipment and BMPs. However, BMPs
and mitigation measures, as described above and incorporated into
emissions estimates, would nevertheless reduce the impact by about 15
to 20 percent compared to uncontrolled emissions. Therefore, the impact
from NOX emissions would be significant due to the sizes and quantities
of diesel- powered equipment and vehicles used on a daily basis, which
exceed the mitigating capacity of BMPs and measures.
As shown in Table 4.11-12, except for NOX, none of the significance
thresholds shown in Table 4.11-10 would be exceeded by the Project,
neither daily nor annually, as applicable. Mitigation measures as
described in Chapter 5, would not be able to fully reduce NOX emissions
to below the significance threshold. However, except for NOX, since
emissions would be controlled with BMPs and emissions are short-term in
nature, they would not be cumulatively considerable and would, thus, be
less than significant.
As discussed in Source Specific Regulations, the use of newer, less
polluting Tiers 1, 2, 3, and 4 engines in most fleet construction equipment
used onsite is a mitigating factor for combustion emissions of NOX,
VOCs, CO, PM10, and PM2.5. California ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel, with
a maximum sulfur content of 15 ppm by weight, would be used in all
diesel-powered equipment to minimize SO2 and particulate emissions.
However, since fleet-average Tiered emission standards and California
ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel are the current baseline for the state, their use
does not comprise mitigation, per se.
The Project would not conflict with the 2010 Clean Air Plan issued by
BAAQMD (2012a), because general construction activity related
emissions (i.e., temporary sources) are accounted for in the emission
inventories included in the plan. Therefore, impacts on air quality plan
objectives would be less than significant.
General estimated basin-wide construction-related emissions are
included in BAAQMD’s emission inventories (which, in part, form the
basis for the air quality plans cited above) and are not expected to
prevent attainment or maintenance of the O3, particulate matter, and CO
standards within the Bay Area. Therefore, construction impacts related to
air quality plans for these pollutants would be less than significant, and no
mitigation measures would be required, since they are presently
estimated and accounted for in BAAQMD’s emission inventories.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-129

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
The Tunnel Alternative would result in a small temporary incremental
contribution to a cumulative effect for several criteria pollutants for which
the SFBAAB is in nonattainment under an applicable federal or state
ambient air quality standard (i.e., O3, PM10, and PM2.5).
DPM contains substances that are suspected carcinogens, along with
pulmonary irritants and hazardous compounds, which may affect
sensitive receptors such as young children, senior citizens, or those
susceptible to respiratory disease. Where construction activity occurs in
proximity to long-term sensitive receptors, there could be a potential for
unhealthful exposure of those receptors to diesel exhaust, including
residential receptors.
The Project sites are located in populated suburban areas. Several
residential dwellings are in very close proximity to the watercourses,
typically in Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8, approximately 33 to 66 feet (10 to 20
meters). The nearest schools within 1,000 feet (305 meters) of the Project
area are Burnett Elementary School, St. Catherine’s School, Britton
Middle School, Oakwood Elementary School, and Gwinn Elementary
School. The Centennial Senior Center is also within 1,000 feet of the
creek. Nearby parks include Galvan Park, Britton Field, Morgan Hill
Community Park, and Paradise Park. There are no hospitals proximate to
Project sites.
In order to assess the potential impacts of Project construction activities
upon proximate sensitive receptors, a screening-level HRA for DPM was
performed using conservative methodology for maximum (intensive)
excavation activity levels and timeframes, as described in Section
4.11.4.2. Conservative methodology overestimates impacts, thus, actual
impacts would be lower than shown in Table 4.11-22.
Table 4.11-22 shows the results of the screening HRA. The 2010
BAAQMD cumulative cancer risk threshold of 10-5 (10 in a million) would
not be exceeded in the vicinity of the excavations at the closest sensitive
receptors or in the neighboring areas. For Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8,
respective cumulative risk values are 0.01, 0.02, and 0.13 in a million,
which are far below the threshold. This is due to (1) the short-term
temporary nature of the mobile sources (days, not years), and (2) the
relatively small size of the mobile sources (mid-size excavating machines)
compared to permanent industrial stationary sources.
Due to the relatively small scale of the proposed construction activity in
any one location, its short-term temporary nature, and its large overall
footprint in the Project area, the exposure of sensitive receptors to
substantial pollutant concentrations would be less than significant.
BAAQMD control measures for diesel exhaust would be implemented as
a BMP in combination with the fugitive dust controls as described in
Chapter 5. The Project would not expose sensitive receptors to
substantial pollutant concentrations and the impact would be reduced.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-130

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
California ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel with a maximum sulfur content of 15
ppm by weight would be used in all diesel-powered equipment, which
minimizes emissions of sulfurous gases (SO2, hydrogen sulfide, carbon
disulfide, and carbonyl sulfide). Therefore, no objectionable odors are
anticipated from construction activities due to the use of diesel-powered
equipment and vehicles.
Since excavation work may encounter odorous materials, such as
decaying organic matter (plants, wood, leaves, etc.), a possibility exists
that such odorous material could cause a nuisance as described in
Section 4.11.3.5. A Project BMP is designed to prevent such a nuisance
from affecting a considerable number of persons. The Tunnel Alternative
would not create objectionable odors affecting a considerable number of
persons; therefore, the impact would be reduced with implementation of
BMPs.
Under the Tunnel Alternative, seasonal construction activity would occur
over the course of 6 years in the Project area. Emissions of GHGs (CO2,
CH4, N2O) in engine exhaust would occur as a result of the construction
activity. As shown in Tables 4.11-19 and 4.11-21, construction emissions
would be about 4,000 metric tonnes CO2 e in the highest year, and a
cumulative total of about 15,000 metric tonnes CO2 e occurring over the
course of 6 years. These emissions would be temporary and would
permanently cease upon Project completion, although GHGs can persist
in the atmosphere for indefinite lengths of time. Compared to national,
statewide, and Bay Area GHG inventories shown in Table 4.11-6,
mitigated construction emissions would comprise about 0.00006, 0.0008,
and 0.005 percent of these respective inventories on an annual basis. In
Santa Clara County (Tables 4.11-8 and 4.11-9), Project emissions would
be about 0.02 percent of the countywide annual total, and 0.05 percent of
the mobile source sector within the county. These GHG emissions are
well within USEPA limits of precision of -2 to +5 percent for fossil fuel
combustion (USEPA 2012b) and are thus negligible in context.
Due to its small temporary scale and GHG mitigations, the Project would
not individually affect the environment or impede the state’s ability to
meet its 2020 GHG emission reduction goal; thus, the individual impact
would be less than significant with implementation of BMPs, and the
incremental cumulative impact would not be considerable.
On a statewide basis, agencies in California are in the process of
implementing strategies to reduce GHG emissions pursuant to the Global
Warming Solutions Act of 2006, which requires that California reduce its
statewide GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. Assembly Bill 32
required CARB to develop the Scoping Plan (2008) in coordination with
the California Energy Commission’s Climate Action Team (2010). The
Scoping Plan defines a comprehensive set of measures to achieve the
mandated emissions level. Key approaches for reducing GHG emissions
to 1990 levels by 2020 include:

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-131

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Expanding and strengthening existing energy efficiency programs as well
as building and appliance standards.
Achieving a statewide renewable electricity standard of 33 percent.
Developing a California cap-and-trade program that links with other
Western Climate Initiative partner programs to create a regional market
system.
Establishing targets for transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions
for regions throughout California, and pursuing policies and incentives to
achieve those targets.
Adopting and implementing measures to reduce transportation sector
emissions, including California’s Clean Car Standards, goods movement
measures, and the Low Carbon Fuel Standard.
Creating targeted fees, including a public goods charge on water use,
fees on high global warming potential gases, and a fee to fund the
administrative costs of the state’s long-term commitment to AB 32
implementation.
Due to its small scale and temporary status, the Project would not conflict
with state and local plans, policies, or regulations aimed at curbing GHG
emissions.
Under the Tunnel Alternative, operations and maintenance would be the
same as described in Section 2.7.5. Compared to construction activities,
maintenance emissions would be small and intermittent, mainly from onroad service vehicles (e.g., pickup trucks, dump trucks), small off-road
equipment (e.g., mini-excavators, Bobcats™), portable equipment (e.g.,
wood chippers), and hand-held equipment (e.g., chainsaws, brush/grass
cutters). As such, maintenance would not cause an exceedence of
applicable daily significance thresholds shown in Table 4.11-10, would
not cause an exceedence of applicable significance thresholds shown in
Table 4.11-22, would cause very small incremental amounts of GHG
emissions, but no new odors would be generated. The Applicant would
be responsible for maintaining all Project features, such as the channel,
tunnel, piping, culverts, roads, fences, and grade control structures
consistent with SCVWD guidelines as applicable including work
conducted from Hillwood Lane through Llagas Road within Morgan Hill.
This would include vegetation and sediment removal needed to maintain
adequate flow capacity of the channel and culverts. The maintenance
methods and activities are described in Section 2.7.5.
General estimated basin-wide maintenance-related emissions are
included in BAAQMD’s emission inventories. Therefore, maintenance
impacts would be less than significant, and no mitigation measures would
be required, since they are presently estimated and accounted for in
BAAQMD’s emission inventories.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-132

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.11.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

Compared to the Tunnel Alternative, estimated daily NOX emissions from
fuel combustion would be about 14 percent lower, while fugitive dust
emissions would be about 4 percent lower. However, since estimated
emissions for the NRCS Alternative would be in the same quantitative
range as the Tunnel Alternative and no BAAQMD thresholds would be
exceeded except daily NOX, NEPA impact determinations, BMPs, and
mitigation measures are the same as for the Tunnel Alternative. Thus,
there is no significant difference in emissions impacts between the NRCS
and Tunnel Alternatives. Therefore, please refer to the discussion on the
Tunnel Alternative for the emissions impacts related to the NRCS
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.11.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Compared to the Tunnel Alternative, estimated daily NOX emissions from
fuel combustion would be about 14 percent lower, while fugitive dust
emissions would be about 4 percent lower. However, since estimated
emissions for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be in the same
quantitative range as the Tunnel Alternative and no BAAQMD thresholds
would be exceeded except daily NOX, CEQA impact determinations,
BMPs, and mitigation measures are the same as for the Tunnel
Alternative. Thus, there is no significant difference in emissions impacts
between the Culvert/Channel and NRCS/Tunnel Alternatives. Therefore,
please refer to the discussion on the Tunnel Alternative for the emissions
impacts related to the Culvert/Channel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.11.4.5

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Compared to the Tunnel Alternative, estimated daily NOX emissions from
fuel combustion would be about 9 percent lower, while fugitive dust
emissions would be about 12 percent lower. The Reach 6 Bypass avoids
the need for extensive excavation and earthmoving work in Reaches 5
and 6, thus, the bulk of emissions associated with these activities in other
alternatives (i.e., Tunnel, NRCS, or Culvert/Channel) would not occur. As
a result, aggregated NOX emissions for the Bypass would be about 26
pounds per day less than excavation and earthmoving work in Reaches 5
and 6. However, since estimated emissions for the Reach 6 Bypass
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-133

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Alternative would be in the same quantitative range as the Tunnel
Alternative and no BAAQMD thresholds would be exceeded except daily
NOX, NEPA impact determinations, BMPs, and mitigation measures are
the same as for the Tunnel Alternative. Thus, there is no significant
difference in emissions impacts between the Reach 6 Bypass and the
Tunnel Alternative. Therefore, please refer to the discussion on the
Tunnel Alternative for the emissions impacts related to the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.11.4 Summary of Impacts to Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases
The No Action Alternative would not result in any construction activity; therefore,
no construction emissions and no construction impacts. Except for peak daily
NOX emissions, which would exceed the BAAQMD significance threshold of 54
pounds per day, all construction impacts would be less than significant for the
Tunnel, NRCS, Culvert/Channel, and Reach 6 Bypass alternatives whether
criteria pollutants, DPM, or GHGs in engine exhaust or fugitive dust from
earthmoving tasks. No other applicable daily significance thresholds shown in
Tables 4.11-10 and 4.11-22 would be exceeded.
Consistent with BAAQMD guidelines, standard BMPs adopted by the Applicant
(SCVWD) and mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS are
incorporated into the alternatives analysis (Project design). As implemented,
these BMPs and mitigation measures would reduce diesel exhaust emissions by
about 15 to 20 percent overall compared to uncontrolled emissions; however,
these practices and measures would not be able to reduce peak daily NOX
emissions below 54 pounds per day. Notwithstanding significance, these
emissions would be temporary and permanently cease upon completion of
Project construction.
Long-term operations and maintenance would not result in significant new
emissions of criteria pollutants, DPM, or GHGs in engine exhaust or fugitive dust
from earthmoving tasks, which would cause an exceedence of applicable daily
significance thresholds shown in Tables 4.11-10 and 4.11-22. In the context of
significance thresholds, future maintenance activity would be essentially the
same as existing maintenance, albeit with some changes; therefore, there would
be no substantive changes in emissions and no substantive changes in impacts.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Traffic and Circulation are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-134

Chapter 4

4.12

Environmental Consequences

NOISE
4.12.1 Introduction
This section identifies applicable noise and vibration regulations and analyzes
potential impacts associated with the implementation of the alternatives.
Specifically, this section analyzes the potential noise and vibration impacts
stemming from the proposed flood risk management and improvements in the
project area, relative to applicable noise and vibration criteria and the existing
ambient noise environment.
Construction activities are described in Chapter 2. Construction activity proposed
for the Project alternatives would be considered short-term, occurring over some
portion of the entire construction period (approximately 6 years). Construction
would take place year-round and depending on the alternative, would include
tunnel construction, existing channel improvements (excavation and grading to
deepen and widen), excavation and construction of diversion channel,
construction of permanent access roads, and installation of reinforced concrete
boxes, as well as the development of Lake Silveira mitigation (see Chapter 2,
Section 2.5.6 and Section 5.3 for further details on the Lake Silveira mitigation
element). In-channel work would occur, to the extent feasible, during the dry
season, typically between May 1 and October 15, when flows are low or, in most
reaches, the channel is dry. Revegetation and work in upland areas adjacent to
the creek channel could occur outside the dry season. Construction is assumed
to take place Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. with the
potential for construction work in the evenings until 10:00 p.m.; in emergencies, it
could be later, and on Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., as necessary for
certain activities. All construction activities within residential areas, including work
hours, would be governed by local noise ordinances (the City of Morgan Hill and
the County of Santa Clara), but generally would be limited to weekdays.
The use of construction equipment to accomplish any of the Proposed Project
alternatives would result in noise in the Project area, i.e., construction zone.
Table 4.12-7 shows typical noise levels for common construction equipment that
have been identified for use in the Project (see Chapter 2, Section 2.6.2, NRCS
Alternative). A few pieces of specialty equipment for other alternatives have been
included, such as a drill rig, paving breaker (jackhammer), pile driver, and
vibratory roller.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-135

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-7 Typical Noise Levels for Proposed Construction Equipment (at 50 feet)
Equipment

LMAX (dBA)

Pile Driver
Paving Breaker (Jackhammer)
Jumbo 2-boom Diesel Drill Rig
Grader
Scraper
Compactor
Dozer
Spader
Cement Pump Truck
Crane
Excavator
Vibratory Roller
Static Roller
Concrete Truck
Front End Loader
Wheel Loader
Air Compressor
Backhoe
Paver
Dump Truck
Flat Bed Truck
Water Tanker
Hydroseeder
Pick-up Trucks
Tractor Crawler

101
89
89
85
84
83
82
82
81
81
81
80
80
79
79
79
78
78
77
76
74
74
74
74
40

Source: FHA 2006a,b

The source-noise levels shown in Table 4.12-7, which are normally measured at
50 feet, are used to determine the noise levels at nearby sensitive receptors by
attenuating 6 dB for each doubling of distance for point sources of noise such as
operating construction equipment. Noise levels at the nearest receptors for each
reach were analyzed on a worst-case basis, using the equipment with the highest
noise level expected to be used at the nearest receptor along the reach.
Some of the construction equipment listed in Table 4.12-7 would also produce
ground borne vibration. The pieces of equipment proposed for the Project that
would produce the highest vibration levels are listed in Table 4.12-8.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-136

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-8 Typical Vibration Levels for Proposed Construction Equipment (at 25 feet)
Equipment
Vibratory Pile Driver
Vibratory Roller
Dozer
Flat Bed Truck
Paving Breaker

Inches/second PPV
0.644
0.210
0.089
0.076
0.035

Source: FTA 2006a,b

The source vibratory levels shown in Table 4.12-7, which occur at 25 feet, are
used to determine the vibration levels at nearby sensitive receptors by dividing
the source PPV (point peak velocity/peak particle velocity) value by the distance
to the receptor. Vibration levels at the nearest receptors for each reach were
analyzed on a worst-case basis, using the equipment with the highest vibratory
level expected to be used at the nearest receptor along each reach.
Maintenance activities associated with any of the action alternatives are those
procedures needed to maintain channel flood capacity, such as sediment and
vegetation management such as culverts; debris removal, minor maintenance;
and additionally maintenance of the Lake Silveira inlet and outlet structures and
structural facilities, (see Chapter 2, Section 2.5.6 and Chapter 5, Section 5.3 for
further details on the Lake Silveira element). Maintenance activities proposed for
the Project are considered long-term and, therefore, are recognized for purposes
of the impact analysis as a permanent activity, even though maintenance does
not occur on a continuous basis, but rather occurs relatively infrequently and
intermittently since it is performed as- needed, typically for a few days every year.
Mowing, for example, is necessary once or twice per year for 1 or 2 days in a
given area. Maintenance activities listed below (also see Section 2.5.5 of this
EIS) are necessary to help to maintain flood conveyance capacity, protect floodrelated infrastructure, and to thereby reduce potential flood damage. These
maintenance activities intermittently occur under current baseline conditions (see
the No Action Alternative below).
Noise-generating equipment would be required for use during maintenance,
including mounted flail and disc mowers, weed/grass trimmers, chain saws, and
trucks for vegetation maintenance, and excavators or backhoes and dump trucks
for sediment maintenance. Minor maintenance would include excavators and
graders, dump trucks, along with smaller-scale equipment. Table 4.12-9 shows
typical noise levels for the maintenance equipment that has been identified for
use in the Project. It should be noted that noise from some of the equipment
proposed for maintenance, such as mowers and weed-eaters, would likely not be
discernible over typical residential noise sources. This is because the type of
landscape equipment used and the type of noise generated for vegetation
maintenance associated with the Project is not distinguishable from the type of
landscape maintenance generated noise in residential areas. However, noise
from graders, backhoes, excavators, and trucks would be very different from
landscape equipment generating noise, and as such would be much more
discernible in residential areas.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-137

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-9 Typical Noise Levels for Proposed Maintenance Equipment (at 50 feet)
Equipment
Weed/Grass Trimmer
Disc Mower
Flail Mower
Grader
Chain Saw
Excavator
Backhoe
Dump Truck
Haul Truck

LMAX (dBA)
96
91
90
85
84
81
78
76
74

Source: FHA 2006a,b; USEPA 1974

The use of heavy equipment to accomplish the Proposed Project maintenance
activities would result in noise in the Project area. The source noise levels shown
in Table 4.12-9, which occur at 50 feet, are used to determine the noise levels at
nearby sensitive receptors by attenuating 6 dB for each doubling of distance for
point sources of noise such as operating heavy equipment. Noise levels at the
nearest receptors for each reach were analyzed on a worst-case basis, using the
equipment with the highest noise level expected to be used at each receptor.
Some of the maintenance equipment would also produce ground borne vibration.
The pieces of equipment proposed for Project maintenance that would produce
some of the highest vibration levels are listed in Table 4.12-10. The source
vibratory levels, which occur at 25 feet, are used to determine the vibration levels
at nearby sensitive receptors by dividing the source PPV value by the distance to
the receptor. Vibration levels at the nearest receptors for each reach were
analyzed on a worst-case basis, using the equipment with the highest vibratory
level expected to be used at each receptor.
Table 4.12-10 Typical Vibration Levels for Proposed Maintenance Equipment (at 25 feet)
Equipment
Excavator
Backhoe
Grader
Haul/Dump Truck

Inches/second PPV
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.076

Source: FTA 2006a,b; ATS 2013

4.12.2 No Action Alternative
As discussed in Chapter 2, Section 2.4, No Action Alternative, the Project would
not be built, and no new land purchases or construction activities would occur
under this alternative. People would not be exposed to noise levels in excess of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-138

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

standards as there would be no construction activity, and therefore there would
be no impact.
Maintenance activities would occur in accordance with the updated SMP, which
addresses bank stabilization, sediment removal, vegetation management, and
minor maintenance. Implementation of the SMP renewal project began in late
2012 and is re-authorized for the next 10 years. Activity under the SMP would fall
under two general categories: regularly-scheduled work occurring in the same
place and the same manner with a predictable frequency; and other routine work
not on a regular annual schedule, but done as the need arises. In the Project
area, SCVWD maintenance staff conduct annual inspections of fee-owned and
easement areas. Following inspections, SCVWD staff evaluates what work
should be conducted.
In-stream sediment removal and bank protection work is carried out from June 15
to October 30, or the first significant rainfall after October 15, whichever occurs
first. Typical maintenance activities include the following:


Channel debris clearing;



Stream bank protection;



Structural element maintenance;



Minor maintenance;



Sediment management; and,



Vegetation management.

Maintenance under the No Action Alternative would be considered long-term
because it will periodically occur over a 10-year-time period, consistent with the
duration of the SMP. It is also considered intermittent because maintenance
activity would be performed on an as-needed basis, typically for a few days in a
given locale each year, but with a frequency that would be unknown and
unplanned, and that could vary each year.
Noise levels during maintenance activity could still result in noise above
standards for the jurisdictions along all reaches. Maintenance activity under the
No Action Alternative would be considered long-term but would be intermittent
because it is as-needed, typically for a few days every year in a given area.
Maintenance activity would include the use of both mechanized equipment and
hand tools. Use of hand tools would not affect the existing noise environment with
the exception of vehicles bringing maintenance workers to and from the site.
Maintenance worker vehicles would not be expected to result in a perceptible
increase in noise over vehicles already used for ongoing maintenance under the
SMP. Mechanized equipment would be expected to increase noise in the Project
area during the use of the equipment.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-139

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Although maintenance activities would likely occur during daytime hours, noise
could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents. However, periods of
intrusive noise exposure would be intermittent and generally temporary and
would represent existing conditions. Noise from maintenance activity could vary
significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent on how many pieces of
equipment are operating simultaneously. The noise levels shown in Table 4.1211 represent a worst-case scenario for the closest receptors (all residential),
using the loudest piece of equipment, a grader, at 85 dBA at 50 feet (see Table
4.12-7) and reducing noise by 6 dB for every doubling of distance. Residential
and non- residential receptors further away would experience lower noise levels
due to attenuation by distance. Such worst-case scenarios would likely exist only
for short periods at any particular residence on a given day. Landscape-type
equipment for vegetation maintenance is not considered because the noise levels
generated from this type of equipment would not be discernible over typical
residential landscaping noise sources. This is because the type of landscape
equipment used and the type of noise generated for vegetation maintenance
associated with the Project is not distinguishable from the type of landscape
maintenance generated noise in residential areas. However, noise from graders,
backhoes, excavators, and trucks would be very different from landscape
equipment generating noise, and as such would be much more discernible in
residential areas.
Table 4.12-11 shows the estimated noise levels at the closest receptors along
the reaches that would be affected under the No Action Alternative. The following
thresholds were identified for determining an exceedence of noise standards:


Noise levels of 75 dBA measured at the lot line in the City of Morgan Hill
(for Reaches 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14); or



Noise levels of 80 dB at the residential property line in the County of
Santa Clara (for Reach 4).

Based on the thresholds, the nearest residences along all reaches would exceed
corresponding noise standards. It should be noted that noise standards are in dB
for Santa Clara County rather than the
A-weighted dBA (see Section 3.12), however, 89 dBA would still exceed an 80dB standard. Noise levels from maintenance may exceed noise standards.
Although work would be intermittent, likely occurring for a few days every year, it
would be a significant unavoidable impact due to exceedance of the applicable
standards. SCVWD will implement the following BMPs to minimize the impacts to
the nearby residences, but noise levels may still exceed standards.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-140

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-11 Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (No Action
Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
1

Distance from Proposed
Maintenance Activity
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 50
feet (dBA)1
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

Noise Level at
Receptor (dBA)
89
79
85
85
89
91
81

Equipment with the loudest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a grader.

Table 4.12-12 Maintenance Noise at Nearest Non-Residential Receptors by Reach (No
Action Alternative)
Receptor

Reach

Distance and
Direction

Source Level at
50 feet (dBA)1

Noise Level at
Receptor (dBA)

St Louise Regional Hospital

4

4,500 feet south

85

48

South County Retirement Home

6

750 feet east

85

63

Pacific Hills Manor/Morgan Hill Villa

8

1,500 feet west

85

56

Britton Middle School

8

50 feet east

85

85

Crossroads Christian Center School

8

400 feet east

85

67

Oakwood School

7A

250 feet east

85

72

San Martin/Gwinn Elementary School

6

650 feet west

85

63

Paradise Valley Elementary School

7B

900 feet west

85

60

PA Walsh Elementary School

8

950 feet west

85

60

Kiddie Academy of Morgan Hill

7A/7B

1,150 feet east

85

59

Stratford School Morgan Hill

8

900 feet north

85

60

Rucker Elementary School

5

3,300 feet west

85

49

Galvan Park

8

200 feet west

85

73

Morgan Hill Community Park/Dog Park

7B

800 feet west

85

61

Paradise Park

7B

1,100 feet west

85

59

1

Equipment with the loudest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a grader.

As discussed in Chapter 2, Section 2.4, No Action Alternative, the Project would
not be built, and no new land purchases or construction activities would occur
under this alternative. People would not be exposed to excessive ground borne
vibration as there would be no construction activity, and therefore there would be
no impact.
As discussed in Section 4.12.2, under the No Action Alternative, maintenance
activities would occur in accordance with the updated SMP, which addresses
bank stabilization, sediment removal, vegetation management, and minor
maintenance. Vibration levels during maintenance activity could still result in
vibration above standards for the jurisdictions along all reaches. Maintenance
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-141

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

activity under the No Action Alternative would be considered long-term but would
be intermittent because it is as-needed, typically for a few days every year in a
given area. Mechanized equipment would be expected to increase vibration in the
Project area during the use of the equipment. Although maintenance activities
would likely occur during daytime hours, vibration could still be considered
substantially disruptive to residents. However, periods of intrusive vibration
exposure would be intermittent and generally temporary. Vibration from
maintenance activity could vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is
dependent on how many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. The
vibration levels shown in Table 4.12-13 represent a worst-case scenario. Such
worst-case scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any particular
residence on a given day.
Maintenance activity would be expected to use the equipment listed in Table
4.12-8. Based on the activities that would be expected for the No Action
Alternative, the equipment with the greatest vibratory levels that may be used
often during activity would be an excavator, backhoe, or grader which would
produce vibration levels of 0.044 inch per second PPV at a distance of 25 feet.
Table 4.12-13 shows the estimated vibration levels at each receptor along the
reaches that would be maintained under the No Action Alternative. Vibration
levels at each receptor were determined by taking the source PPV level for the
most vibratory equipment proposed to demonstrate worst-case scenario (0.044
inch per second PPV for an excavator, backhoe, or grader at 25 feet), and
extrapolating for the distance and attenuation, relative to 25 feet, for each
receptor. For example, the nearest receptor along Reach 5 is located 100 feet
away. One hundred feet divided by 25 feet equals 4; therefore 0.044 inch per
second PPV divided by 4 equals 0.011 inch per second PPV at the receptor 100
feet away). Due to attenuation by distance similar to noise, receptors further from
the equipment and activity would experience lower vibration levels. Section
3.12.4.1 indicated the following thresholds for determining generation of
excessive vibration:


Vibration levels of 0.5 and 0.1 inch per second PPV for structural damage
and annoyance, respectively, for construction activities.

Based on the thresholds, none of the nearest residences along any reach with
proposed No Action Alternative maintenance would experience vibration levels in
excess of state standards for either structural damage or annoyance.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-142

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-13 Maintenance Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (No
Action Alternative)
Reach

Distance

4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 25
Feet (PPV)1
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044

Vibration Level at
Receptor (PPV)
0.0285
0.011
0.022
0.022
0.0278
0.044
0.013

1

Equipment with the greatest vibration levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is an excavator,
backhoe, or grader.

There are five airports in Santa Clara County, including Reid-Hillview Airport,
Mineta San Jose International Airport, Palo Alto Airport of Santa Clara County,
Moffett Federal Airfield, and South County Airport of Santa Clara County (South
County). The airport closest to the Project is South County, 180 feet from Reach 6
and 0.3 mile from Reach 14. South County is operated by the county and is open
to the public. On average, there are 117 aircraft operations per day on the single
runway at this airport (Air Nav 2013).
The No Action Alternative would require a workforce to temporarily/intermittently
spend time near the airport when working on Reaches 5, 6, and 14, but there
would be no introduction of a permanent population in the vicinity of the airport.
As shown in Table 4.12-4 previously, the average noise level during 24-hour noise
measurements along Reach 6 was 55.4 dB, with primary sources of noise during
that time noted as airport and traffic. The average noise levels along Reach 14,
measured over 24 hours, was 63.6 dB, with the primary noise source noted as
traffic. As such, the No Action Alternative would not expose people residing or
working in the Project area to excessive airport-related noise levels. Therefore,
impacts would be less than significant for maintenance activities. As discussed in
Chapter 2, Section 2.4, No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and
no new land purchases or construction activities would occur under this
alternative. The No Action Alternative would not have construction activities that
would expose people to excessive noise levels from a public airport. Therefore,
no impact would occur.
There are no private-use airports in Santa Clara County. Therefore, there would
be no excessive noise levels from private airstrips in the area and subsequently
no impact from excessive noise levels to maintenance workers.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-143

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.12.3 Action Alternatives

4.12.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, the Tunnel
Alternative would provide an increased level of flood protection for urban
and semi-urban areas and would also protect agricultural land. All
reaches would be deepened and widened. Construction proposed for
Reach 8 for the tunnel would result in increased noise levels from the use
of equipment specifically for the portal intake and tunnel and from
blasting. The following sections analyzing noise impacts consider the
predominant and representative noise-generating construction activities.
The type of construction with the greatest noise contributions proposed for
the Tunnel Alternative is the tunnel, which would be excavated using
conventional mining equipment and methods to excavate, specifically
roadheaders, excavators, and controlled detonations. Controlled
detonations would be used in sections of harder rock, to fracture the rock
for the roadheader or excavator. Controlled detonation would be
performed by drilling small holes in a specified pattern in the rock face,
packing them with small amounts of explosive and primer and detonating
the explosives using a specified time delay between successive
detonations. The detonations would sound like a short succession of
thunder generally lasting a few seconds. Controlled detonation methods
would adhere to stringent state and federal safety requirements and
would also be conducted in accordance with local noise ordinances.
Typically, less than 20 pounds of explosives per delay would be used. A
Blasting Plan would be prepared for the Project to provide guidelines for
the safe use and storage of blasting materials that may be used during
construction, and would also provide measures to reduce noise, including
the following:


Drill multiple, small charge holes rather than fewer larger holes;



Retain soil 3 to 4 feet above blasting material before detonation;



Use blast mats and timing delays;



Blast small horizontal and vertical areas rather than large areas;



Stem blast holes with dense sand;



Direct charges away from the direction of sensitive receptors; and



Place physical barriers between the detonation site and the
nearest receptors.

See Section 3.18, Hazards and Hazardous Materials, for further detail on
the Blasting Plan.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-144

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Due to the intensity, duration, and proximity of construction activities to
the nearby residences, two temporary sound barriers (e.g., walls, soundabsorbing blankets) would be installed along some of the work area
boundaries. These sound barriers would be designed to provide a
minimum 10-dBA (decibel) reduction in noise. The final design of the
sound barrier would be determined by the contractor to achieve the
Project’s noise performance standards. The barrier is assumed to be
approximately 20 feet high.
Other construction activities for the Tunnel Alternative would include
channel improvements (e.g., excavation to deepen and widen existing
channels), excavation and construction of diversion channel, construction
of permanent access roads, and installation of reinforced concrete boxes.
Although construction activities would occur mostly during daytime hours,
noise could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents due to
the distance between the activity and the receptors. However, periods of
intrusive noise exposure would be temporary. Noise from construction
activity could vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent
on how many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. The
noise levels shown in Table 4.12-14 represent a worst-case scenario, with
the use of the loudest equipment which is a pavement
breaker/jackhammer (89 dBA at 50 feet) along Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B, and
14, a drill rig (89 dBA at 50 feet) along Reach 8, and a grader (85 dBA at
50 feet) along Reach 7A. Noise levels would reduce 6 dB for every
doubling of distance away from the noise source. Such worst-case
scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any particular
residence on a given day.
Table 4.12-14 Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (Tunnel
Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 50 Feet (dBA)1
89
89
89
85
89
89
89

Noise Level at Receptor (dBA)
92
84
89
85
90
95
84

1

Equipment with the highest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a breaker/jackhammer
along Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7B, and 14, a drill rig along Reach 8, and a grader along Reach 7A.

Construction activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table
4.12-7, which is further differentiated by reach in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, Table 2.5-4. Table 4.12-14 shows the estimated noise levels
at the nearest receptor along each reach which correspond to the loudest
piece of equipment proposed for each reach that would be affected under
the Tunnel Alternative, as best represented by the most predominant type
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-145

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

of construction activities including channel improvements (excavation and
grading of existing channel reaches to widen and deepen), excavation
and construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, installation of reinforced concrete boxes, and demolition/removal of
buildings and structures. As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, some residences may be removed or relocated under the
Tunnel Alternative; however the nearest receptors may not be those
identified for removal/relocation and could remain during construction
activity and be exposed to the noise generated. The following thresholds
were identified for determining an exceedence of noise standards:


Noise levels of 75 dBA measured at the lot line in the City of
Morgan Hill (for Reaches 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14); or



Noise levels of 80 dB at the residential property line in the County
of Santa Clara (for Reach 4).

Based on the thresholds, the nearest residences along all reaches would
exceed corresponding noise standards, and impacts would be significant
for construction of tunnel, channel improvements, excavation and
construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, installation of reinforced concrete boxes, and demolition/removal of
buildings and structures. Impacts would be less than significant for
relocation of utilities. It should be noted that noise standards are in dB for
Santa Clara County rather than the A-weighted dBA (see Section 3.12.1),
however, 92 dBA would still exceed an 80- dB standard.
Noise levels from construction equipment would be more than 5 dBA over
existing noise levels. Therefore, impacts associated with noise standards
exceedance for construction activities would remain significant.
Construction of sound barriers between noise sources and sensitive
receptors was considered, but rejected as infeasible by the SCVWD due
to the large scale of the construction activity covering a distance of nearly
13.5 miles and the fact that the construction would be constantly moving
along the channel reaches requiring barriers to be set up, taken down,
and moved along with the work. Installing barriers, removing them, and
re-erecting the barriers in new places would have its own effects on noise,
visual, and biotic resources. It should also be noted, City of Morgan Hill
Municipal Code Chapter 18.48.040 D.1.d exempts public works projects
from noise standards and indicates the public works director shall set
construction hours for these types of projects. However, even though
noise from the Project generated in Morgan Hill would be exempt from the
applicable standards, the nearest residences along Reaches 5, 6, 7A, 7B,
8, and 14 would experience noise levels that would be significant.
Under the Tunnel Alternative, operational activities would be limited to
typical maintenance procedures, including minor maintenance, and
specific tunnel maintenance procedures such as excavating the
sediments in the detention basin at the upstream boundary of the Project
in Reach 8 and accessing the box culverts for maintenance in Reach 8,
either through major access points with removable panels; through
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-146

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

smaller hatches; or through manways. Operational activity proposed for
the Project would be considered long-term but would be intermittent
because it is performed as-needed, typically for a few days every year.
Maintenance activities are discussed in Section 4.12.1.
Maintenance activity would include the use of both mechanized
equipment and hand tools. Use of hand tools would not affect the existing
noise environment with the exception of vehicles bringing maintenance
workers to and from the site. Maintenance worker vehicles would not be
expected to result in a perceptible increase in noise over vehicles already
used for ongoing maintenance, as described under the No Action
Alternative. Mechanized equipment would be expected to increase noise
in the Project area during the use of the equipment.
However, periods of intrusive noise exposure would be intermittent and
generally temporary and similar to existing conditions as described under
the No Action Alternative. Noise from maintenance activity would vary on
a day-to-day basis, and is dependent on how many pieces of equipment
are operating simultaneously. The noise levels shown in Table 4.12-15
represent a reasonable worst-case scenario used for maintenance for the
closest receptors (all residential), using the loudest piece of equipment, a
grader, at 85 dBA at 50 feet (see Table 4.12-7) and reducing noise by 6
dB for every doubling of distance. Residential and non-residential
receptors further away would experience lower noise levels due to
attenuation by distance. Table 4.12-12 under the No Action Alternative
shows the noise levels that would be expected during maintenance
activity at the non-residential receptors, which would be the same for the
Tunnel Alternative. Such conditions (or noise levels) would likely exist
only for short periods at any particular residence on a given day.
Landscape-type equipment for vegetation maintenance is not considered
because noise from this equipment would not be discernible over typical
residential landscaping and vegetation maintenance noise sources. This
is because the type of landscape equipment used and the type of noise
generated for vegetation maintenance associated with the Project is not
distinguishable from the type of landscape maintenance generated noise
in residential areas. However, noise from graders, backhoes, excavators,
and trucks would be very different from landscape equipment generating
noise, and as such would be much more discernible in residential areas.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-147

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-15 Operation and Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by
Reach (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s Proposed Action)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
1

Source Level at 50 Feet (dBA)1
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Noise Level at Receptor (dBA)
89
79
85
85
89
91
81

Equipment with the highest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a grader.

Table 4.12-15 shows the estimated noise levels at each receptor along
the reaches that would be affected under the Tunnel Alternative. As
discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, some residences may
be removed or relocated under the Tunnel Alternative; however, the
nearest receptors may not be those identified for removal/relocation and
could be present during maintenance activity and be exposed to the noise
generated.
The following thresholds were identified for determining an exceedence of
noise standards:


Noise levels of 75 dBA measured at the lot line in the City of
Morgan Hill (for Reaches 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14); or



Noise levels of 80 dB at the residential property line in the County
of Santa Clara (for Reach 4).

It should be noted that noise standards are in dB for Santa Clara County
rather than the A-weighted dBA (see Section 3.12), however, 89 dBA
would still exceed an 80-dB standard. Based on the thresholds, the
nearest residences along all reaches would exceed corresponding noise
standards. Although maintenance activities would be intermittent,
infrequent, and similar to activities currently occurring, impacts would be
significant due to the exceedances.
Controlled detonation would be performed by drilling small holes in a
specified pattern in the rock face, packing them with small amounts of
explosive and primer and detonating the explosives using a specified time
delay between successive detonations. The detonations would sound like
a short succession of thunder generally lasting a few seconds. Controlled
detonation methods would adhere to stringent state and federal safety
requirements and would also be conducted in accordance with local noise
ordinances. Typically, less than 20 pounds of explosives per delay would
be used. A Blasting Plan would be prepared for the Project to provide
guidelines for the safe use and storage of blasting materials that may be
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-148

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

used during construction, and would also provide measures to reduce
vibration, including:


Strict management of blast design;



Use of proper charge size and detonation sequence in accordance
with the scaled-distance (SD) factor guidelines provided by the
OSMRE; and



Use of seismograph equipment to monitor PPV levels at nearby
receptors; and



Cessation of blasting activity and modification of blasting plan if
PPV levels exceed all applicable regulations.

See Section 3.18, Hazards and Hazardous Materials, for further detail on
the Blasting Plan.
Vibration levels associated with blasting are site-specific and are
dependent on the amount of explosive used, soil conditions between the
blast site and the receptor, and the elevation where blasting would take
place (specifically, the below surface elevation where bedrock would be
encountered). Blasting below the surface, as is proposed for the Project,
would produce lower vibration levels at a receptor due to additional
attenuation provided by distance and transmission through soil and rock.
The use of controlled detonations for blasting and adherence to the
Blasting Plan would result in less than significant impacts as blasting
vibration levels would be below state and federal requirements. However,
impacts would be significant based on vibration levels produced by
construction equipment (see further discussion below).
Other construction activities for the Tunnel Alternative would include
channel improvements, excavation and construction of diversion channel,
construction of permanent access roads, and installation of reinforced
concrete boxes. Although construction activities would mostly occur
during daytime hours, vibration could still be considered substantially
disruptive to residents. However, periods of intrusive vibration exposure
would be intermittent and generally temporary. Vibration from construction
activity could vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent on
how many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. The
vibration levels shown in Table 4.12-16 represent a worst- case scenario.
Vibration levels at each receptor were determined by taking the source
PPV level for the most vibratory equipment proposed to demonstrate
worst-case scenario (0.644 inch per second PPV for the pile driver at 25
feet along Reach 8, and 0.210 inch per second PPV for a vibratory roller
at 25 feet along all other reaches), and extrapolating for the distance and
attenuation, relative to 25 feet, for each receptor. For example, the
nearest receptor along Reach 5 is located 100 feet away. One hundred
feet divided by 25 feet equals 4; therefore 0.210 inch per second PPV
divided by 4 equals 0.053 inch per second PPV at the receptor 100 feet
away). Due to attenuation by distance similar to noise, receptors further
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-149

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

from the equipment and activity would experience lower vibration levels.
Such worst-case scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any
particular residence on a given day.
The following thresholds were identified for determining generation of
excessive vibration:
>
Vibration levels of 0.5 and 0.1 inch per second PPV for structural
damage and annoyance, respectively, for construction activities.
Based on the thresholds, none of the nearest residences along any reach
would experience vibration levels in excess of state standards for
structural damage, with the exception of receptors along Reach 8, but
residences along Reaches 4, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14 would experience
vibration levels that exceed state standards for annoyance resulting in a
significant impact for channel improvements, excavation and construction
of diversion channel, construction of permanent access roads, and
installation of reinforced concrete boxes.
Table 4.12-16 Construction Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (Tunnel
Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
1

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 25 Feet (PPV)1
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.644
0.210

Noise Level at Receptor (PPV)
0.131
0.053
0.105
0.105
0.131
0.644
0.062

Equipment with the highest vibration levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a vibratory roller.

Under the Tunnel Alternative, operational activities would be limited to
typical maintenance procedures, including specific tunnel maintenance
procedures such as excavating the sediments in the detention basin at
the upstream boundary of the Project in Reach 8 and accessing the box
culverts for maintenance in Reach 8, either through major access points
with removable panels; through smaller hatches; or through manways.
Operational activity proposed for the Project would be considered longterm but would be intermittent because it is performed as-needed,
typically for a few days every year in a given location. Maintenance
activities are discussed in Section 4.12.2.
Maintenance activity would include the use of both mechanized equipment
and hand tools. Use of hand tools would not affect the existing vibration
levels with the exception of vehicles bringing maintenance workers to and
from the site. Maintenance worker vehicles would not be expected to result
in a perceptible increase in vibration over vehicles already used for
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-150

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

ongoing maintenance under the SMP. Mechanized equipment would be
expected to increase vibration in the Project area during the use of the
equipment.
Although maintenance activities would likely occur during daytime hours,
vibration could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents.
However, periods of intrusive vibration exposure would be intermittent and
generally temporary. Vibration from maintenance activity could vary
significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent on how many pieces
of equipment are operating simultaneously. The vibration levels shown in
Table 4.12-17 represent a worst-case scenario. Such worst-case
scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any particular
residence on a given day. Noise from maintenance activity would vary on
a day-to-day basis, and the noise levels shown in Table 4.12-18 represent
a worst-case scenario. Such worst-case scenarios would likely exist only
for short periods at any particular residence on a given day.
Maintenance activity would be expected to use the equipment listed in
Table 4.12-8. Based on the activities that would be expected for the
Tunnel Alternative, the equipment with the greatest vibratory levels that
may be used often during activity would be an excavator, backhoe, or
grader, which would produce vibration levels of 0.044 inch per second
PPV at a distance of 25 feet. Table 4.12-17 shows the estimated vibration
levels at each receptor along the reaches that would be maintained under
the Tunnel Alternative. Vibration levels at each receptor were determined
by taking the source PPV level for the most vibratory equipment proposed
to demonstrate worst-case scenario (0.044 inch per second PPV for an
excavator, backhoe, or grader at 25 feet), and extrapolating for the
distance and attenuation, relative to 25 feet, for each receptor. For
example, the nearest receptor along Reach 5 is located 100 feet away.
One hundred feet divided by 25 feet equals 4; therefore 0.044 inch per
second PPV divided by 4 equals 0.011 PPV at the receptor 100 feet
away). Due to attenuation by distance similar to noise, receptors further
from the equipment and activity would experience lower vibration levels.
The following thresholds were identified for determining generation of
excessive vibration:


Vibration levels of 0.5 and 0.1 inch per second PPV for structural
damage and annoyance, respectively, for construction activities.

Based on the thresholds, none of the nearest residences along any reach
would experience vibration levels in excess of state standards for either
structural damage or annoyance from maintenance. Impacts would be
less than significant.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-151

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-17 Maintenance Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (Tunnel
Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

Source Level at 25 Feet (PPV)1
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.044

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Noise Level at Receptor (PPV)
0.028
0.011
0.022
0.022
0.028
0.044
0.013

1

Equipment with the highest vibration levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is an excavator, backhoe,
or grader.

While the construction period would be a total of six years, construction
activity in any location would be temporary since construction work would
be spread out over the entire construction footprint and would not result in
permanent increases in ambient noise levels. Impacts would be less than
significant for construction of tunnel, channel improvements, excavation
and construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, installation of reinforced concrete boxes, and relocation of
structures and utilities. Noise from the tunnel construction along Reach 8
could reach higher levels based on the type of equipment proposed, but
would still be temporary, and not result in a permanent increase in
ambient noise levels. Maintenance activity would be expected to use the
equipment listed in Table 4.12-9. Based on the activities proposed for the
Tunnel Alternative, the equipment with the loudest operating noise level
that would be used often during activity would be a grader, which would
produce noise levels of 85 dBA at a distance of 50 feet. Table 4.12-18
shows the estimated noise levels at each receptor along the reaches that
would be affected under the Tunnel Alternative.
Section 3.12.3 discusses the existing ambient conditions along the
reaches. Table 4.12-18 compares the existing noise levels based on the
noise measurements collected in 2011 along each reach with the
expected noise levels for maintenance under the Tunnel Alternative.
The following thresholds were identified for determining a substantial
permanent noise increase:


Permanent increase of 5 dBA LEQ as a result of Project operation
based on ambient noise levels.

Based on the threshold of a 5-dBA LEQ increase, all of the nearest
residences would experience short- term, temporary increase in noise
levels above 5 dBA LEQ during maintenance work. It should be noted that
noise standards are in dBA LEQ and are compared to values in dBA. As
discussed in Section 3.12, LEQ is a calculated single level for a specified
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-152

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

duration, which contains the same energy as all of the varying sounds
over the measurement period. While not identical to an average,
especially when noise fluctuations are great, the LEQ is widely used to
represent an average noise level over some period of time. Because of
the substantial increase in noise (22.1 dBA and greater) it is clear that
noise level increases would exceed a 5-dBA increase. However, based
on the intermittent nature of the activity, and the infrequency (a few days
every year) the operations and maintenance noise would not be
permanent.
Table 4.12-18 Estimated Noise Levels for Operation and Maintenance Activities
Compared with Existing Noise Levels (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s Proposed Action)
Reach

Distance

4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Existing Noise
Levels LEQ (dBA)1
60.4
52.2
60.1
46.3
50.3
56.9
58.9

Noise Level at
Receptor (dBA)
89
79
85
85
89
91
81

Change in Noise
Level (dBA)
+27.6
+26.8
+24.9
+38.7
+37.7
+34.1
+22.1

1

Existing noise levels from 2011 noise measurements converted from dB, as measured, to dBA using average
frequency of 500 Hz.

Although construction activities would occur mostly during daytime hours,
noise could be considered disruptive to residents due to the distance
between the activity and the receptors. However, periods of increased
noise exposure would be temporary. Noise from construction activity
would vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent on how
many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. The noise levels
shown in Table 4.12-19 represent a worst-case scenario. Such worstcase scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any particular
residence on a given day.
Section 3.12.3 discusses the existing ambient conditions along the
reaches. Table 4.12-19 compares the existing noise levels based on the
noise measurements collected in 2011 along each reach with the
expected noise levels for construction under the Tunnel Alternative.
Construction activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table
4.12-7. Table 4.12-14 shows the estimated noise levels at each receptor
along the reaches that would be affected under the Tunnel Alternative. As
discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, some residences may
be removed or relocated under the Tunnel Alternative; however, the
nearest receptors may not be those identified for removal/relocation and
could remain during construction activity and be exposed to the noise
generated.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-153

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The following thresholds were identified for determining a substantial
temporary noise increase:


Temporary increase of 5 dBA LEQ as a result of Project
construction based on ambient noise levels.

Table 4.12-19 Estimated Noise Levels for Construction Activities Compared with
Existing Noise Levels (Tunnel Alternative/Applicant’s Proposed Action)
Reach

Distance

4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Existing Noise
Levels LEQ (dBA)1
60.4
52.2
60.1
46.3
50.3
56.9
58.9

Construction Noise
Level at Receptor (dBA)
92
84
89
85
90
95
84

Change in Noise Level
(dBA) from Existing
+31.6
+31.8
+27.9
+38.7
+39.7
+38.1
+25.1

1
Existing noise levels from 2011 noise measurements converted from dB, as measured, to dBA using average
frequency of 500 Hz.
2
Construction noise levels from Table 4.12-14.

Based on the threshold of a 5-dBA LEQ increase, all of the nearest
residences along each reach would experience an increase in noise
levels above 5 dBA LEQ during construction work, resulting in significant
impacts for construction of tunnel, channel improvements, excavation and
construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, installation of reinforced concrete boxes, and demolition/removal of
buildings and structures. It should be noted that noise standards are in
dBA LEQ and are compared to values in dBA. As discussed in Section
3.12.1, LEQ is a calculated single level for a specified duration, which
contains the same energy as all of the varying sounds over the
measurement period. While not identical to an average, especially when
noise fluctuations are great, the LEQ is widely used to represent an
average noise level over some period of time. Because of the substantial
increase in noise (25.1 dBA and greater) it is clear that noise level
increases would exceed a 5-dBA increase. It should be noted, City of
Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 18.48.040 D.1.d exempts public
works projects from noise standards and indicates the public works
director shall set construction hours for these types of projects. However,
even though noise from the Project generated in Morgan Hill would be
exempt from the applicable standards, the nearest residences along
Reaches 5, 6, 7A, 7B, 8, and 14 would experience noise levels otherwise
considered significant. Impacts would be less than significant for
relocation of utilities.
The only airport adjacent to the Project is South County Airport, 180 feet
from Reach 6 at its closest point and 0.3 mile from Reach 14. The Tunnel
Alternative would require a workforce to temporarily/intermittently spend
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-154

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

time near the airport when working on Reaches 5, 6, and 14, but there
would be no introduction of a permanent population in the vicinity of the
airport. As shown in Table 4.12-4 previously, the average noise level
during 24-hour noise measurements along Reach 6 was 55.4 dB, with
primary sources of noise during that time noted as airport and traffic. The
average noise levels along Reach 14, measured over 24 hours, was 63.6
dB, with the primary noise source noted as traffic. As such, the Tunnel
Alternative would not expose people working on construction in the
Project area to excessive airport-related noise levels. Therefore, impacts
would be less than significant for construction of tunnel, channel
improvements, excavation and construction of diversion channel,
construction of permanent access roads, installation of reinforced
concrete boxes, and relocation of structures and utilities.
The Tunnel Alternative would require a workforce to
temporarily/intermittently spend time near the airport when working on
Reaches 5, 6, and 14, but there would be no introduction of a permanent
population in the vicinity of the airport. As shown in Table 4.12-4
previously, the average noise level during 24-hour noise measurements
along Reach 6 was 55.4 dB, with primary sources of noise during that time
noted as airport and traffic. The average noise level along Reach 14,
measured over 24 hours, was 63.6 dB, with the primary noise source noted
as traffic. As such, the Tunnel Alternative would not expose people
working on maintenance in the Project area to excessive airport-related
noise levels.
There are no private-use airports in Santa Clara County and there would
be no impact to workers involved in from construction of tunnel, channel
improvements, excavation and construction of diversion channel,
construction of permanent access roads, installation of reinforced
concrete boxes, and relocation of structures and utilities.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.12.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, the NRCS
Alternative would provide an increased level of flood protection for urban
and semi-urban areas and would also protect agricultural land. All
reaches would be deepened and widened. As compared with the Tunnel
Alternative, the NRCS Alternative would have a larger Project footprint in
Reach 8, a larger amount of required right of way, would require a greater
amount of vegetation to be removed and increased excavation would be
needed along the existing West Little Llagas channel. It would increase
the extent of utilities to be relocated and culvert replacements, which
would subsequently result in greater construction-related interference with
commercial and residential areas. However, the NRCS Alternative would
not include any tunnel construction and therefore would not include any of
the noise generating construction, such as blasting/detonation activities
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-155

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

associated with the tunnel construction as described previously in the
Tunnel Alternative.
The most prevalent and representative noise generating equipment used
in the construction activities for the NRCS Alternative, as identified in
previous Table 4.12-7, would include channel improvements, excavation
and construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, and installation of reinforced concrete boxes. Although
construction activities would occur mostly during daytime hours, noise
could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents due to the
distance between the activity and the receptors. However, periods of
intrusive noise exposure would be temporary. Noise from construction
activity could vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is dependent
on how many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. The
noise levels shown in Table 4.12-20 represent a worst-case scenario with
the use of the loudest equipment which is a grader (85 dBA at 50 feet)
along Reach 7A and a pavement breaker/jackhammer (89 dBA at 50 feet)
along the other reaches. Noise levels would reduce 6 dB for every
doubling of distance away from the noise source. Such worst-case
scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any particular
residence on a given day.
Table 4.12-20 Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (NRCS
Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 50 Feet (dBA)1
89
89
89
89
89
89
89

Noise Level at Receptor (dBA)
92
83
89
85
90
95
84

1

Equipment with the highest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a grader along Reach 7A,
and a pavement breaker/jackhammer along the other reaches.

Construction activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table
4.12-7, which is further differentiated by reach in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, Table 2.5-4. Table 4.12-20 shows the estimated noise levels
at the nearest receptor along each reach which correspond to the loudest
piece of equipment proposed for that reach that would be affected under
the NRCS Alternative, used for channel improvements, excavation and
construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, installation of reinforced concrete boxes, and demolition/removal of
buildings and structures. As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, some residences may be removed or relocated under the
NRCS Alternative; however the nearest receptors may not be those

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-156

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

identified for removal/relocation and could remain during construction
activities and be exposed to the noise generated.
Table 4.12-21 Operation and Maintenance Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by
Reach (NRCS Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
1

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 50 Feet (dBA)1
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

Noise Level at Receptor (dBA)
89
79
85
85
89
91
81

Equipment with the highest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a grader.

Table 4.12-21 shows the estimated noise levels at each receptor along
the reaches that would be affected under the NRCS Alternative. As
discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, some residences may
be removed or relocated under the NRCS Alternative; however, the
nearest receptors may not be those identified for removal/relocation and
could be present during maintenance activity and be exposed to the noise
generated.
Table 4.12-22 Construction Vibration at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (NRCS
Action Alternative)
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
1

Distance
40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 25 Feet (PPV)1
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210
0.210

Noise Level at Receptor (PPV)
0.131
0.053
0.105
0.105
0.131
0.210
0.062

Equipment with the highest vibration levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a vibratory roller.

Construction vibrations to nearby residents are similar to that described
under the Tunnel Alternative, and Table 4.12-22. shows the worst-case
scenario for vibration.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-157

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-23 Estimated Noise Levels for Operation and Maintenance Activities
Compared with Existing Noise Levels (NRCS Alternative)
Reach

Distance

4

40 feet

Existing Noise
Levels LEQ (dBA)1
60.4

5

100 feet

52.2

6

50 feet

60.1

7A

50 feet

46.3

7B

40 feet

50.3

8

25 feet

56.9

14

85 feet

58.9

Noise Level at Receptor
(dBA)

Change in Noise Level
(dBA)

89
79
85
85
89
91
81

+27.6
+26.8
+24.9
+38.7
+37.7
+34.1
+22.1

1

Existing noise levels from 2011 noise measurements converted from dB, as measured, to dBA using average
frequency of 500 Hz.

Table 4.12-23 compares the existing noise levels based on the noise
measurements collected in 2011 along each reach with the expected
noise levels for The noise levels shown in Table 4.12-24 represent a
worst-case scenario with the loudest piece of equipment operating, a
grader (85 dBA at 50 feet) along Reach 7A and a pavement
breaker/jackhammer (89 dBA at 50 feet) along the other reaches. Such
worst-case scenarios would likely exist only for short periods at any
particular residence on a given day.
Table 4.12-24 compares the existing noise levels based on the noise
measurements collected in 2011 along each reach with the expected
noise levels for construction under the NRCS Alternative. Construction
activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table 4.12-7. Table
4.12-20 shows the estimated noise levels at each receptor along the
reaches that would be affected under the NRCS Alternative. As discussed
in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, some residences may be
removed or relocated under the NRCS Alternative; however, the nearest
receptors may not be those identified for removal/relocation and could
remain during construction activity and be exposed to the noise
generated.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-158

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.12-24 Estimated Noise Levels for Construction Activities Compared with Existing
Noise Levels (NRCS Alternative)
Reach

Distance

4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14

40 feet
100 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Existing Noise
Levels LEQ (dBA)1
60.4
52.2
60.1
46.3
50.3
56.9
58.9

Construction Noise
Level at Receptor (dBA)2
92
83
89
85
90
95
84

Change in Noise Level
(dBA) from Existing
+31.6
+30.8
+28.9
+38.7
+39.7
+38.1
+25.1

1

Existing noise levels from 2011 noise measurements converted from dB, as measured, to dBA using average
frequency of 500 Hz.
2
Construction noise levels from Table 4.12-20.

Noise and vibration impacts associated with the NRCS Alternative would
be similar to the Tunnel Alternative. However, vibrations associated with
the Tunnel Alternative in Reach 8 would result in higher vibrations than
the NRCS Alternative. Refer to Table 4.12-16 (Tunnel Alternative)
compared to Table 4.12-22 (NRCS Alternative). For all reaches, other
than Reach 8, the impacts are similar, including impacts from operation
and maintenance activities.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.12.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

The Culvert/Channel Alternative, described in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, is similar to the NRCS Alternative, although channel
deepening and widening through residential properties would be
eliminated in Reach 8 as a results of alterations proposed for existing
culverts.
Construction activities for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would include
channel improvements, excavation and construction of diversion channel,
construction of permanent access roads, installation of reinforced
concrete boxes, and removal/demolition of buildings and structures.
Although construction activities would occur mostly during daytime hours,
noise could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents due to
the distance between the activity and the receptors. However, periods of
intrusive noise exposure would be temporary. Noise from construction
activity could vary significantly on a day-to- day basis, and is dependent
on how many pieces of equipment are operating simultaneously. While
channel deepening and widening is eliminated in Reach 8, a pavement
breaker/jackhammer (89 dBA at 50 feet) is still proposed for use for
removal/demolition of buildings and structures, which is the same as the

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-159

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

NRCS Alternative. Such worst-case scenarios would likely exist only for
short periods at any particular residence on a given day.
Construction activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table
4.12-7, which is further differentiated by reach in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, Table 2.5-4. Table 4.12-20 shows the estimated noise levels
at each receptor along the reaches which correspond to the loudest piece
of equipment proposed for that reach that would be affected under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative. As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, some residences may be removed or relocated under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative; however the nearest receptors may not be
those identified for removal/relocation and could remain during
construction activity and be exposed to the noise generated.
Noise and vibration impacts associated with the Culvert\Channel
Alternative would be similar to the NRCS Alternative, including impacts
from operation and maintenance activities. See the previous discussion
on the Tunnel and NRCS Alternatives as the impacts would be similar,
except there would be no tunnel work that is associated with the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.12.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of Alternatives, the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would provide an increased level of flood protection for
urban and semi-urban areas, would protect agricultural land, and would
construct a high flow bypass channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek
and Reach 14 of East Little Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed
so that no flood capacity improvements would be needed along Reach 6
or Reach 5 of Llagas Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Flood
conveyance improvements for the upstream reaches would remain the
same as that described for the Tunnel Alternative. Reach 14 would
undergo greater channel widening and culvert modification under this
alternative. It would also include construction of hydraulic gates in Reach
6 for the bypass channel, three bridges near U.S. 101, and new
maintenance roads.
Construction activities for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would include
tunnel construction (as described under the Tunnel Alternative), bridge
and hydraulic structure construction, channel improvements, excavation
and construction of diversion channel, construction of permanent access
roads, and installation of reinforced concrete boxes. Although
construction activities would occur mostly during daytime hours, noise
could still be considered substantially disruptive to residents due to the
distance between the activity and the receptors. However, periods of
intrusive noise exposure would be temporary and plans would be
implemented such as the blasting plan, described under the Tunnel
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-160

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Alternative (Section 4.12.3.2) to reduce noise levels. Noise from
construction activity could vary significantly on a day-to-day basis, and is
dependent on how many pieces of equipment are operating
simultaneously. The noise levels shown in Table 4.12-25 represent a
worst-case scenario with the use of the loudest equipment which is a pile
driver (101 dBA at 50 feet) for Reaches 6 and 8, and a pavement
breaker/jackhammer (89 dBA at 50 feet) along Reaches 4, 7A, 7B, and
14. Noise levels would reduce 6 dB for every doubling of distance away
from the noise source. Such worst-case scenarios would likely exist only
for short periods at any particular residence on a given day.
Construction activity would be expected to use equipment listed in Table
4.12-7, which is further differentiated by reach in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, Table 2.5-4. Table 4.12-25 shows the estimated noise levels
at the nearest receptor along each reach which correspond to the loudest
piece of equipment proposed for each reach that would be affected under
the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. As discussed in Chapter 2, Description of
Alternatives, some residences may be removed or relocated under the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative; however the nearest receptors may not be
those identified and could remain during construction activity and be
exposed to the noise generated.
Table 4.12-25 Construction Noise at Nearest Residential Receptors by Reach (Reach 6
Bypass Alternative)
Reach1
4
6 (Bypass)
7A
7B
8
14

Distance
40 feet
50 feet
50 feet
40 feet
25 feet
85 feet

Source Level at 50 Feet (dBA)2
89
101
89
89
101
89

Noise Level at Receptor (dBA)
92
101
89
90
107
84

1
Reach 5 not included in table as no improvements would be needed along Reach 5 downstream of the proposed
bypass.
2
Equipment with the highest noise levels, used to demonstrate the worst-case scenario, is a pile driver for Reach 6
and 8, and a pavement breaker/jackhammer for all other reaches.

Noise impacts associated with the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be
similar to the Tunnel Alternative. However, noise impacts for the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative within the Reach 6 project limits would be higher than
the noise impacts associated with the Tunnel Alternative. Refer to Table
4.12-15 (Tunnel Alternative) compared to Table 4.12-25 (Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative). For all reaches, other than Reach 8, the impacts are similar,
including impacts from operation and maintenance activities.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-161

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.12.4 Summary of Impacts to Noise
Construction of the Project would result in temporary noise and vibration impacts
adjacent to active work areas. Even with proposed mitigation, impacts would
remain significant, primarily due to the limited distance from the work areas to the
nearest sensitive receptors, for construction and operations and maintenance
under all action alternatives for exceedance of noise standards, for construction
under all action alternatives for ground borne vibration, and for construction of all
action alternatives for temporary noise increases. All other applicable impacts
would be less than significant.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Noise are discussed and described in
Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives) of
this EIS.
4.13

AESTHETIC RESOURCES
4.13.1 Introduction
This section evaluates potential impacts on visual resources (aesthetics) from
implementation of the alternatives identified for the Project.
This visual assessment relies partly on the visual assessment methodology
established by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) as described in the
FHWA Visual Assessment Methodology manual. The aesthetic value of an area
is a measure of its visual character and quality, combined with the viewer
response to the area (Federal Highway Administration 1988). Viewer response is
a combination of viewer exposure and viewer sensitivity. Viewer exposure is a
function of the number of viewers, number of views seen, distance of the viewers,
and viewing duration. Viewer sensitivity relates to the extent of the public’s
concern for a particular viewshed. These terms and criteria are described in detail
below.
Impacts related to aesthetics are determined by comparing existing visual
conditions to Project conditions by Project alternatives during construction and
operations and maintenance. Impacts are evaluated based on implementation of
constructions and operation and maintenance activities for each alternative as a
whole rather than by individual reaches. Viewers in the area primarily include
local residents, recreational users, merchants, and visitors in the urban areas,
such as Morgan Hill, and passing motorists.
Viewer Groups and Viewer Responses
Viewer groups in the vicinity of the Project area and their sensitivity to visual
changes are characterized below. Viewers in the Project area include motorists
traveling on roads that intersect or parallel the Upper Llagas Creek and West and
East Little Llagas creeks. Additionally, the key observation points, described in
Figures 3.13-1a–h, which visual simulations located along Upper Llagas Creek
would also be affected by changes in the visual environment. Motorists typically

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-162

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

view the area only for short periods, but recreational users and residents would
experience the views for longer periods. Viewer groups who have visual access
to the Project area were divided into the categories of residents, workers, and
motorists, described in more detail below.
Residents
Residents are individuals whose homes are in proximity to the Project area.
Viewer sensitivity is moderately high amongst residents, because they are likely
to value their local visual resources highly, appreciate the visual experience, and
be more sensitive to changes in views.
Workers
Workers are individuals whose place of employment is in proximity to the Project
area, or who may come into contact with construction and maintenance locations
as part of their work activities (e.g., delivery persons). Viewer sensitivity is
moderate among workers.
Motorists
Motorists use roadways at varying speeds; normal highway and roadway speeds
differ based on the traveler’s familiarity with the route and roadway conditions
(e.g., presence/absence of rain). Single views typically are of short duration,
except on straighter stretches where views last slightly longer. Motorists who
frequently travel these routes generally possess low to moderate visual sensitivity
to their surroundings. The passing landscape becomes familiar to these viewers,
and their attention typically is not focused on the passing views but on the
roadway, roadway signs, and surrounding traffic. Motorists who travel local routes
for sightseeing purposes generally possess a higher visual sensitivity to their
surroundings, because they are likely to respond to the natural environment with
higher regard and as a holistic visual experience.
Viewer sensitivity is moderately low among most roadway travelers anticipated to
view Upper Llagas Creek in this area. The passing viewshed becomes familiar to
frequent viewers; further, at standard roadway speeds, views are of short
duration and roadway users are fleetingly aware of surrounding traffic, road
signs, their immediate surroundings within the automobile, and other visual
features.
Project Assumptions
The following analysis on potential impacts to aesthetics from the implementation
of the Project, and alternatives assumes the following:


The primary issue related to aesthetics during construction would be
vegetation removal. Riparian corridors can be viewed from a distance
since they contain stands of tall trees and, therefore, views are afforded
by the public at a distance and from a wider viewing area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-163

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences


The analysis primarily considers aesthetics related impacts from public
views. Physical channel improvements, such as widening and deepening,
would not be very visible from public viewing points with the exception of
very few areas, such as bridges along the alignments of the Project
alternatives. Views from bridges and trails may be from those in cars,
bikes, and pedestrians who would only have brief and transient viewing
opportunities either while driving, walking, or biking on these bridges or
trails. Therefore, channel modifications are not considered a primary
visual change from implementation of Project alternatives.



Post construction would involve revegetation efforts. After construction is
complete, the area will appear less dense due to vegetation removal;
however, after the planted trees and other vegetation mature over time,
the area will likely exceed pre-Project densities.



The primary issue related to aesthetics during operations and
maintenance would be vegetation management

For this analysis, the construction period for the Project includes active
construction, as well as implementation and 5 years of monitoring that may be
required after construction for elements, such as re-vegetation and restoration.
During the operations period, maintenance activities related to aesthetics will
primarily center around the need for vegetation management, which is anticipated
to have more of a visual aspect to it than other maintenance activities, therefore,
the operations and maintenance discussion focus primarily on vegetation
management activities.
4.13.2. No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential areas
of Morgan Hill and San Martin would still continue. Storm runoff would continue
through the West Little Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and Llagas Creek
channel reaches. The bypass channel in Reach 7A would not be constructed
under the No Action Alternative, and channel bank erosion would likely continue.
There would be no construction involved with the No Action Alternative; therefore,
no construction- related impacts would occur.
The No Action Alternative assumes that existing maintenance activities
established by the SCVWD, which include a SMP, would continue. The SMP
establishes procedures for routine maintenance of stream channels involving
sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and associated
minor activities.
Vegetation management is the primary component of the SMP that may affect
visual resources in the Project area. Vegetation has the ability to restrict hydraulic
capacity and impede flow conveyance, and create fire hazards due to high fuel
loads. Non-native vegetation may also have negative ecological impacts as it can
out-compete more desirable native species, resulting in habitat alteration and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-164

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

reduced biodiversity. Vegetation management activities include pruning, hand
removal, herbicide, mowing, and discing activities.
Impacts related to vegetation management include changes in visual character
from thinning of vegetation from activities, such as pruning, discing, mowing,
herbicide use, and vegetation removal, as part of the SMP. Maintenance
activities would result in less-than-significant impacts.
There would be no construction involved with the No Action Alternative; therefore,
no construction- related impacts would result.
Vegetation management is the primary component of the SMP that may affect
visual resources in the Project area. Impacts related to vegetation management
include changes in visual character from thinning of vegetation from activities,
such as pruning, discing, mowing, herbicide use, and vegetation removal, as part
of the SMP. There are no designated scenic resources along the Upper Llagas
Creek alignments subject to this Project. There is no construction involved with
the No Action Alternative; therefore, no construction-related impacts would result.
Vegetation management is the primary component of the SMP that may affect
visual resources in the Project area. Impacts related to vegetation management
include changes in visual character from thinning of vegetation from activities,
such as pruning, discing, mowing, herbicide use, and vegetation removal, as part
of the SMP. Implementation of the SMP does not conflict with local plans and
policies related to visual and aesthetic resources, therefore, continued
implementation of the No Action Alternative is anticipated to have no conflicts
with local plans or policies. There is no construction involved with the No Action
Alternative; therefore, no construction-related impacts would result. Continued
implementation of the SMP under the No Action Alternative would have no
impacts related to new sources of light and glare since maintenance is done
during the daytime hours and lighting is not typically required to perform these
activities.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.13.3 Action Alternatives

4.13.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

The SCVWD considered and developed the Tunnel Alternative, because
there was an opportunity to reduce the Project footprint associated with
the NRCS Alternative in Reach 8. Within Reach 8, the Tunnel Alternative
would require a smaller ROW; reduce the amount of vegetation to be
removed along the existing West Little Llagas channel; reduce the extent
of utilities to be relocated; reduce the culvert replacements required,
which would result in less construction-related interference with
commercial and residential areas. Additionally, the existing channel would
remain through downtown Morgan Hill. The channel will contain a
sediment basin/weir structure that would allow low flows to continue
through the existing creek that goes through downtown Morgan Hill. The
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-165

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

high flows would be diverted through the new tunnel through the Nob Hill
area. The Tunnel Alternative would be the same throughout the Project
reaches, as described in Chapter 2.
Construction of the Tunnel Alternative has the potential to degrade the
existing visual character and quality of the Project area and surroundings
for viewer groups; because construction would require staging of
materials and large construction equipment, physical reshaping of
channels and the removal of large quantities of vegetation within the
construction footprint as demonstrated in Figures 3.13-1a and Figures
3.13-1c–h. Overall, approximately 65 percent of the trees within the
Project construction limits are proposed for removal. The proposed tree
removals would change the visual character of each reach immediately
following tree removals. Trees would be removed in phases, since
construction of all reaches would not happen simultaneously. The tree
removals would create more filtered and broader views through fewer
trees, which in some areas are currently more narrowed and focused
along the channel corridor by the number and density of the existing
larger mature vegetation.
The proposed tree removals would change the visual character of each
reach immediately following tree removals. Trees would be removed in
phases, since construction of all reaches would not happen
simultaneously. The tree removals would create more filtered and broader
views through fewer trees, which in some areas are currently more
narrowed and focused along the channel corridor by the number and
density of the existing larger mature vegetation.
It is anticipated that immediately after tree removals and prior to full
establishment after revegetation, the area would appear less densely
vegetated and the tree canopy would be reduced. This change would be
short term and temporary in that revegetation and establishment of
replanted trees may take years to reach pre-Project densities; but would
eventually recover, thereby changing the general visual character and
quality of all reaches within the Project area. Therefore, the overall visual
character would temporarily change with the thinning of vegetation and
tree canopy across all reaches; however, this change is expected to be
temporary.
The view simulation (Figure 3.13-1f) in Reach 4 provides an example that
illustrates that although mature trees would be removed in some areas,
overall many areas of the riparian corridor would eventually be more
vegetated than prior to the Project because of revegetation, which is
proposed for mitigation, including areas that were previously minimally
covered. The view simulation (Figure 3.13-1g) in Reach 14 also illustrates
the more dense cover after revegetation. Over the long-term, revegetation
would allow for recovery and growth of disturbed and removed vegetation,
which in turn would allow for improved visual character after construction
in areas visible to viewer groups.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-166

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The temporary presence of construction equipment in the Project area
and in staging areas, in addition to construction personnel, would
temporarily change the general visual character and/or impede views of
the creek during construction activities. Removal of structures related to
channel widening and realignment during construction, as discussed in
Table 2.5-1, would change the general visual character in all reaches
where removal or relocation is necessary. Removal of structures involves
all reaches, except Reach 7A and Reach 8 for the Tunnel Alternative.
However, structure removal would be kept to a minimum and only select
structures are slated for removal or relocation. Removal and relocation of
structures would not dramatically affect the visual character of the Project
area since there are very few proposed for removal as compared to the
existing structures in the area and, therefore, impacts would be less than
significant.
New access roads are proposed to be constructed along most reaches.
Clearing and grubbing of vegetation (as necessary) prior to road
construction would constitute a slight visual change to viewers in the area;
however, the roads are flat and linear and not easily visible throughout all
reaches. Therefore, impacts would be less than significant.
New temporary staging areas would also constitute new visual features
along the Project reaches. Staging areas would contain staged
construction equipment and materials not typically there. Staging areas
would be used both during the duration of construction during both
daytime and nighttime. Staging areas are anticipated, however, to be
temporary in nature and not contribute to a permanent change in visual
character in the Project area.
The permanent changes to visual character include channel widening,
vegetation removal, additional access roads, and removal/relocation of
structures within the Project footprint along most of the reaches, with the
exception of Reach 8. For example, in Figure 3.13-1c, which depicts
Spring Avenue looking northwest in Reach 7B, the visual character
changes from a more urban impression to a more formalized water
feature with the channel being re-routed and a new access road being
located along the channel. Vegetation would also be cleared and an
existing structure would be removed, opening up the area to views, as
well. The general visual character would change slightly, as the viewer’s
focus would be a water feature as compared to existing conditions. The
visual quality also would generally improve, since the site is more open
and clear and the new focus of the site would be a water feature. Overall
visual changes to the Project would be increased visual quality, while at
the same time involving a general change to visual character. Views to
the site can be obtained from Spring Avenue and from local residences.
Similar changes are expected for most other reaches for the Tunnel
Alternative.
Overall, with the combination of tree removal, removal and relocation of
structures, and general construction activity, the visual character and
quality would substantially change during construction, and impacts
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-167

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

during construction would be temporary and significant. However, after
construction has been completed and the proposed revegetation
plantings have become established, long-term impacts would be less than
significant.
The Tunnel Alternative would result in reduced visual impacts compared
to the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives as it relates to commercial
and residential areas in Reach 8 due to the subsurface construction of a
tunnel while leaving the existing creek channel in its current configuration
through downtown Morgan Hill. Construction activities under the Tunnel
Alternative would result in reduced disturbance along the existing West
Little Llagas Creek channel. Another feature that is part of the Tunnel
Alternative, but not included in the NRCS Alternative, is the construction
of a sediment basin/weir structure at Wright Avenue and Hale Avenue in
Reach 8. Figure 3.13-1a shows a visual simulation of the proposed
sediment basin/weir structure in Reach 8. Currently, there is a detention
basin as part of the adjacent housing development on the site of the
proposed sediment detention basin for the Tunnel Alternative. The Tunnel
Alternative would involve construction of a sediment basin/weir structure,
and a maintenance access road on top of the side-slopes of the detention
basin. The channel and detention basin would be located in an area that
could be viewed by travelers on Hale Road and adjacent residences. The
general visual character of the area in Reach 8 would not substantially
change since it would still remain in use as part of the water course with
associated features, as shown in Figure 3.13-1a.
Overall, with the combination of tree removal, removal and relocation of
structures, and general construction activity the visual character and
quality of the area during construction has the potential to substantially
change; and impacts during construction would be temporary and
significant. However, after construction has been completed and with
implementation of the mitigation measures as discussed in Chapter 5 of
this EIS, which includes re-vegetation of the Project area, long-term
impacts would be less than significant.
During the operations phase of the Tunnel Alternative, the primary visual
changes would involve the permanent change in visual character of the
area due to the flood control improvements along all reaches. Once the
Project is constructed, over time vegetation density would increase and
flexibility of woody riparian species may decrease as the vegetation
matures and becomes well established. This would cause the hydraulic
roughness of the channel to increase beyond that originally designed,
necessitating thinning or removal of vegetation to maintain the reduction
of flood risk. During routine maintenance activities, such as vegetation
management, there would be visual changes from removal of vegetation
required as part of flood risk management. However, these changes
would be intermittent and site specific. Additionally, large trees would not
be removed as part of the maintenance program. Therefore, impacts from
maintenance would be less than significant.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-168

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The lack of modification to the existing creek channel, as compared to the
NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives where channel widening and
deepening, as well as culvert replacement would occur, would result in
decreased visual impacts in Reach 8, because the existing vegetation
would remain and no construction would occur through a very visibly
accessible area in downtown Morgan Hill. No maintenance is proposed
for the existing creek channel in Reach 8, thereby reducing long-term
visual impacts to the area as compared to the NRCS and Culvert/Channel
alternatives.
The proposed sediment basin in Reach 8 would function to capture
sediments from the drainage upstream of the Project, thereby reducing
the need to conduct sediment maintenance in downstream reaches,
including the culverts and tunnel sections in Reach 8. To maintain the
function of the basin, it would periodically need to be excavated and the
removed sediments would be end-hauled off-site. The basin would be a
new feature in Reach 8 and would be located next to existing residences.
A smaller detention basin is being constructed in this area as part of new
residential development adjacent to Reach 8. The Tunnel Alternative
would require enlarging the existing detention basin, which would be a
visual impact for residences that have views of the detention basin in the
area. However, the creek would not be a new visual feature in the area
and the visual character would generally remain the same and impacts
would be less than significant.
There are no designated scenic vistas or view corridors in the Project
area. The Project area is flat and views primarily consist of rolling hills and
agricultural lands to the east and views of the Santa Cruz Mountains to
the west. Site-specific views of the creek from public access areas, such
as trails are provided along the Upper Llagas Creek corridor. The Tunnel
Alternative would result in lessened construction-related effects to
commercial and residential areas in Reach 8 as compared to the NRCS
and Culvert/Channel alternatives.
Construction of the Tunnel Alternative would involve tree removals,
channel widening, channel realignment, staging of materials and large
construction equipment, and other flood improvement activities, which
may change the general appearance of Upper Llagas Creek at public
viewing points (Figures 3.13-1a and Figures 3.13-1c- h). A revegetation
plan would be implemented to revegetate and restore the creek corridor
to natural conditions. While the revegetated areas recover from Project
construction, they may temporarily appear sparsely vegetated and bare;
however, as the plants and trees mature, the overall long-term change
would remain in line with the visual character of Upper Llagas Creek
corridor. The Project will not obstruct or block any scenic vista or view
corridor that is designated on local plans; therefore, no impacts would
occur from construction of the Project.
During routine maintenance activities, such as vegetation management,
there may be visual changes from removal of vegetation required as part
of flood risk management. However, these changes would be intermittent
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-169

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and site specific. Additionally, large trees would not be removed as part of
the maintenance program and no designated scenic vistas or view
corridors would be blocked by the operations; therefore, no impacts would
occur related to obstructing view corridors.
In terms of policies related to aesthetics, those that are relevant to the
Project, are primarily associated with protection and minimizing
disturbances to creek corridors to maintain aesthetic values. Staging of
materials and equipment would change the visual character of the creek
corridor; but this impact would be short-term during construction and,
therefore, would not create a permanent conflict with local policies.
The City of Gilroy’s Policy 6.03 (U.S. 101 Landscaping and View
Protection) states that projects within the city should work with Caltrans
and the county to provide additional landscaping along the U.S. 101 ROW
to enhance its attractiveness, recognizing that it is the primary “visitorserving” traffic artery in the planning area. Also, encourage new
developments facing U.S. 101 to provide landscape screening and to
protect and enhance existing views of farmland and surrounding hills. The
nearest portions of Reach 4, which parallel U.S. 101, are approximately
0.25 mile away and within the City of Gilroy’s SOI 1. Views of Reach 4
along U.S. 101 may be obscured because of the distance from passing
motorists whose views are also transient in nature. The existing
composite roughness characteristics of the channel (n-values) would not
substantially change in those reaches where there is some riparian
vegetation, particularly Reaches 4, 5, and 6 (see Table 2.5-5 and Figure
3.13-1f). This indicates that the overall change in vegetative cover and
character would be small. Therefore, impacts would be less than
significant.
The City of Morgan Hill states in Policy 14a that the city should enhance
the visual integrity of the gateways to the city, such as Monterey Road
south of Watsonville Road, which falls within Reach 7A. Policy 14b also
states that the city should protect the visual integrity of the scenic
gateways to the South County.
Some native shrubs and hardwood trees would be removed to allow for
channel widening on one side of the channel leaving one natural bank.
These excavated areas would be revegetated using native species.
Revegetation is discussed in Section 3.4, Botanical Resources.
West Little Llagas Creek Trail (Reaches 7A and 7B) lies on land owned
by SCVWD. Section 3.15.3, Recreation Resources, discusses the trail in
additional detail. The West Little Llagas Trail would be replaced by the
maintenance road, which would decrease the visual sensitivity of the area
by reducing opportunities for public access. Revegetation would allow for
recovery and growth of disturbed and removed species, which in turn
would allow for improved visual character in areas visible from scenic
1

SOI refers to “boundaries for all agencies within its jurisdiction, indicating the physical boundary and
service area each agency is expected to serve”. (Santa Clara County 2006)
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-170

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

roads and gateways identified by the cities of Morgan Hill and Gilroy. As
the vegetation recovers after implementation of the revegetation plan, as
shown in Figure 3.13-1d for Reach 7B, the disturbed areas may appear
sparsely vegetated and bare. However, in the long term, revegetation
would return the general visual character of the Upper Llagas creek
corridor and the removal of the trail would decrease the visual sensitivity
over the short term and, therefore, impacts would be reduced.
The Tunnel Alternative would result in fewer construction-related effects
to commercial and residential areas in Reach 8 compared with the other
alternatives since a portion of the existing creek channel within the
downtown portion of the City of Morgan Hill would not be modified.
Overall, operations and maintenance activities would comply with local
policies related to protection of visual resources and with the
implementation of BMPs as described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of
this EIS. No conflicts with local policies would occur during operations
and maintenance of the Tunnel Alternative.
Maintenance activities related to vegetation management, such as
thinning, pruning, and small tree removal, would affect the visual
character of the riparian corridor. However, the effect would be minor in
nature since views from passing motorists are considered of lower visual
sensitivity and the overall view of the riparian corridor would remain intact
since maintenance activities would not occur every year, but
approximately every five years (except for Reach 6, which may need to
occur annually since there is perennial water and the likelihood of
increased vegetation growth due to the presence of perennial water) and
are generally site specific in nature. Vegetation maintenance would not
include aggressive vegetation removal or removal of large trees along
large stretches of creek.
Construction would take place Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. and Saturdays 9:00 a.m.to 6:00 p.m., but with the potential for
construction work in the evenings until 10:00 p.m. outside of residential
areas, although in rare instances, could be later. Construction activities
are not anticipated to result in new sources of light or glare during the
daytime. Nighttime construction may be required to avoid interruptions
during peak traffic periods on heavily used roads or to address utilities
relocation when utilized less in the evenings. Temporary lighting may be
used when necessary; however, this would be temporary in nature.
Additionally, illumination beyond the immediate work area will be
minimized and all required lights would be shielded and pointing
downward to control light beyond the immediate work area. Construction
of new bridges at Watsonville Road and West Middle Avenue would not
result in new lighting along bridges in areas where lighting did not
previously exist. Therefore, no operations related impacts would occur.
Maintenance activities would occur during daytime hours and would not
result in new sources of light or glare in the Project area. No impacts
would occur.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-171

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Construction activities to unearth the buried existing bridges at
Watsonville Road and West Middle Avenue would not result in new
lighting at these locations where lighting did not previously exist.
Therefore, no operations related impacts would occur. Maintenance
activities would occur during daytime hours and would not result in new
sources of light or glare in the Project area; therefore, no impacts would
occur.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.13.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

The NRCS Alternative would include widening and deepening the channel
in all Project reaches.
Construction of the NRCS Alternative has the potential to degrade the
existing visual character and quality in downtown Morgan Hill with the
proposed improvements along West Little Llagas is Reach 8. For other
reaches construction would require staging of materials and large
construction equipment and the removal of large quantities of vegetation
within the construction footprint as demonstrated in Figures 3.13-1b
through 3.13-1h. Tree removal for the NRCS Alternative would be the
same as in the Tunnel Alternative with the exception of Reach 8. In
Reach 8, the NRCS Alternative would involve removal of additional trees
found along 2,775 feet of the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel
where above- ground construction would take place, which would be
avoided by the Tunnel Alternative. Overall, approximately 65 percent of
the trees within the Project construction limits are proposed for removal.
The NRCS Alternative would result in increased visual impacts compared
to the Tunnel Alternative as it relates to commercial and residential areas
in Reach 8. Construction of the NRCS Alternative would result increased
disturbance along the existing West Little Llagas Creek channel. Another
feature that is not included in the NRCS Alternative is the construction of
a sediment basin/weir structure at Wright Avenue and Hale Avenue in
Reach 8. The general visual character of the area in Reach 8 as shown in
Figure 3.13.1b would be substantially changed as part of the NRCS
Alternative since existing West Little Llagas Creek, downstream of West
Main Avenue through downtown City of Morgan Hill would require
widening and hardscape to meet the project objective of providing 1percent flood protection.
There are no designated scenic vistas or view corridors of importance
within the Project area. Construction of the NRCS Alternative would
involve tree removals, channel widening, channel realignment, staging of
materials and large construction equipment, and other flood improvement
activities, which may change the general appearance of Upper Llagas
Creek at public viewing points (Figures 3.13-1b–h). A revegetation plan
would be implemented to revegetate and restore the creek corridor to
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-172

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

natural conditions. While the revegetated areas recover from NRCS
construction, they may temporarily appear sparsely vegetated and bare;
however, as the plants and trees mature, the overall long-term change
would remain in line with the visual character of Upper Llagas Creek
corridor. The NRCS Alternative would not obstruct or block any scenic
vista or view corridor that is designated on local plans. Therefore, no
impacts would occur from construction of the NRCS Alternative.
After construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
associated with the NRCS Alternative would be greater than those O&M
activities described in the Tunnel Alternative within Reach 8. After
construction of the NRCS Alternative, maintenance of modified West Little
Llagas Creek through downtown City of Morgan Hill would require periodic
sediment removal, vegetation management, and associated minor
maintenance activities to maintain the required hydraulic capacity to meet
the project objective of providing 1-percent flood protection. These O&M
activities would have temporary visual impacts until the vegetation growth
returned. These Reach 8 O&M activities associated with the NRCS
Alternative are not required under the Tunnel Alternative.
Impacts to Aesthetic Resources for the remaining project reaches (4, 5, 6,
7a, 7b, and 14) for the NRCS Alternative are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition, after
construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities within
these remaining project reaches (4, 5, 6, 7a, 7b, and 14) associated with
the NRCS Alternative would be similar to the O&M activities described in
the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.13.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

The SCVWD considered and developed the Culvert/Channel Alternative,
because there was an opportunity to reduce the Project footprint
associated with the NRCS Alternative in Reach 8. This alternative would
require a smaller ROW; reduce the amount of vegetation to be removed
along the existing West Little Llagas channel; and would allow easier
maintenance access, relative to the NRCS Alternative. The key feature of
the Culvert/Channel Alternative is elimination of the need for channel
deepening and widening through residential properties, as proposed for
the NRCS Alternative between West Main Avenue and West 2nd Street in
Reach 8.
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would result in lessened constructionrelated effects to aesthetics in residential areas in Reach 8 than the
NRCS Alternative, because of the installation of the culverts would occur
through athletic fields and along Del Monte Road to West 2nd Street,
rather than through a section of residential homes between West Main

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-173

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Avenue and West 2nd Street. For other project reaches, visual
simulations are shown in Figures 3.13-1b–h.
For most reaches, once the Project is constructed, over time vegetation
density would increase and flexibility of woody riparian species would
decrease as the vegetation matures and becomes well established. This
would cause the hydraulic roughness of the channel to increase beyond
that originally designed, necessitating thinning, or removal of vegetation to
maintain the reduction of flood risk. During routine maintenance activities,
such as vegetation management, there would be visual changes from
removal of vegetation required as part of flood risk management.
However, these changes would be intermittent and site specific.
Additionally, large trees would not be removed as part of the maintenance
program.
In Reach 8, there would be reduced removal of vegetation for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative; therefore, reduced visual impacts overall
from this alternative, since no maintenance is proposed in the areas that
would not require vegetation removal. Therefore, impacts from
maintenance would be less than significant.
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would result in lessened constructionrelated effects to creek corridor views in residential areas in Reach 8. An
800-foot segment of the double 10-foot-wide box culverts in the NRCS
design would be realigned parallel to Hale Avenue through the Britton
School athletic fields up to Del Monte Avenue and continuing the double
box culvert under Del Monte Avenue approximately 900 feet to West 2nd
Street.
From West 2nd Street to West Dunne Avenue the same channel widening
and deepening, along with culvert replacements at 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th
streets, as described for the NRCS Alternative, would be performed in
Reach 8. The upstream-most portion of the Culvert/Channel Alternative
from Llagas Road then along Hale Avenue would remain the same as the
NRCS Alternative. All other reaches would have exactly the same design,
as previously described for the NRCS Alternative. Since there are no
designated scenic resources in the NRCS Project area, no impacts would
occur.
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would result in lessened constructionrelated effects aesthetics in residential areas in Reach 8. With
implementation of mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this
EIS, impacts would be less than significant. Overall, operations and
maintenance would comply with local policies related to protection of
visual resources and with the implementation of the BMPs, listed below.
Impacts related to conflicts with local policies would occur during
operations and maintenance of the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be
less than significant. Construction would take place primarily Monday
through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and Saturdays 9:00 a.m.to
6:00 p.m., but with the potential for construction work in the evenings until
10:00 p.m. outside of residential areas, although in emergencies, it could
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-174

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

be later. Construction activities are not anticipated to result in new
sources of light or glare during the daytime. Nighttime construction may
be required to avoid interruptions during peak traffic periods on heavily
used roads or to address utilities relocation when utilized less in the
evenings, temporary lighting may be used when necessary; however, this
would be temporary in nature. Additionally, with incorporation of mitigation
measures, illumination beyond the immediate work area will be minimized
and all required lights would be shielded and pointing downward to control
light beyond the immediate work area. With implementation of mitigation
measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS, impacts would be less
than significant.
Impacts to Aesthetic Resources for the remaining project reaches (4, 5, 6,
7a, 7b, and 14) for the Culvert/Channel Alternative are similar to the
Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition,
after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities within
these remaining project reaches (4, 5, 6, 7a, 7b, and 14) associated with
the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be similar to the O&M activities
described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.13.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high-flow bypass
channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little
Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so that no flood capacity
improvements would be needed along Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas
Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Additionally, in Reach 8,
through the City of Morgan Hill, the Project would be exactly the same as
the Tunnel Alternative. Flood conveyance improvements for the upstream
Project Reaches 7A and 7B and for the downstream Reach 4 would
remain the same as that described for the NRCS Alternative. Reach 14
would also be wider and deeper compared to other alternatives.
Impacts are similar to the Tunnel Alternative, except along the existing
channel in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6, which would require no
construction; and, therefore, no tree removals in either reach. However,
there would be additional construction of a new bypass channel, which
would connect Reach 6 to Reach 14 by passing under Murphy Avenue
and then under U.S. 101 with new bridges. However this proposed
bypass area is currently an undeveloped, open field that has low visual
sensitivity, because the viewers are commuters and non-recreational
travelers along U.S. 101 or along Murphy Avenue. The constructed
earthen bypass channel banks would be vegetated, but the channel itself
would be dry most of the time, except during rainfall events that briefly
generate high flow runoff. Although the empty field would hold a new
channel feature, the aesthetic character would not substantially change,
as the landscape would remain earthen, natural materials, the same viewUpper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-175

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

shed would remain intact (nothing would obstruct existing views) and the
landscape would remain pastoral in character. As such, the visual quality
to the area would not be negatively affected, because it would not be out
of context with the existing surrounding visual character. Visual
simulations depicting most Project reaches for the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative are demonstrated in Figures 3.13-1a and Figures 3.13-1c–h.
Figure 3.13-1f depicts both the existing setting and the visual simulation
with channel modifications in Reach 5. Since no modifications are
proposed in Reach 5 for the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, this existing
view would remain the same as shown in the top photograph of this
figure. With implementation of mitigation measures as described in
Chapter 5 of this EIS, impacts would be reduced.
During operations and maintenance of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative,
no channel modifications would occur in Reach 5 and portions of Reach
6. Therefore, long-term visual effects, as a result of Project operations
and maintenance would be less along those reaches compared with the
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action).
Maintenance activities, such as vegetation management would still occur
along Reach 5 and portions of 6. With regards to the new bypass channel
proposed for construction under this alternative, it would be dry most of
the year and revegetation would primarily involve grasses and lowgrowing xeric shrubs, which would require minimal maintenance. The
maintenance associated with the newly constructed channel segments
would result in periodic and temporary reduction in the density of
vegetation to maintain channel capacity; however, these changes would
be subtle and would not degrade the overall visual quality of the Project
area. Impacts are less than significant.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would, however, result in less
construction-related visual effects in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6,
although construction of the bypass channel would introduce new
construction not proposed under the Tunnel Alternative. There would be
additional construction-related visual effects due to construction of a new
Bypass channel under Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101 to connect Reach 14
to Reach 6. There are no designated scenic vistas or view corridors in the
Project area. Therefore, no impacts will occur to designated scenic vistas
or view corridors. During operations and maintenance of the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative, no channel modifications would occur in Reach 5 and
a portion of Reach 6; therefore, related effects on visual resources would
be reduced along those reaches. Other than vegetation maintenance,
operations would not alter the view or impact the visual quality of the
Project area. The existence of a new bypass under U.S. 101 would be a
new permanent visual change in the area. Additionally, a tunnel would be
constructed similar to the Tunnel Alternative in Reach 8, which would
reduce visual impacts from above-ground locations compared to channel
deepening and widening that would occur under the NRCS Alternative.
Maintenance activities, such as vegetation management, would still occur
along Reach 5 and portions of 6 and 8. The bypass channel would be dry
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-176

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

most of the year, so revegetation would primarily consist of grasses and
xeric shrubs, which would require minimal maintenance. Maintenance
would result in periodic and temporary reduction in the density of
vegetation to maintain channel capacity; however, these changes would
be subtle and would not degrade the overall visual quality of the Project
area. Additionally, there are no designated scenic vistas or view corridors
in the Project area; therefore, no impacts would occur.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would result in a reduced construction
footprint, since there is no construction in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6
but would result in additional construction of a new Bypass connection
under Murphy Avenue and U.S. 101 to connect Reach 14 to Reach 6.
Construction activities would not conflict with local plans and policies on
protecting visual and aesthetic resources with implementation of
mitigation measures as discussed in Chapter 5 of this EIS, impacts would
be less than significant.
For operations and maintenance of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, no
channel modifications would occur in Reach 5 and most of Reach 6;
therefore, visual related effects would not occur along those reaches.
Maintenance activities, such as vegetation management, would still occur
along the existing segments of channel in Reach 5 and portions of 6,
where no construction would occur under this alternative. The Reach 6
Bypass Channel would be dry most of the year, so revegetation would
primarily consist of grasses and xeric shrubs, which would require
minimal maintenance. Where new construction occurs under this
alternative, maintenance would result in periodic and temporary reduction
in the density of vegetation to maintain channel capacity; however, these
changes would be subtle and would not change the overall visual
character or quality of the Project area.
Impacts to Aesthetic Resources for the remaining project reaches (4,
portion of 6, 7a, 7b, 8 and portion of 14) for the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as described and
discussed previously. In addition, after construction, the operations and
maintenance (O&M) activities within these remaining project reaches (4,
portion of 6, 7a, 7b, 8 and portion of 14) associated with the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would be similar to the O&M activities described in the
Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-177

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.13.4 Summary of Impacts to Aesthetic Resources
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Aesthetic Resources are discussed
and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures
for the Alternatives) of this EIS. Although impacts are less than significant
for each of the Alternatives, the level of impacts vary in intensity and
extent as summarized below.
No Action Alternative
No construction is proposed as part of the No Action Alternative.
Continued implementation of the maintenance activities as part of the
SMP would not have long-term aesthetic impacts. No significant
aesthetics related impacts would occur as a result of implementing the No
Action Alternative.
Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)
Aesthetics impacts from the Tunnel Alternative would involve tree
removals, channel widening, channel realignment, staging of materials
and large construction equipment, and other flood improvement activities,
which would change the general appearance of Upper Llagas Creek at
public viewing points. However, construction activities would be
temporary and disturbed areas would be revegetated according to a
revegetation plan. This would be implemented to revegetate and restore
the creek corridor to natural conditions. Immediately after tree removals,
and prior to full establishment after initial revegetation efforts, the Project
area would appear less densely vegetated and the tree canopy would be
reduced. This change would be temporary, but revegetation and
establishment of replanted trees would take place following tree removals,
and in the long term vegetation would eventually reach pre-Project
densities.
Maintenance activities after construction would be subtle and would not
change the overall visual character or quality of the Project area.
Overall aesthetic impacts would be less than the NRCS Alternative in that
there would be no modifications to the channel in Reach 8 through
downtown Morgan Hill with construction of a tunnel, which has high public
viewing opportunities.
NRCS Alternative
Aesthetics impacts would be similar to the Tunnel Alternative but would
be increased with the proposed channel improvements in Reach 8. The
proposed tree removals, as part of construction for all action alternatives,
would change the visual character and visual quality of each reach and
would be considered a significant impact since more than half of the
existing trees within the construction limits would be removed.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-178

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

As compared to the other alternatives, the NRCS Alternative would have
the most visual impacts from construction and operations and
maintenance since channel modifications are proposed for every reach.
Culvert/Channel Alternative
The Culvert/Channel Alternative would have impacts very similar to the
NRCS Alternative, except that through a portion of Reach 8, the amount
of vegetation to be removed along the existing West Little Llagas channel
near downtown City of Morgan Hill would be reduced, thereby, reducing
the extent of impacts compared to the NRCS Alternative. The
Culvert/Channel Alternative would result in more aesthetics impacts than
the Tunnel Alternative and the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative due to the
longer length of channel modifications in Reach 8 near downtown.
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative is most similar to the Tunnel Alternative,
but requires the construction of a new bypass channel under U.S.101,
which would involve construction and operations related visual effects in
the bypass channel area. However, the bypass channel area has low
visual quality and visual sensitivity since it is part of an urbanized area
near a busy interstate freeway. Additionally, there would be no
construction in Reach 5 and portions of Reach 6; and a tunnel would be
constructed in Reach 8, leaving the existing creek channels in these
reaches unmodified. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would reduce the
overall need for vegetation removal and channel modifications and would
have the least amount of aesthetic related impacts as compared to the
other alternatives.
4.14

UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
4.14.1 Introduction
In this section, the focus is on how utilities and public services may be affected by
the various alternatives; and this section will not focus on the potential for the
Project to increase growth and, therefore, increase demand for the various
utilities.
The Project is not expected to increase demand for utility or public services, as
an increase in population attributable to the various alternatives is not anticipated
(Section 3.16 and Section 4.16, Population and Housing). Therefore, the focus of
the analysis is on how the Project may affect the utilities infrastructure. Potential
impacts to utilities due to ground disturbing activity, such as construction, are
assessed. The various alternatives are also analyzed to assess the potential
effect on public services in the Project area. Also, the potential for the alternatives
to impact the delivery of public services, such as increasing the overall
emergency response times, is considered; although, the net change in timing
would vary depending on location, type of emergency, weather, and time of day.
For the purpose of comparing the alternatives’ impacts on solid waste facilities,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-179

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.14-2 shows the estimate of net disposal volume of materials associated
with excavation by alternative. The SCVWD will comply with all regulations
associated with the management of solid waste under all alternatives.
Table 4.14-2 Disposal Volumes by Alternative in Bank Cubic Yards (bcy) 1
No Action
Alternative
Disposal (bcy)

0

NRCS
Alternative
1,339,500

Tunnel
Alternative
1,332,500

Culvert/Channel
Alternative
1,342,000

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative
986,030

1

Table shows disposal (total excavation less the estimated amount to be used on-site for fill). More detailed data is
shown in the Project Description.

4.14.2 No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative, in general, is not expected to lead to direct impacts to
public services and/or utilities within the Project area. However, compared to the
action alternatives, this alternative does subject urbanized portions of Morgan Hill
(Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8) to increased flood risk. Flooding, in turn, may disrupt or
damage existing infrastructure, including utilities.
No construction would occur; therefore, the No Action Alternative would not
damage or displace any utility infrastructure, and no impact would result.
Maintenance activities would continue as under existing conditions. However,
future flooding of the creek could damage or disrupt utility services and other
infrastructure (DWR and USACE 2013), as there is no additional protection from
100-year flooding. This can be especially damaging in a populated area where
the concentration of commercial and residential areas is greater and more utility
infrastructure is present. Under existing conditions, a substantial portion of the
urbanized portion of Morgan Hill, including areas in and around downtown, is
susceptible to flooding under the 100-year flood scenario. Under this scenario,
existing utility infrastructure would likely be damaged during an extreme flood
event and would constitute a significant impact.
No construction would occur; therefore, the No Action Alternative would not
impact landfill capacity. Maintenance activities would continue as under existing
conditions. The No Action Alternative would have no new impact on landfill
capacity. With no construction there would be no impact on public services.
Maintenance would continue under the existing SMP. There would be no impact
to public services.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-180

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.14.3 Action Alternatives

4.14.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

A network of underground and overhead utility lines providing water, gas,
electricity, telecommunications (including fiber-optic lines), sewer, water,
and stormwater drainage, among other utilities identified in Section 2.4.4,
exists within the Project area. The construction of the Tunnel Alternative
would require the abandonment and/or relocation of some of the utility
lines within the Project footprint. These utilities would be protected in
place if they were not removed. Prior to construction, other utilities would
be relocated to maintain service levels currently provided. Sewer lines
and storm drainage facilities may be relocated prior to construction.
Seven wells, not operated by SCVWD, are within 500 feet of the Project
area. There is the possibility that wells providing water for households,
industrial, or agricultural users within or near the Project footprint could be
impacted by interruption to their water service. The interruption of water
service attributable to construction activities is a potentially significant
impact but would be reduced with mitigation.
The construction and excavation under this alternative is expected to
produce about 1.33 million bcy of spoil (see Table 2.5-3). To the extent
possible, excavated materials would be used on-site where fill or soil
materials are needed and for existing or planned projects where fill is
necessary. For example, fill would be needed at Lake Silveira and the
majority of materials would be delivered to Anderson Dam for later use in
a SCVWD earthquake retrofit project, Section 2.5.3.3 provides additional
detail about use of excavated materials and quantities. A small portion of
construction-related earth materials, that may not be suitable for use in
the Anderson Dam retrofit project, would go to local landfills. The exact
amount going to the landfill would depend on the construction
specifications for both the Proposed Project and the Anderson Dam
Project neither of which has been defined at the time. Currently, landfills
serving Santa Clara County have sufficient capacity to accept the
remaining amount of non-reusable spoil that assumed to be transferred to
a landfill as there will be 46,814,938 tons of surplus capacity in the year
2020, assuming a middle growth scenario (Cal Recycle 2013). Assuming
10 percent of total Project-generated excavation spoils, about 130,000
bcy (162,000 tons) would go to a landfill, the waste input from the Tunnel
Alternative would be 0.3 percent of the space available and, therefore, the
impact is less than significant.
Construction of the Project would not require the construction of additional
public service facilities or impact existing physical resources used to
deliver these public services. The Project would not substantively
increase permanent population, increase the demand for protective
service, education facilities or services, and would not be growth inducing
because the Project would not substantively increase permanent
population, increase the demand for protective service, education facilities
or services, and would not be growth inducing (Section 3.16, Population
and Housing). However, construction activities would be in the proximity
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-181

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

of electric utility lines and underground pipelines. Even with the
implementation of safety procedures, construction activities increase the
probability of rupture and even an explosion especially if natural gas lines
were damaged. If this were to occur, demand for emergency services,
including police and fire, would likely be needed. Additionally, potential
temporary road closures associated with Project construction have the
possibility of increasing response times for emergency services, including
police and fire. Both of these factors would result in a significant impact on
public services but would be reduced with mitigation.
The operations and maintenance of the Tunnel Alternative would not
damage or displace existing utility infrastructure, would not impact public
services in the Project area, because no operations would be interfering
with utilities or emergency services due to the availability of maintenance
roads after construction. The operations and maintenance of the Tunnel
Alternative would not impact landfills, because the amount of waste would
be minimal because the channel design will be more stable than existing
conditions and historically maintenance has been infrequent as described
in Section 2.3. Sediment maintenance has occurred as frequent as once
every 4–10 years and vegetation would be chipped or composted landfills
serving Santa Clara County currently have sufficient capacity.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.14.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

The activities, impacts, and mitigation measures under the NRCS
Alternative are expected to be similar to the Tunnel Alternative. However,
this alternative would result in a greater impact to utilities compared to the
Tunnel Alternative, because the Project footprint is larger within Reach 8.
The construction and excavation under this alternative is expected to
produce about 1.34 million bcy of spoil (see Table 2.5-3). To the extent
possible, excavated materials would be used on-site where fill or soil
materials are needed and for existing or planned projects where fill is
necessary.
Impacts to Utilities and Public Services are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition, after
construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be
similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-182

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.14.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

The impacts and mitigations under the Culvert/Channel Alternative are
expected to be similar to the Tunnel Alternative, although the Project
footprint is reduced within Reach 8. Additionally, this alternative would
place a box culvert below a school field, so below ground utilities, if any, in
the vicinity of the ball fields may be impacted.
The construction of the Culvert/Channel Alternative would not impact
public services in the Project area. The Project would not require the
construction of additional public service facilities or impact existing
physical resources used to deliver these public services, the Project
would not substantively increase permanent population, increase the
demand for protective service, education facilities or services and would
not be growth inducing (Section 3.16, Population and Housing). The
Project would temporarily limit access to the ball fields, adjacent to Britton
Middle School; however, this is not anticipated to impact the school itself.
The impact to the ball fields is addressed in detail in Section 4.15,
Recreation Resources
The construction and excavation under this alternative is expected to
produce about 1.34 million bcy of spoil (see Table 2.5-3). To the extent
possible, excavated materials would be used on site where fill or soil
materials are needed and for existing or planned projects where fill is
necessary.
Impacts to Utilities and Public Services, not described above, are similar
to the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.14.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

The impacts and mitigation measures under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative are expected to be similar to the Tunnel Alternative. However,
compared with the Tunnel Alternative, there is no construction along
Reach 5 and limited construction along Reach 6, so that utilities along
these reaches, and the potential extent of related impacts would be less
compared with the Tunnel Alternative. For example, six wells along Reach
6, potentially impacted under the other alternatives, would not be affected
under this alternative; three of these wells are SCVWD-owned while the
other three are water supply/irrigation wells. Therefore, there are four
wells, not owned by SCVWD, potentially impacted under this alternative.
A network of underground and overhead utility lines providing water, gas,
electricity, telecommunications (including fiber-optic lines), sewer, water,
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-183

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

and stormwater drainage, among other utilities, exists within the Project
area. Construction conducted under this alternative would require the
abandonment and/or relocation of some of the utility lines within the
Project footprint. However, the amount of utilities removed under this
alternative would be less than under the Tunnel Alternative. These utilities
would be protected in place if they were not removed. Prior to
construction, other utilities would be relocated to maintain service levels
currently provided. There is the possibility that wells providing water for
households, industrial, or agricultural users within or near the Project
footprint could be impacted by interruption to their water service. The
interruption of water service attributable to construction activities is a
potentially significant impact. Potential impacts to utilities would be
mitigated through the implementation of mitigation measures described in
Chapter 5 of this EIS, which requires the replacement of affected wells.
The construction and excavation under this alternative is expected to
produce less than 0.99 million bcy of spoil (see Table 2.5-3). To the extent
possible, excavated materials would be used onsite where fill or soil
materials are needed and for existing or planned projects where fill is
necessary.
Impacts to Utilities and Public Services, not described above, are similar
to the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.14.4 Summary of Impacts to Utilities and Public Services
Two less-than-significant impacts with proposed mitigations were identified for
each of the action alternatives. The first impact relates to the potential for wells to
be decommissioned as a result of Project construction. The mitigation requires
replacement with operating wells. Second, a significant impact was identified in
relation to potential utility rupture associated with Project construction and the
possibility that public services, such as police and fire, may be impacted due to
delays in response time. The impact is reduced to less than significant with
mitigation by requiring the development of an emergency response plan and
notification.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Utilities and Public Services are discussed
and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-184

Chapter 4

4.15

Environmental Consequences

RECREATION RESOURCES
4.15.1 Introduction
This section assesses if the alternatives have the potential to physically impact
existing recreational resources in the Project area, such as parks or trails located
within the Project footprint, which may be impacted by construction.
Impacts attributable to construction activities, such as potentially diminishing
access to recreational opportunities, are considered. For this analysis, the
proximity of the Project footprint to recreational resources is considered; and if a
park or other recreational resource is within the footprint, the potential for an
impact exists. Therefore, an additional impact category (Location of Project
Features) is added for each action alternative to account for areas where there is
the possibility of Project features permanently replacing existing features such
as, in this case, parklands or trails.
In general, the park facilities within the Project footprint are along Reaches 7A,
7B, and 8. A facility impacted by the Project may negatively affect the users’
experience or result in users choosing to visit another facility in the region and
potentially adversely impact the outlying locations. Impacts to the West Little
Llagas Creek Trail is considered in light of the Joint Use Agreement between the
City of Morgan Hill and the SCVWD.
Lake Silveira would be partially filled as part of Project and be converted into
wetlands. This would change the conditions at the lake; however, Lake Silveira is
not currently a sanctioned recreation facility and access is only provided
informally. Changes at Lake Silveira are not discussed in the impact analysis for
each alternative, as the changes would be the same under each action.
4.15.2 No Action Alternative
This alternative would not affect recreational resources within the Project area.
The only concern would be recreational resources within the City of Morgan Hill
would be at a greater risk of damage due to flooding compared with the action
alternatives; however, any impact would be temporary.
There will not be any construction activities under the No Action Alternative and,
thus, the alternative would not disrupt access to recreational resources in the
Project area.
Periodic maintenance activities, conducted with implementation of SCVWD
BMPs, would continue along streamside trails and, at times, trail access would be
temporarily affected as maintenance occurs under the existing SMP.
Maintenance activities under the No Action Alternative would not permanently
disrupt access to recreational resources in the Project area; therefore, due to
short-term interruptions the impact would be less than significant. There is the
possibility that recreational facilities could be inundated as a result of flooding.
This impact would be temporary and is not likely to physically deteriorate
recreational resources. The potential impact is less than significant.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-185

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

There would not be construction activities under the No Action Alternative and,
thus, the alternative would not result in the displacement of potential recreational
users.
Maintenance activities under the No Action Alternative would not result in the
displacement of potential recreational users. However, there is the possibility that
park and trail users could be displaced from areas within the flood inundation
zone as a result of flooding. This impact would be temporary and is not likely to
physically deteriorate other existing recreational resources. Therefore, the impact
would be less than significant.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.15.3 Action Alternatives

4.15.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

Construction activities associated with the Tunnel Alternative would
create temporary impacts to recreation resources due to noise, visual
quality issues, or traffic attributable to construction related activities.
Additionally, this alternative has the potential to impact parklands and
trails if construction occurs on or around these facilities given the
proximity of the Project to recreational facilities along Reaches 7A, 7B,
and 8.
The West Little Llagas Creek Trail, on land owned by SCVWD, would be
inaccessible during times of construction. However, the trail currently
operates under a Joint Use Agreement that states that the purpose of the
trail is secondary to flood management activities and the understanding is
the trail could be affected by these activities. Also, use of maintenance
roads, although unpaved, would be available after the Project construction
is complete. This alternative also has the potential to impact parklands if
construction occurs on or around these facilities given the proximity of the
Project to recreational facilities along Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8. Parklands
that are both not owned by SCVWD and in close proximity to the Project
footprint, include the Centennial Recreation Center, Galvan Park, and the
Britton ball fields. The possibility exists that Project construction would
impact these parklands and constitutes a significant impact. These
impacts would be reduced to less than significant with the incorporation of
mitigation discussed in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
Recreational facilities (Centennial Recreation Center and Galvan Park)
are very close to the Project footprint, as are the ballpark fields adjacent
to Britton Middle School; however, recreational facilities, not under the
jurisdiction of the SCVWD, would not be permanently converted to nonrecreational uses. The West Little Llagas Creek Trail is also within the
Project footprint. The paved trail and landscaping would be removed, as
flood management activities would occur in these areas. Although after
construction, maintenance roads could continue to provide access for
recreational trail users in and around Llagas Creek. Given the possibility
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-186

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

that the trail would be converted to an aggregate base road, this would
have a significant impact to recreational resources. However, the impact
would be reduced to the less than significant with the incorporation of
mitigation measures as discussed in Chapter 5 of this EIS.
During the Draft EIS Notice of Intent (NOI) comment period, the USACE
received a letter National Park Service, dated October 23, 2015 (See
Appendix A), requesting this EIS analyze and address any potential
impacts to the Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail. The
Applicant (SCVWD) has discussed with and held previous meetings with
the County of Santa Clara Parks and the City of Morgan Hill staffs
regarding future trails within Reaches 7A, 7B, and Reach 8 for the
proposed project in accordance with the planning, design, and
preparation of this EIS. The Applicant's Proposed Action is consistent
with both the County's and City's Master Plans regarding Recreation
Trails within the project area and will not impact any portion of the Juan
Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail. The Applicant's Proposed Action
does not include the construction of any recreation trails, but the
Proposed Action may support future recreation trails constructed by the
County and/or City, or other authorized party, subject to proper approvals
from the various governing and jurisdictional agencies.
Periodic maintenance activities would lead to short periods where the
maintenance roads used as trails are inaccessible, as occurs under the
existing SMP. The operations and maintenance of this alternative would
have a less-than-significant impact on recreational resources due to these
short-term and temporary interruptions in recreation availability.
Visitors may choose to visit other recreational opportunities in the region
to avoid the temporary impact due to construction. However, the region
has ample regional recreational opportunities and the impact to facilities
outside of the Project footprint would not expected to be significant.
Recreationists visiting other locations due to changes in the Project
footprint are expected be minimal, because the main feature to change is
the West Little Llagas Trail would be unpaved. Furthermore, there are
ample regional recreational opportunities, as described in Section 3.15.3
and shown on Figure 3.15-1. The amount of additional use, if any, at
outlying recreational areas would be negligible compared to the available
area for recreation. Therefore, the impact would be less than significant.
The operations and maintenance of this alternative would require periodic
closures to trails. However, these closures would be temporary and be
incorporated with trail management-related BMPs. Therefore, the impact
to recreational resources would be less than significant and would not
require mitigation.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-187

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.15.1.3

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

Construction activities associated with the NRCS Alternative would create
temporary impacts to recreation resources due to noise, visual quality
issues, or traffic attributable to construction related activities. Additionally,
this alternative has the potential to impact parklands and trails if
construction occurs on or around these facilities given the proximity of the
Project to recreational facilities along Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8. This
alternative would widen and deepen the creek along Reach 8.
Impacts to Recreation Resources are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as
described and discussed previously. In addition, after construction, the
operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be similar to the
O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.15.1.4

Culvert/Channel Alternative

In general, the impacts and mitigation measures under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative, would be similar as under the Tunnel
Alternative, with the exception that the impact to the ballpark fields near
Britton Middle School would likely be more substantial and of a longer
duration to account for burying the culvert under the field. Therefore, the
Culvert/Channel Alternative would have greater impacts to Recreation
Resources than the other Action Alternatives.
The City of Morgan Hill Parks and Recreation Department offers to the
public a softball program with a significant amount of players and teams
enrolled in this program each year. However, currently most games are
scheduled at their Community Park near Monterey Road, located off of
Edmundson Avenue. However, teams utilize these ballpark fields near
Britton Middle School for games and as a practice site. The
Culvert/Channel Alternative would require the City to play additional
games at other sites, specifically Community Park and likely reduce the
available fields available for opportunities to practice. Finding other
locations while this Alternative is under construction through the ballpark
fields near Britton Middle School would be a temporary impact.
Impacts to Recreation Resources, not described above, are similar to the
Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition,
after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities
would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-188

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.15.1.5

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

The impacts and mitigation measures under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative would be similar as under the Tunnel Alternative, because the
recreational facilities are located on reaches that would undergo the same
construction activities for both alternatives. There are no recreational
facilities in the footprint or adjacent to the Reach 6 bypass channel.
Impacts to Recreation Resources are similar to the Tunnel Alternative as
described and discussed previously. In addition, after construction, the
operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be similar to the
O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.15.4 Summary of Impacts to Recreation Resources
Impacts to recreational resources under all of the action alternatives were
identified in association with construction, and location of Project features with all
action alternatives having similar impacts, except for the Culvert/Channel
Alternative, where the impacts will be greater due to impacts to the recreation
fields near Britton Middle School.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Recreation Resources are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.16

POPULATION AND HOUSING
4.16.1 Introduction
In this section, the potential impacts of the various alternatives are assessed
related to population and housing.
The implications to population and housing resources are evaluated for each of
the alternatives are considered. The analysis also includes potential impacts due
to both construction and operations and maintenance activities. For population
growth, the anticipated new long-term employment opportunities are the focus of
the analysis. Most of the new construction related employment would be filled by
existing construction workers within Santa Clara County and its adjacent counties
(see Section 3.17.3.1 and Table 4.17.11). For the purpose of analyzing
population growth, these jobs have been assumed to be filled by individuals new
to the region. Long-term operations and maintenance employment opportunities
would be filled by existing employees performing existing SMP work. Based on
the information presented in Chapter 2 (see Tables 2.5-2 and 2.5-4), Table 4.164a lists the maximum annual construction employment by alternative. For
population and housing, the potential displacement of housing and individuals

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-189

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

living in the Project footprint is the focus of the analysis. Table 4.16-4b lists the
number of residences to be moved or removed by alternative.
Table 4.16-4a Project-related construction employment (Maximum/year) 1,2
Construction
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6

No Action
Alternative
0
0
0
0
0
0

Tunnel
Alternative
107
261
256
159
112
48

NRCS
Alternative
107
245
240
143
96
48

Culvert/Channel
Alternative
107
245
240
143
96
48

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative
107
261
256
201
154
0

1

Excavation and non-excavation construction occupations.
These estimates reflect maximum annual construction employment, because Table 2.5-4 counts the same employee
in each reach where the employee is required regardless if construction phases are overlapping and the same
employee may work in multiple reaches simultaneously. While these estimates do not include the laborers required for
the Lake Silveira portion of the Project (estimates have not been developed at this time), labor needs for construction
and restoration activities are expected to be a small fraction of the construction labor required for the channel
widening/deepening and infrastructure modifications portion and would not vary among the action alternatives.
2

Table 4.16-4b Residential Structures Located Within Project Footprint
Reach
4
5
6
7A
7B
8
14
Total by Action

No Action
Alternative
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Tunnel
Alternative
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
3

NRCS
Alternative
0
0
2
0
1
9
0
12

Culvert/Channel
Alternative
0
0
2
0
1
4
0
7

Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
3

4.16.2 No Action Alternative
The No Action Alternative would not result in changed conditions related to
housing and population in the Project area. As it is, population has been growing
steadily within the general vicinity of the Project regardless of the existing flood
management conditions. It appears that population growth within the Project area
is influenced more by employment opportunities linked to the Silicon Valley rather
than risk associated with flooding. Therefore, the No Action Alternative is not
expected to induce population growth and would not displace housing or people
within the Project area, and there is no impact.
Stream maintenance would continue under the SCVWD’s SMP. Since this is an
ongoing program and no new workers would be needed to continue this work
there would be no impact to population and housing under this alternative. In

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-190

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

addition, maintenance activities would not displace housing, because the removal
of homes is not necessary to complete these activities.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.16.3 Action Alternatives

4.16.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

The Tunnel Alternative is anticipated to employ a maximum of
approximately 260 construction workers, 157 per year on average.
The number of workers who may relocate to the area is not expected to
induce substantial population growth (see section 3.16.1 for workforce
information). Many of the workers would likely already live in the general
vicinity of the Project (see Section 3.17.3.1 and Table 3.17.11). Even if all
260 workers and their family members moved into the Project area, the
population growth would be less than 1 percent of the 2010 population in
the combined Morgan Hill, Gilroy, and San Martin area. One aspect of the
Project is to reduce the area subject to flood, suggesting that additional
areas may be open to residential development. However, the amount of
land potentially protected by the Project is relatively small compared to
the undeveloped or existing agricultural lands in south Santa Clara
County. Additionally, population growth in the region is driven more by
regional factors, such as job creation in the Silicon Valley. Therefore, this
alternative is not expected to induce substantial population growth and
therefore there is no impact.
This alternative is expected to displace three residences and,
subsequently, the residents within the households. Two of the residences
are currently owned by the Applicant (SCVWD) where the tenants are
continuously advised of the Project status as to when the tenants will be
required to find additional housing. Local General Plans (Housing
Elements) call for the maintenance of the existing housing stock,
suggesting that removing households could be an impact. However, the
total number of impacted residences represents less than 0.1 percent of
the total households in the combined Morgan Hill, Gilroy, and San Martin
area. The owner of the residence not owned by the Applicant would be
compensated at fair market value for their property and would be able to
acquire a replacement residence.
Since Project-related operations and maintenance would be similar to the
ongoing program, no new workers would be needed. Further, the
operations and maintenance of the Project under the Tunnel Alternative is
not expected to induce substantial population growth nor is this
Alternative expected to displace existing housing or people, because
housing will not be removed with these actions; resulting in no impact.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-191

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.16.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

The NRCS Alternative would result in the displacement of individuals who
live in 12 residences, including the tenants of 2 residences currently
owned by the Applicant. This is more than the other action alternatives.
The NRCS Alternative is anticipated to employ a maximum of
approximately 245 construction workers, 147 per year on average.
Impacts to Population and Housing, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.16.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Impacts under the Culvert/Channel Alternative would generally be the
same as the Tunnel Alternative, but 7 residences would be removed. This
is less than the NRCS Alternative but more the Tunnel Alternative and the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative. The Culvert/Channel Alternative would
employ a maximum of approximately 245 construction workers, 147 per
year on average.
Impacts to Population and Housing, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.16.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

The impacts under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative are expected to be the
same as the Tunnel Alternative, since this alternative would displace
three residences due to construction. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
would employ a maximum of approximately 260 construction workers, 163
per year on average.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-192

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Impacts to Population and Housing, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.16.4 Summary of Impacts to Population and Housing
One less-than-significant impact was identified for each of the action alternatives.
The less-than- significant impact is associated with the removal of residences,
and the subsequent displacement of the residents due to construction of the
various proposed Project features. The Tunnel Alternative and the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would result in the displacement of individuals who live in
three residences which is less than the NRCS (12 residences) and
Culvert/Channel (7 residences) Alternatives.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Population and Housing are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.17

SOCIOECONOMIC RESOURCES
This section analyzes potential impacts of the Proposed Project on social and economic
(socioeconomic) resources within the Project area. Impacts to specific components of
socioeconomic characteristics including population, housing, land use, recreation, and
public utilities are addressed in other section of the EIS. Impacts to employment, income,
taxes, and similar socioeconomic factors associated with each of the Project alternatives
are identified and assessed in this section relative to the existing condition of the
potentially affected socioeconomic resources. A set of criteria is developed for evaluating
the significance of each impact.
4.17.1 Introduction
Impacts on socioeconomics resources were evaluated by determining whether
and how Project activities and features are likely to affect stocks, flows, and
values of social and economic assets in the Project area and comparing any
changes to existing conditions of those parameters. Effects on socioeconomic
resources can be direct, as in reductions in the stock of available housing, and
indirect, as in the cost of housing, which can increase over the long-term if
population growth continues but the housing stock is not replaced or if future
development is constrained by the Project. While quantifiable metrics and
estimates were formed for parts of the evaluation, constraints on data availability,
and detail of available data resulted in a mostly qualitative analysis using the
application of economic theory and principles.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-193

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

It is important to understand that some features of the Project can accrue
beneficial impacts to socioeconomic resources. An economic analysis of flood
protection benefits prepared by the USACE in 1982 estimated annual flood
damage reduction on the order of $2 to 2.5 million in present value dollars. The
valuation is based on avoided property damage or destruction, and avoided
destruction or damage to businesses including commercial agriculture. It is likely
an understatement of the value of the project given the substantial population
growth and changes in land use patterns in the Project area since the time of the
USACE study. Expenditures on construction labor, materials, and supporting
goods and services from businesses within the Project area will stimulate the
local economy. While the dollar amounts of these beneficial impacts are not
quantified in this study, it can be concluded that these benefits will not accrue
under the No Action Alternative.
4.17.2 No Action Alternative
There would be no impact from construction. No construction activity would
occur; thus, there would be no demand for short-term labor housing. No
acquisitions would be necessary to secure Project ROW; thus, there is no
potential to deplete the housing stock to the point of causing a housing shortage.
Flood capacity in the upper reaches would remain unchanged and intermittent
flood events would continue to occur. There is no evidence suggesting
substantial portions of the housing stock have been destroyed during past flood
events without replacement; thus, there is no basis to conclude continued
flooding would create a housing shortage. This is particularly true given the
population growth and housing development experienced in the area over in spite
of flooding. However, it is worth noting, the largest flood on record was a 33-year
flood event in 1955 before the recent flooding in 2008 thought to be a 60-year
event (flood damages were been finalized).
Without construction and associated acquisitions for Project right of way, there is
no potential for physical loss of real property. Although intermittent flood events
would continue, there is no evidence of substantial physical loss of real property
during historical flooding (although property damage has occurred). However,
without the Project, properties in the upper reaches would remain in the flood
plain and will continue depressed property values relative to those of similar
properties outside of the flood plain (Bin and Polasky 2004; MacDonald,
Murdoch, and White 1987). No original study was conducted for this EIS to
quantify the dollar amount of property value diminution of properties located
within the flood plain along the upper reaches.
There would be no impact from construction as no construction would occur and
therefore no construction jobs would be supported. No spending on goods,
services, and raw materials by construction laborers and the Project would occur
and, thus, no jobs or income would be indirectly supported. Flood capacity would
remain unchanged and intermittent flooding would occur. While businesses have
closed during previous flood events, no data support that historical flooding has
substantially reduced employment or income within the Project area2.

2

Reports indicate business in an around downtown Morgan Hill shuttered for days during recent flooding during 2008 and 2009

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-194

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The impact from no construction would be significant and unavoidable. Even
though no construction would occur, no structures are in the Project right of way,
and there is no potential to close businesses, flood capacity would remain
unchanged and intermittent flooding would continue. Evidence from recent
flooding suggests that business operations in an around Reach 8 were closed,
preventing the sale of goods and services in the interim. Closure or destruction of
businesses, including crop loss, will continue without increased flood protection.
In addition, since no construction activity would occur and no existing residential,
commercial, and agricultural structures would be acquired, there would be no
potential for reductions in taxable sales revenue or taxable property values.
However, flood capacity would remain unchanged and intermittent flood events
would continue. Properties in the upper reaches would remain in the flood plain,
experiencing depressed property values relative to similar properties outside the
flood plain. Flooding would continue to result in forgone sales tax revenue, as
businesses in and around the upper reaches would continue to shutter due to
encroaching flood waters.
The nature of existing operations and maintenance of Upper Llagas Creek and its
tributaries is such that there is no potential to deplete the housing stock, not
anticipated to induce population growth, no potential for substantial loss of real
property for substantial reductions in employment or income, no potential for
displacement of substantial disruption of business operations, and no potential
for reductions in the supply of fiscal resources. It is assumed existing operations
are optimal and the existing channel adequately maintained. Therefore, flood
capacity of the existing channel is expected to be the source of continued
intermittent flooding, rather than operations and maintenance.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.17.3 Action Alternatives

4.17.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

As described in Section 3.16, Population and Housing, Table 4.16-4b, the
3 residences within the Project right of way for this alternative represent a
very small percentage of overall housing stock in the communities of
Morgan Hill, San Martin and Gilroy (a combined value of 25,365 units as
of 2010). In addition, the vacancy rate of these communities (2.6% for the
combined areas as of 2010) indicates that there are an estimated 653
available units; therefore, the loss of 3 units would not substantially affect
the vacancy rate.
Construction labor would be expected to be sourced locally within the
Project area or in nearby population centers within a reasonable daily
commute, or to locate in extended-stay lodging facilities. The demand for
Project construction labor for the Tunnel Alternative would vary over the
(SCVWD 2010). This may have resulted in reduced income for hourly employments and some level of reduced spending within the
economy, but not likely a substantial reduction when taken in the context of Morgan Hill generally or the rest of the Project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-195

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

estimated 6-year construction period, averaging approximately 157
laborers annually and approximately 260 at peak construction during year
2 (see Table 4.16-4a)3. This includes construction laborers, foremen,
managers, superintendents, office staff, skilled construction machinery
operators, carpenters, road workers, landscapers, arborists, and truck
drivers. The San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara MSA employs relevant
Project construction labor occupations anywhere from 27 to 102 percent
of the national average (BLS 2011b)4. However, this would partly be a
function of industry characteristics and labor demand in the region and
does not necessarily identify a labor shortage.
Table 4.17.11 displays estimates of the Project construction labor force in
the Project area and nearby population centers well within the range of a
typical daily commute5. In total, there are 1,629 persons in the Project
area employed in a construction labor occupation considered relevant for
the Project; 127 employed in truck driving occupations considered
relevant to the Project and 164 employed in other occupations considered
relevant to the Project. Within 40 miles one-way from the Project area,
there are an additional 15,371 persons employed in relevant construction
occupations, 1,974 employed in relevant truck driving occupations, and
2,568 employed in other relevant occupations. At its peak, the Project
would require approximately 11 percent of the relevant construction labor
force within the Project area and just 1 percent of the relevant
construction labor force within the Project area and nearby population
centers. Similarly, the Project would require 40 percent of the relevant
truck driving labor force and 23 percent of the relevant labor force in other
occupations in the Project area, while requiring only 3 percent of the
relevant truck driving labor force and 1 percent of the relevant labor force
in other occupations in the Project area and nearby population centers.
The current and future utilization of the existing labor force is unknown.
Further, data show that employment in occupations relevant to Project
construction in the San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara MSA is expected to
increase between 2010 and 2020, with annual increases ranging from 1
to 3 percent. Taking these facts together, there is not likely to be labor
shortages within the Project area by meeting demand for Project labor,
and certainly not when considering the labor force in nearby population
centers6.

3

This estimate and those for following action alternatives should be viewed as an upper-bound on estimated construction labor
required at any time during the Project, as they do not explicitly account for the same employee working to fill the same job
requirement in multiple reaches simultaneously when construction phases overlap (see notes in Table 4.16-4a). This estimate does
not include the laborers required for the Lake Silveira portion of the Project, as estimates have not been developed at this time.
However, labor needs for Lake Silveira construction and restoration activities are expected to be a small fraction of the labor required
for the channel widening/deepening and infrastructure modifications, and would not vary by action alternative.
4
Occupations listed in the work crew estimate provided RMC Water and Environment correspond to Bureau of Labor Statistics
Occupational Category Codes: 11-9021, 37-3011, 43-6014, 47-1011, 47-2031, 47-2061, 47-2071, 43-2073, 47-4051, and 53-3032.
The percentages reflect the range of location quotients reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for these individual occupational
categories.
5
San Jose, CA, Salinas, CA, and Hollister, CA range from 16 to 39 miles one-way (32 to 78 miles round-trip) to the
cities/communities within the Project area. San Jose is closest to Morgan Hill at 22 miles and furthest from Gilroy at 32 miles.
6
Each of the calculated proportions is an upper bound. First, the analysis uses the peak labor requirement, not the average annual
labor. Second, the number of workers required for the Project used for the calculation is not the number of unique individuals,
because the data reported in Table 2.4-4 does not identify unique individuals but rather job requirements in each reach, regardless of

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-196

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.17.11 Estimates of the Project Construction Labor Force in the Project area and
Nearby Population Centers
Number Employed in Occupations Considered Relevant for the
Proposed Project Area
Construction
Truck Driving
Other
Project Area
Morgan Hill
533
San Martin
188
Gilroy
908
Subtotal
1,629
Nearby Population Centers
San Jose
13,135
Hollister
522
Salinas
1,715
Subtotal
15,371
Total
17,001

42
31
54
127

82
11
71
164

1,658
59
257
1,974
2,101

2,350
38
180
2,568
2,732

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-11 American Community Survey; Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2011
Occupational Employment Survey.

Although the degree of Project labor in-migration is unknown, it is not
expected to create a housing shortage. For the purpose of making this
determination, it was assumed all laborers at peak construction and their
families relocate into the Project area. At the average family size of 3.3,
this would amount to an influx of approximately 860 people, requiring
approximately 260 housing units7. This potential worst-case demand
could be readily accommodated in the existing Project area housing
stock, which has about 650 vacant housing units8.
Increased flood capacity resulting from Project construction would not
induce population growth to the point of causing a housing shortage.
Population growth in the Project area is determined more by job
opportunities in the Silicon Valley in northern Santa Clara County and the
relative affordability of housing in the Project area. The population of the
Project area has increased substantially in recent decades, despite
intermittent flooding and in particular the severe floods of 1997 and 1998,
after which the population continued to grow substantially (Section
3.15.3.1; Table 3.16-1, Population Trends for Communities in the Vicinity
of Project area). Further, flood protection created by the Project would
largely protect existing residential land use (60%) and land designated as
open space (20%). As a result, the potential for additional housing
whether one individual may work in multiple reaches simultaneously during the Project.
7
261 laborers at peak construction each having the average family size of 3.3 persons is 861 persons total. At the average family
size per housing unit, 3.3, the number of housing units required is the same as the number of laborers, 261.
8

This analysis does not account for the incremental Project labor required for the Lake Silveira portion of the Project. Although
estimates of labor requirements for Lake Silveira are not available at this time, it is not expected that Lake Silveira will contribute to a
housing shortage. As the aforementioned analysis shows the vacant housing units in the Project area could absorb more than
double the in-migration of labor required for the channel widening/deepening and infrastructure modifications portion of the Project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-197

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

development within and around Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B is limited (Section
3.8 and Section 4.8, Land Use; Table 4.8-5, Land Use Designations
Flooded under the Various Alternatives (Acres); Figure 3.8-1a, Land Use
in the Project Vicinity). Even if undeveloped land were developed as a
result of flood protection, the number of housing units added would by
nature determine the population growth that could be supported.
Acquisition of Project right of way would displace 43 structures; 3
residential homes, 11 greenhouses, 21 outbuildings, and 5 structures of
unknown type (see Table 2.5-1). In addition, some amount of currently
undeveloped land that is zoned for residential use or conversion to higher
density residential use would not be available for development over time.
The affected structures and presently undeveloped acreage comprise a
very small portion of real property in the Project area. The SCVWD would
obtain property appraisals and compensate affected owners in an amount
reflecting fair market value of the property.
Potential impacts to property values associated with construction activities
would be less than significant. Construction activities would not be
expected to substantially reduce the quantity of real property in the
Project area. Staging areas for construction activities are completely
within SCVWD right of way. In theory, construction activities could reduce
property values if indirect effects, such as noise, traffic, or air quality
degradation, are sufficient to reduce the demand for occupancy. Changes
in these parameters would not be expected to substantially reduce
property values in the Project area, because Project construction would
be temporary and dynamic throughout the Project area. Further, evidence
suggests these parameters are not major determinants in the demand for
housing or business location decisions, as temporary infrastructure
construction projects are commonplace throughout the San Francisco
Bay Area where property values are driven mainly by supply of housing
and the demand created by income generated by employment in the area
and where hundreds of thousands of business locate.
The long-term increased flood capacity resulting from the Project would
be beneficial to property values. Although this study has not determined
the dollar value of this benefit, the entire area in and around Reaches 8,
7B, and 7A would be virtually removed from the 1-percent flood extent. As
with other infrastructure and public safety improvements, reductions in
flood risk to existing residential property can increase property values
over the long-term. In addition, property ownership costs associated with
insurance supplements paid to the FEMA would likely be reduced (Public
Scoping Meeting 2012).
Reductions in flood risk can reduce constraints on developable land, and
if developed over the long term, property values in the area are likely to
increase. Increased investment in business and industry can also raise
property values in the Project area.
Construction would have a beneficial impact on employment and income
levels. Although complete details on Project labor requirements are
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-198

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

unknown at this time, it is estimated construction will directly support
approximately 157 jobs (on average) and associated income. During
construction, laborers in the area would spend money within the local
economy. This direct spending ripples backward through industry sectors
within the local economy, indirectly supporting jobs and income and
inducing spending and hiring. The benefits may be incremental if the
laborers spending money would otherwise not be fully employed, or if
they commute into the Project area from nearby population centers.
Additionally, raw materials and support services of an unknown sum
necessary for construction would be sourced with local businesses, if
available. This spending would support local jobs and provide income to
local proprietors that would circulate through the economy.
The impact level associated with increased flood capacity would be
considered beneficial, assuming that reductions in flood risk spur
investment and economic growth in Morgan Hill. This conclusion is based
on the recognition of flood protection as one of the determining factors in
the future economic development of Morgan Hill. It is noted that this study
forms no formal economic model of employment to determine whether
any increases in economic growth would exist and the level of
employment supported.
Acquisition of Project right of way would displace 11 greenhouses in San
Martin and Gilroy near Reaches 4 (1 greenhouse), 6 (9 greenhouses),
and 14 (1 greenhouse). At over $80 million annually, greenhouse nursery
production is the highest gross value crop in Santa Clara County. While
these displacements are not expected to be substantially disruptive of
business within the Project area as a whole, they could result in
substantial disruptions to individual operations and owners. Relocation
efforts, complying with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, would ensure the business
operations are not significantly affected and owners are appropriately
compensated for the disruption during relocation. Any business closure
associated with relocation would be temporary. There is no additional
mitigation required beyond compliance with the Act.
However, to mitigate impacts to greenhouse corps, besides
compensating the owners for their land, for the improvements
(greenhouse structures and any appurtenances) within the required
project right of way, compensation is also be granted for the loss of the
crops/plants in their growing cycle is beyond a year. For crops with a
year or less growing cycle, included in the acquisition process, the
Applicant will issue the owner a permit to allow the owner operate and
maintain their greenhouse until the crops/plants have been harvested.
Total productive crop acreage in the Project footprint subject to
permanent conversion was approximately 21 acres in 2013 (see Table
3.7-4, Summary of Crops Grown in Project Footprint Subject to
Permanent Conversion (2013)). As noted in Section 3.7.1, Agricultural
and Forestry Resources, this estimate does not include organic crops,
fallow acreage, crops otherwise not treated with pesticides, or multiple
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-199

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

crops within a season. However, even with these caveats, this acreage
represents only a fraction of 1 percent of the $260.8 million value of
agricultural production in Santa Clara County during 2012 9. The
displacement of productive agricultural acres and associated assets are
not expected to be substantially disruptive of agricultural business within
the Project area as a whole; however, they could result in substantial
disruptions to individual agricultural operations and owners. The SCVWD
will compensate the affected landowners for conversion of crop acreage.
Potential short-term impacts to local businesses due to construction
activities would be less than significant. A qualitative analysis is provided
here, because estimates of lost operational hours over the course of the
Project have not been quantified for this study. Direct sources of business
disruption can include utility relocation, which forces shutdown or partial
shutdown of an operation, resulting in reduced production or patronage.
Potential indirect impacts include reduced distribution capabilities or
patronage induced by traffic, noise, road closures, and detours. Specific
examples of business disruption could include:


Location of a staging area on 0.38 acre near the Nature Quality
Inc., food-processing plant, where construction traffic would be
located near the plant.



Utility relocation at the Nature Quality Inc., food-processing plant,
requiring parking structures to be relocated.



Worker vehicle and construction equipment (traffic) near
businesses.

The BMPs as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS includes features that
would help mitigate unintended consequences of Project traffic on local
business10.
The potential long-term impacts to local businesses associated with
increased flood capacity would be beneficial. Historical flooding in and
around Reaches 8, 7B, and 7A have caused businesses to shut- down
and prevented access to those remaining open. The dollar value
associated with this impact has not been determined for this study.
However, flood protection is recognized as one of the determining factors
in the quality and pace of future economic development in downtown
Morgan Hill (City of Morgan Hill 2009).
The potential impacts to local fiscal resources (primarily, property tax
revenue and sales tax revenue) due to the acquisition of Project right of
way would be minor in the context of the overall socioeconomics Project
area. Approximately 300-acre of land would be changed in use as a result
9

Assumes county average value per acre.
Item 1 states “Work will be staged and conducted in a manner that maintains two-way traffic flow on public roadways in the vicinity
of the work site. If temporary lane closures are necessary, they will be coordinated with the appropriate jurisdictional agency and
scheduled to occur outside of peak traffic hours (7:00–10:00 a.m. and 3:00–6:00 p.m.) to the maximum extent practicable. Any lane
closures will include advance warning signage, a detour route and flaggers in both directions”.

10

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-200

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

of project construction see Table 3.8-1. This total acreage within the
Project footprint comprises 2 percent of acreage within the boundaries of
the cities/communities forming the socioeconomics Project area. No
substantial reduction in sales tax revenue would be expected, as the
displaced population would be very small relative to the Project area as is
the total amount of taxable sales, which could potentially be relocated out
of the Project area.
Potential impacts to local fiscal resources associated with the demand for
Project construction labor would have no impact on property tax revenue
and beneficial impact on sales tax revenue. Project labor would be
expected to be sourced locally within the Project area or at most within an
acceptable daily commute. The Tunnel Alternative, even under the worst
case assumption of relocation, laborers would occupy available vacant
units within the Project area, which are currently being assessed for
property taxes, irrespective of the vacancy rates. Project construction
workers would also spend money on food and other services, thus,
increasing sales tax revenue. Construction would require raw materials
and other services. A portion of these materials would be purchased from
local business and industry to the extent possible. This increased
spending, as a result of non-labor construction activities, could increase
sales tax revenue.
The potential long-term impacts to local fiscal resources associated with
increased flood protection would be beneficial. Increased flood protection
would benefit both property and sales tax revenue through support of
increase of property values, reductions in business interruption (closure),
and support of economic growth initiatives for downtown Morgan Hill.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) activities (Chapter 2, Alternatives
Analysis and Project Description) are not expected to result in loss of real
property or expected to result in the closure of any businesses,
particularly given their nature and location with the stream channel.
Operations and maintenance of the Project is a necessary component of
achieving and maintaining increased flood protection created by the
Project, resulting in a beneficial impact. In addition, O&M activities
associated with the Project would not cause substantial reduction in the
supply of property and sales tax revenue. No new permanent workers
would be required to operate the Project, and routine maintenance
activities would be relatively short in duration; therefore, operation and
maintenance activities would not impact employment, income levels, or
demand for housing.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-201

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.17.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

Potential impacts of the NRCS Alternative are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative, except that more acres of urban land would be required for
flood protection; and 9 more residential homes (all within Reach 8) would
be acquired, for a total of 12, compared to the Tunnel Alternative.
Potential impacts to businesses and employment would be the same as
for the Tunnel Alternative, as the same number of greenhouses and other
structures would be displaced. Although construction duration would not
differ from the Tunnel Alternative, the NRCS Alternative would require
approximately 10 fewer construction workers per year on average (147
workers) compared to the Tunnel Alternative (157 workers). Further, peak
construction for the NRCS Alternative would be 245 workers, compared to
261 workers for the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, construction would have no impact. Although
9 more residential homes would be acquired than in the Tunnel
Alternative (12 instead of 3), the total number of homes acquired for the
NRCS Alternative amounts to a fraction of 1 percent of the existing
housing stock (as of 2010) and the same number of vacant units would
remain to absorb any potential long-term construction employment. While
the duration of construction is the same as in the Tunnel Alternative, even
fewer construction workers would be required for the NRCS Alternative.
Taken together, this indicates even less of a possibility that in-migration of
construction labor would occur to a degree resulting in a housing shortage
than in the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact from construction would be less
than significant. The NRCS Alternative would be displace 49 structures, 6
more than in the Tunnel Alternative, but property owners would be
compensated the fair market value. Potential impacts to property values
associated with construction activities would be similar to the Tunnel
Alternative, as the nature of construction activities under the NRCS
Alternative are similar to that of the Tunnel Alternative and of the same
duration. The long-term increased flood capacity resulting from the Project
would be beneficial to the same degree as in the Tunnel Alternative, as
the NRCS Alternative achieves the same end result in terms of increased
flood protection.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, construction would have a beneficial impact
on employment and income levels, although to a slightly lesser degree.
While duration of Project construction is the same, the NRCS Alternative
would require fewer workers per year on average than the Tunnel
Alternative. At this time, there is insufficient information about the
expenditures of raw materials within the local economy to determine
whether the beneficial impact of expenditures on construction under the
NRCS Alternative would differ in degree relative to the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact from construction would be less
than significant. The NRCS Alternative would displace the same number
of greenhouses (commercial agricultural operations) and same amount of
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-202

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

productive crop acreage as the Tunnel Alternative. Any displacement or
acquisitions would be done under the guidelines of the Uniform
Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970.
Potential direct (e.g., staging areas, utility relocation) and indirect (e.g.,
traffic) impacts to local businesses, including production agricultural
operations due to construction activities are more than in the Tunnel
Alternative, due to the avoidance of work through downtown Morgan Hill
in the Tunnel Alternative.
The potential long-term impacts to local businesses associated with
increased flood capacity are beneficial to same degree as that of the
Tunnel Alternative, as the NRCS Alternative achieves the same end result
in terms of increased flood protection.
The long-term impact on the property tax base is somewhat greater than
under the Tunnel Alternative, as 12 instead of 6 residential homes would
be acquired under the NRCS Alternative. The same number of
greenhouses would be acquired under the NRCS and Tunnel
Alternatives.
Under worst case housing demand in-migration of construction labor
would occupy existing housing, thus, having no impact on the property tax
base. While the duration of construction is the same, the NRCS
Alternative would require fewer construction workers per year on average
than the Tunnel Alternative, thus the beneficial impact on sales tax
revenue through expenditures within the local economy would be
somewhat less than in the Tunnel Alternative. At this time it cannot be
determined whether the beneficial impact of expenditures on construction
would differ in degree from the Tunnel Alternative.
The potential long-term impacts to local fiscal resources associated with
increased flood protection would be beneficial to the same degree as in
the Tunnel Alternative, as the NRCS Alternative achieves the same end
result in terms of increased flood protection.
Impacts to Socioeconomic Resources, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-203

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.17.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Potential impacts of the Culvert/Channel Alternative are similar to the
Tunnel Alternative, except that more acres of urban land would be
required for flood protection; and 4 residential homes within Reach 8
would be displaced compared to none in the Tunnel Alternative. Potential
impacts to businesses and employment would be the same as for the
Tunnel Alternative, as the same number of greenhouses and other
structures would be displaced. Although construction duration would not
differ from the Tunnel Alternative, the Culvert/Channel Alternative would
require approximately 10 fewer construction workers per year on average
(147 workers) compared to the Tunnel Alternative (157 workers). Further,
peak construction for the Culvert/Channel Alternative would be 245
workers, compared to 261 workers for the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, construction would have no impact. Although
four more residential homes would be acquired than in the Tunnel
Alternative (7 instead of 3), the total number of homes acquired for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative amounts to a fraction of 1 percent of the
existing housing stock (as of 2010) and the same number of vacant units
would remain to absorb any potential long-term construction employment.
While the duration of construction is the same as in the Tunnel
Alternative, even fewer construction workers would be required for the
Culvert/Channel Alternative. Taken together, this indicates even less of a
possibility that in-migration of construction labor would occur to a degree
resulting in a housing shortage than in the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact from construction would be less
than significant. The Culvert/Channel Alternative would displace 47
structures, 4 more than in the Tunnel Alternative, but property owners
would be compensated the fair market value. Potential impacts to
property values associated with construction activities would be similar to
the Tunnel Alternative, as the nature of construction activities under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative are similar to that of the Tunnel Alternative
and of the same duration. The long-term increased flood capacity
resulting from the Project would be beneficial to the same degree as in
the Tunnel Alternative, as the Culvert/Channel Alternative achieves the
same end result in terms of increased flood protection.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, construction would have a beneficial impact
on employment and income levels, although to a slightly lesser degree.
While duration of Project construction is the same, the Culvert/Channel
Alternative would require fewer workers per year on average than the
Tunnel Alternative. At this time, there is insufficient information about the
expenditures of raw materials within the local economy to determine
whether the beneficial impact of expenditures construction under the
Culvert/Channel Alternative would differ in degree relative to the Tunnel
Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact from construction would be less
than significant. The Culvert/Channel Alternative would displace the same
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-204

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

number of greenhouses (commercial agricultural operations) and convert
the same productive crop acreage as the Tunnel Alternative. Any
displacement or acquisitions would be done under the guidelines of the
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act
of 1970.
The potential long-term impacts to local businesses associated with
increased flood capacity would be beneficial to same degree as that of
the Tunnel Alternative, as the Culvert/Channel Alternative achieves the
same end result in terms of increased flood protection.
The long-term impact on the property tax base would be somewhat
greater than in the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action), as
47 structures would be acquired under the Culvert/Channel Alternative.
Under worst case housing demand in-migration of construction labor
would occupy existing housing, thus, having no impact on the property tax
base. While the duration of construction is the same, the Culvert/Channel
Alternative would require fewer construction workers per year on average
than the Tunnel Alternative, thus the beneficial impact on sales tax
revenue through expenditures within the local economy would be
somewhat less than in the Tunnel Alternative. At this time it cannot be
determined whether the beneficial impact of expenditures on construction
would differ in degree from the Tunnel Alternative.
The potential long-term impacts to local fiscal resources associated with
increased flood protection would be beneficial to the same degree as in
the Tunnel Alternative, as the Culvert/Channel Alternative achieves the
same end result in terms of increased flood protection.
Impacts to Socioeconomic Resources, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.17.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Potential impacts of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be similar to
the Tunnel Alternative. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would require a
shorter overall construction duration than the Tunnel Alternative (5 years
instead of 6 years); and the bypass segment and Reach 14 construction
would span 3 years (730 days total) instead of spanning 2 years in the
other action alternatives (345 days total). In addition, there would be no
construction required in Reaches 5 and 6. However, as discussed in
Section 3.10, this alternative would also necessitate significant highway
construction on U.S. 101 to facilitate the flow diversion to Reach 14; this
long-term construction element would likely result in substantial traffic
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-205

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

impacts and business disruption, both locally and regionally, although
businesses would not close as a result of induced traffic.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, construction would have no impact. The
same number of residential homes (3) will be acquired similar to the
Tunnel Alternative. The duration of construction is shorter than in the
Tunnel Alternative. Taken together, this indicates even less of a possibility
that in-migration of construction labor would occur to a degree resulting in
a housing shortage than in the Tunnel Alternative.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact from construction would be less
than significant. The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would displace 12
structures, 31 fewer than in the Tunnel Alternative. Potential impacts to
property values associated with construction activities would be similar to
the Tunnel Alternative, as the nature of construction activities under the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be similar to that of the Tunnel
Alternative, although shorter in duration. The long-term increased flood
capacity resulting from the Project would be expected to be beneficial to
the same degree as in the Tunnel Alternative, as the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative achieves the same end result in terms of increased flood
protection.
As in the Tunnel Alternative, the impact of construction would be less than
significant. Substantial construction near U.S. 101 would result in traffic
conditions that ultimately act as deterrent to those in the greater San
Francisco Bay Area who would normally travel south on U.S. 101 to shop
at the Gilroy Premium Outlets or dine at restaurants in downtown Morgan
Hill. The degree to which employment and income would be impacted
depends on reactions to reductions in patronage and the actual degree of
reduced spending in the local and regional economy. The impact would
be temporary and U.S. 101 would be restored following the 250-day
construction period to construct new bridges for the bypass channel.
There would be no closures of any lanes or interchanges on U.S. 101
during the period when the detour would be in place to allow construction
of the new bridges. Consequently, there would be no impact on access to
businesses from U.S. 101, so that the impacts on jobs and income would
be less than significant.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would displace 9 fewer greenhouses (2
instead of 11) (commercial agricultural operations) than the Tunnel
Alternative. Any displacement or acquisitions would be done under the
guidelines of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970. Given that substantially fewer
greenhouses would be required to be acquired, the impacts to local
farming operations would be smaller under the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative than under the Tunnel Alternative. The same amount of
productive crop acreage as under the Tunnel Alternative would be
converted for Project ROW, thus the impact to commercial crop
production would be the same as in the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-206

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Potential direct (e.g., staging areas, utility relocation) impacts to local
businesses would likely be the same as under the Tunnel Alternative.
The potential for indirect impacts to local business resulting from traffic
induced by Project construction are substantially greater than in the
Tunnel Alternative. A unique feature of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
would be the need to construct bridges over U.S. 101. Constructing the
bridges would take 250 days and require temporary traffic detour roads.
The traffic detour roads would be expected to cause delays and
congestion along U.S. 101. This would be a temporary and significant
impact on the regional roadway network (Alta Planning and Design 2013:
Section 4.3.1.3). These conditions would act as a deterrent to consumers
who travel south from the greater San Francisco Bay Area. Particular
attractions for non-resident consumers include downtown Morgan Hill and
the Gilroy Premium Outlets (City of Morgan Hill 2013b; Simon Malls
2012). Business disruption would not be sustained over the long-term, as
U.S. 101 would be restored once bridge construction would be complete
within 9 months; and no business would close as a result of induced
traffic on U.S. 101. As discussed above, interchange access on and off
U.S. 101 would be maintained through the Project area. The impact is
less than significant.
The long-term impact on the property tax base would be less than under
the Tunnel Alternative, as 12 instead of 43 structures would be acquired
under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.
Considering the worst case housing demand in-migration of construction
labor would occupy existing housing; thus, having no impact on the
property tax base. While the duration of construction is shorter, the Reach
6 Bypass Alternative would require more construction workers per year on
average than the Tunnel Alternative, thus it cannot be determined whether
the beneficial impact on sales tax revenue through expenditures within the
local economy would differ in degree from the Tunnel Alternative. At this
time it cannot be determined whether the beneficial impact of
expenditures on construction would differ in degree from the Tunnel
Alternative.
The potential for substantial short-term business interruption as a result of
traffic delays stemming from construction of bridges for U.S. 101 as part
of the bypass would be a less than significant impact on sales tax
revenue, as no businesses would close.
The potential long-term impacts to local fiscal resources associated with
increased flood protection would be beneficial to the same degree as in
the Tunnel Alternative, as the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative achieves the
same end result in terms of increased flood protection.
Impacts to Socioeconomic Resources, not described above, are similar to
the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously. In
addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-207

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.
4.17.4 Summary of Impacts to Socioeconomic Resources
The No Action Alternative would impose a significant and unavoidable impact on
socioeconomic resources because intermittent flooding of Upper Llagas Creek
would continue in the absence of the Project, resulting in sustained business
closures and property damages.
The action alternatives would result in less than significant impacts to
socioeconomic resources within the Project area. A few of the specific Project
features would result in beneficial impacts to many of the area’s socioeconomic
resources, particularly the end product of increased flood protection.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Socioeconomic Resources are discussed
and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.
4.18

HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
This section describes the existing environment and assesses potential impacts related
to hazards and hazardous materials for the Project. Potential hazards addressed in this
section include issues related to hazardous materials in soil and groundwater, releases
of hazardous materials during construction, fires, and interference with an adopted
emergency response or emergency evacuation plan.
Information on potential soil and groundwater contamination hazards in the Project area
was drawn primarily from a Hazardous Materials Assessment Report titled Draft
Memorandum Presenting Findings of Hazardous Materials Assessment Reports Review
for Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, prepared by Weiss Associates (Weiss),
dated November 15, 2011. Weiss compiled existing conditions information on hazards
and hazardous materials in the Project area based on review of Phase I Environmental
Site Assessment (Phase I ESA) reports, Phase II Environmental Site Assessment
(Phase II ESA) reports, and database searches.
4.18.1 Introduction
The potential environmental concerns identified in the Project area include
pesticides and fertilizers, nitrates, fecal coliform, potentially hazardous chemicals,
petroleum hydrocarbons, heavy metals, naturally-occurring asbestos, asbestoscontaining building materials, lead-based paint, and polychlorinated biphenyl(PCB)-containing lighting fixtures.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-208

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

This section describes potential hazards and hazardous materials by Project
reach, as described in Chapter 2. In general, the following potential Constituents
of Concern (COCs) were identified for all reaches:


Pesticides and fertilizers from prior or ongoing agricultural activities;



Asbestos and lead-based paint from buildings constructed prior to 1978;
and



Naturally-occurring asbestos in soil.

The analysis for this section considered the potential for adverse impacts on
public health and safety as a result of hazardous materials exposure, vectorborne diseases, and wildland fire. Risks were evaluated qualitatively based on
available information.
SCVWD has performed assessments of the environmental conditions of
properties within the Project area in accordance with its Hazardous Substance
Liability Assessment (HSLA) guidance, which requires HSLAs for any project that
requires acquisition of a new property (Weiss 2011). The following assessments
have been performed and are cited as in the Weiss assessment (2011):


Summary Level 1 Hazardous Materials Investigation performed by SCVWD
for Reaches 4, 5, 6A, 7A, and 8, was conducted in August 1997 (SCVWD
1997) to identify property conditions along the entire Project area.



Phase II ESA performed in August 1997 in Reach 7A to assess the potential
for recognized environmental conditions associated with agricultural use in
the area, a junk yard, a manure pile, and a release of petroleum
hydrocarbons to soil and groundwater identified during the Phase I HSLA
performed by the SCVWD in August 1997 (Kleinfelder 1997, amended in
November and December 1997).



Phase I ESA performed in September 2002 to support property acquisition
in Reaches 4 and 7B (Piers 2002a).



Phase I ESA performed in November 2002 to support property acquisition in
Reaches 5 and 6 (Piers 2002b).



Phase I ESA performed in April 2003 in Reach 8 (Piers 2003a).



Phase I ESA performed in December 2004 in Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7B
(Piers 2003b).



Phase II ESA performed in August 2004 in Reaches 4, 5, 6, and 7B (Piers
2003b).



Phase II ESA performed in August 2004 of selected parcels in Reaches 4
and 5 per recommendations of Phase I assessments to assess the
presence of pesticides, coliform, and nitrate in soils (Piers 2004).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-209

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences


Phase II ESA for Reach 7A performed in August 2004 to review the
potential for recognized environmental conditions associated with
agricultural use for the area that SCVWD allowed after the completion of
earlier assessments (LAS 2004).



Phase I ESA performed in February 2005 in Reach 14 of parcels owned by
SCVWD for the purpose of identifying environmental concerns prior to
construction related to the Project in this location (Piers 2005).

Outstanding Phase I ESA Recommendations
Weiss reviewed all completed Phase l ESAs. Actions recommended in the
completed Phase I ESA reports (and those actions that are recommended in
Phase II, discussed below) will be performed by SCVWD where permission is
obtained from current property owners. The Phase I actions generally fall into the
following categories:


Additional site reconnaissance to determine the locations of hazardous
materials that may impact soil and groundwater such as pesticide use or
storage areas and oil stains.



Assessment of pesticide impacts due to agricultural uses of parcels within
the Project area.



Assessment of asbestos and lead-based paint in buildings constructed
prior to 1978 that may be demolished.



Assessment and/or closure of utility-related structures such as
transformers, water wells, ponds, and septic tanks located in or near the
Project area.

Phase II Investigations
Weiss also reviewed Phase II investigations conducted in areas of Reaches 4, 5,
7A, 7B, and 14. These investigations evaluated the presence of the following
contaminants:


Fecal coliform in Reach 4.



Pesticides in Reaches 4, 5, 7A, and 7B.



Nitrate in Reach 7A.



PCBs and SVOCs in Reaches 7A and 7B.



VOCs in Reaches 5, 7A, and 7B.



Perchlorate in Reach 14.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-210

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

No samples were collected in Reaches 6, 8, or 14. Per Weiss (2011), the results
of Phase II ESA performed in the areas of Reaches 4, 5, 7A, and 7B indicate the
following:


Known hazardous materials releases occurred at sites within and
adjacent to the Project area.



Dieldrin, endosulfan, 4,4'-DDE, and heptachlor are present in soil and
groundwater above screening levels from application of pesticides and
herbicides on parcels that were actively cultivated as orchards or for row
crops.



Arsenic, chromium, cobalt, nickel, and vanadium are present in soil and
groundwater at concentrations exceeding screening levels. These metals
are thought to be naturally occurring.



Animal grazing or manure piles have led to nitrate contamination in
groundwater beneath Reach 7A.



Building and utility structures (septic tanks, wells, and transformers) that
may contain hazardous materials (PCBs, lead-based paint, and asbestos)
are located in the Project area.

Soil borings were collected in Reach 6 in September of 2013 by Pacific
Geotechnical Engineering to assess the historic landfill that overlaps the current
SCVWD right-of-way for Llagas Creek.
Outstanding Phase II Environmental Site Assessments
Additional Phase II ESAs will be conducted as property is acquired, and prior to
the start of excavation as called out in the Weiss report, including:


Additional investigation will be conducted to determine if residual
pesticides are present in soils and groundwater at Reaches 6, 8, and 14.



Buildings that may contain asbestos and lead-based paint were identified
in all reaches, surveys will be conducted to determine the presence of
asbestos or lead-based paint in the buildings.



An investigation will be performed for soil stains and potential oil release
to soil as identified in Reaches 4, 5, and 7B.



Additional investigation into potential contamination from utility structures,
septic tanks, and leach fields will be conducted in Reaches 4, 6, and 8.



The Olin site, located between Reach 7B and U.S. 101, was identified as
a source of perchlorate contamination in regional groundwater and may
have impacted groundwater within the Project area. Groundwater will be
evaluated for perchlorate contamination in the Project area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-211

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.18.2. No Project Alternative
Under the No Project Alternative, the Project would not be built, and no new land
purchases or construction activities would occur. Flooding in the residential areas
of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue. Storm runoff would continue
through the West Little Llagas Creek, East Little Llagas Creek, and Llagas Creek
channel reaches. The bypass channel in Reach 7A would not be constructed
under the No Project Alternative, and channel bank erosion and widening would
likely continue. Maintenance of the Upper Llagas Creek facilities would be
conducted in accordance with the guidelines established in the SCVWD SMP
Update 2012–2022 (SCVWD 2011b). Impacts from hazards and hazardous
materials from this maintenance would be less than significant.
Operations of the flood management system through passive flow of water do not
involve the transport, use, or disposal of hazardous materials. Existing
maintenance activities conducted by the SCVWD are completed under the SMP.
The SMP established procedures for routine maintenance of stream channels
involving sediment removal, vegetation management, bank protection, and
associated minor activities.
Instream sediment removal and bank protection work is carried out from June 15
to October 30, or the first significant rainfall (0.5 inch of rain in a 24-hour period)
after October 15, whichever occurs first. Typical maintenance activities that may
involve hazards or hazardous materials include sediment removal
and bank stabilization; vegetation management; and minor maintenance, as
described below.
Sediment Removal and Bank Stabilization
Sediment removal and bank stabilization activities would require the use of fuels
and lubricants for maintenance equipment. These hazardous materials would be
transported to and from maintenance sites and removed once projects were
completed. Hazardous materials would not be stored permanently at
maintenances sites. However, if hazardous materials were released into water or
soil during refueling or maintenance activities, contamination and harm to people
or the environment could result.
Workers could encounter illegally dumped waste, and ground excavation
activities and bank repairs could disturb previously unknown contamination.
Potential hazardous materials used as part of sediment removal and bank
stabilization activities implemented near schools (Table 3.18-2) would include
fuels and oils associated with the use of heavy equipment. Improper storage or
use of these materials could pose a risk to human health if accidental releases
occurred.
Maintenance activities involving ground disturbance, such as sediment removal
and bank stabilization, could potentially expose asbestos and release it into the
environment. With implementation of the BMPs as described in Chapter 5, these
potential impacts to SMP activities discussed below would be reduced to levels
less than significant.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-212

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Vegetation Management
The SMP vegetation management activities would also include the use of fuels
and lubricants. In addition, the activities would include the application of
herbicides to areas including instream and bank bench areas. The use, transport,
or accidental spills of hazardous materials could potentially harm people or
wildlife if released into the ground or water.
Vegetation management activities would include the application of herbicides.
Improper use or storage of herbicides near schools could pose a potential risk to
children who may be exposed. Vegetation management activities for the SMP
would potentially include mowing, discing, and flaming activities. Without cautious
equipment use, such activities performed near dry vegetation could cause
uncontrolled fires.
Minor Maintenance
Minor maintenance would potentially involve the use of hazardous materials
during the use of heavy equipment for grading or sediment removal. No channel
modification or improvements would be constructed; therefore, no hazards or
hazardous materials impacts would occur as a result of construction.
Maintenance activities could involve the use of heavy equipment and subsequent
use of hazardous materials (i.e., fuels, oil). Children could potentially be exposed
to these materials if an accidental release occurred near a school. No channel
modification or improvements would be constructed; therefore, no hazards or
hazardous materials impacts would occur as a result of construction.
All SMP activities, such as sediment removal activities, could potentially disturb
known existing contaminated sites. Furthermore, portions of the Project area may
contain naturally-occurring asbestos.
Although operations and maintenance under the No Action Alternative may be
performed within 2 miles of San Martin Airport, these activities would not interfere
with airport operations, would not involve the use of any equipment that would
affect aircraft utilizing the airport, and would not result in a substantial safety
hazard to people residing or working in the vicinity of the airport. The impacts
would be less than significant.
The SMP activities could involve temporary road or lane closures, as well as
traffic that could potentially interfere with emergency response.
Under the No Action Alternative, no improvements would be made to creeks in
the Project area to minimize known flooding risks. Flooding in the residential
areas of Morgan Hill and San Martin would continue and may potentially impede
emergency response or evacuation efforts during flooding events. The
unimproved operations of the existing flood management system would result in
an impact that would be significant.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-213

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The SMP activities are not likely to create standing water that would foster
mosquitoes or interfere with current and future Santa Clara Vector Control District
(SCVCD) abatement efforts. Impacts would be less than significant.
Other SMP Activities
Other SMP activities could involve ground disturbance and, therefore, have the
potential to disturb contaminated sites. However, by implementing the BMPs,
listed below, if potential contaminants were found during SMP activities, the area
would be treated as if a hazardous spill had occurred and any ground-disturbing
activities, including disturbance of previously undiscovered contamination, would
be handled in a manner that would protect human health and the environment.
The impact would be less than significant.
Maintenance activities would potentially require the use of heavy equipment to
stabilize the channel banks, remove sediments, perform grading, and/or alter
animal habitats. The use of heavy equipment near dry vegetation could present a
potential wildland fire threat. Through implementation of SMP BMPs, flaming
equipment may be used cautiously and maintenance activities would be
performed in a way to minimize the potential for the creation of wildland fires. The
SCVWD would obtain the required burn permit or authorization from applicable
city or county fire marshals before using flaming equipment. The impact would be
less than significant.
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.
4.18.3 Action Alternatives

4.18.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

The key feature of the Tunnel Alternative is to use an underground
concrete tunnel instead of channel widening and deepening proposed
through Reach 8 in downtown Morgan Hill. The tunnel would be
constructed under the Nob Hill Terrace neighborhood, and a sediment
detention basin would be constructed in the 600 feet of channel between
Wright Avenue and Hillwood Lane with an 18-foot-wide
maintenance/access road for maintenance access to the sediment
detention basin.
Construction activities for channel improvements, a diversion channel,
permanent access roads, RCBs, and relocation of structures and public
service facilities would require the use of hazardous substances, such as
vehicle fuels, lubricants, and solvents in construction equipment and
vehicles, and herbicides to clear vegetation for certain locations. Impacts
of improper storage and handling could be significant, including spills,
releases and exposure of workers and the general public to toxins and
carcinogens. However, hazardous and potentially hazardous materials
used in construction would be transported, stored, and handled in a
manner consistent with all relevant regulations and guidelines, including

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-214

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

those recommended and enforced by the DOT and Santa Clara County
Department of Environmental Health.
During tunnel construction, blasting would be used as a construction
method. Typically, less than 20 pounds of explosives per delay would be
used. A Blasting Plan would be prepared for this alternative to provide
guidelines for the safe use and storage of blasting materials including
within the vicinity of 0.25 mile of an existing school. The nearest schools
to blasting activities are PA Walsh School on West Main Avenue and
Britton School on West Central Avenue near the intersection of Monterey
Road. The Blasting Plan is intended to help ensure the safety of
construction personnel, the public, nearby facilities, and sensitive
resources, such as schools. The Blasting Plan would include, but not be
limited to, the following elements:


Proposed blasting activity;



Blasting procedures;



Blasting contractor qualification;



Applicable federal, state, and local regulations;



Blasting monitoring;



Noise, vibration, and fly-rock mitigation;



Safety during blasting; and



Storage and disposal of explosives.

The SCVWD incorporates standard BMPs related to the transport, use,
and disposal of hazardous materials to ensure these impacts are not
significant.
Construction workers or the public could be exposed to the hazardous
substances, including those discussed above, through accidental
disturbance during Project construction, potentially constituting a
significant impact. Construction activities, in particular, excavation and
other ground-disturbing tasks, would have significant potential to expose
workers and the public to hazardous materials, unless appropriate
precautions are taken. Such exposure could represent a significant public
health impact. Implementation of mitigation measures as described in
Chapter 5 of this EIS will reduce potential effects associated with
exposure of hazardous materials during excavation to a less-thansignificant level.
Uncontaminated excavated soils may be reused within the Project area
for fill materials. Excess material may be stockpiled at Anderson Dam for
reuse on a future project. In the event of an unanticipated discovery of
potentially impacted soils or groundwater, mitigation measures as
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-215

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

described in Chapter 5 of this EIS would be implemented, which requires
evaluation of soils for reuse.
Buildings and structures within the project construction footprint potentially
identified for demolition (see Section 2.5.2, Table 2.5-1) could contain
asbestos or lead, which is a potentially significant impact. The SCVWD
will conduct surveys for asbestos and lead in building prior to demolishing
or moving structures. Implementation of mitigation measures as
described in Chapter 5 of this EIS would reduce the potential impact to a less-than- significant level.
In the event of an unanticipated discovery of NOA, the SCVWD will
comply with the BAAQMD ATCM, which regulates NOA emissions
(Section 3.18.1) and would implement mitigation measures requiring
preparation of an asbestos dust plan to ensure that there are not
significant impacts from naturally occurring asbestos.
Because construction would require the use and transport of a variety of
hazardous substances, including vehicle fuels and lubricants, paving
media, paints, solvents, etc., there would be some potential for exposure
to hazardous materials for students, school employees, and the public.
However, all hazardous materials would be handled, stored, and used in a
manner consistent with relevant regulations and guidelines. This would
reduce risks related to the use of hazardous materials in proximity to
school campuses to a level consistent with the current standard of care.
Weiss identified sites, including several Leaking Underground Storage
Tank (LUST) cleanup sites, listed on hazardous materials databases
(Table 3.18-1) and located within or near the Project area. Construction
activities near these sites have the potential to create significant hazards
to the public or the environment if they are released during Project
construction and impacts would be significant. With implementation of
mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS, impacts
related to potential releases from construction on a site with known
hazardous materials is less than significant.
San Martin Airport is located within 2 miles of Reaches 4, 5, 6, 7A, and
14. However, Project construction activities would not interfere with airport
operations, would not involve the use of any equipment that would affect
aircraft utilizing the airport, and would not result in a substantial safety
hazard risk to people residing or working in the vicinity of the airport. The
impacts would be less than significant.
The presence of construction equipment and vehicles, worker activities,
and materials storage would have the potential to impede emergency
access to the Project sites and/or interfere with emergency evacuation
plans. To ensure that Project construction does not impede emergency
response or evacuations, the SCVWD will develop and implement a
project specific traffic control plan (as part of the Project ) for each site,
including a requirement to maintain emergency access to/through the site.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-216

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Section 4.10, Traffic and Circulation provides details on the elements
required in the plan. With the development of the traffic control plan and
implementation of mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this
EIS, the impact is less than significant.
During construction there could be the potential for standing water to
accumulate that could breed mosquitoes. The contractor would be
required to employ “work site housekeeping” measures to prevent the
accumulation of standing water throughout the Project area. To limit the
potential for mosquitoes to breed, implementation of mitigation measures
as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS would reduce this impact.
The use of construction equipment, in particular equipment with internal
combustion engines, gasoline- powered tools, and equipment or tools that
produce a spark, fire, or flame—in grassland and woodland areas could
pose a fire risk. Some Project elements would be constructed in areas
that could pose wildfire risks under dry conditions. Portions of Reaches
7A, 7B, and 8 are located less than 1 mile from a very high fire hazard
severity zone in a local area of responsibility. With the implementation of
BMP’s and mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS,
which incorporates fire prevention measures into construction activities,
the impact is less than significant.
The principal concern relative to disease vectors relates to the potential
for the Project to create or expand the potential for mosquito breeding in
the Project area. During construction, contractors would be required to
employ “work site housekeeping” to prevent the accumulation of standing
water on construction sites.
With the implementation of mitigation measures as described in Chapter
5 of this EIS, operation and maintenance would not result in a significant
increase in mosquito breeding; therefore, the impact would be reduced to
less than significant.
Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
Much like construction, periodic activities required to maintain the new
Project elements would require the use of vehicle fuels and lubricants and
could require solvents, paints, paving media, and other
substances. The SCVWD incorporates standard BMPs related to the
transport, use, and disposal of hazardous materials to ensure these
impacts are not significant.
The SCVWD will comply with the BAAQMD ATCM, which regulates NOA
emissions (Section 3.18.1).
During operations and maintenance activities, described in Section 2.7.5,
the SCVWD will conduct an online database search for known
contaminated sites in the Project area consistent with mitigation measures
prior to ground disturbing activities and will inform neighbors of impending
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-217

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

work. Mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this EIS will be
implemented if hazardous materials are encountered during work. These
measures would reduce potential impacts to less-than-significant levels.
Pesticides and herbicides may be used in maintenance activities related
to vegetation management. BMPs would minimize the potential for
impacts related to exposure to contaminants associated with pesticide
and herbicide use.
Maintenance activities within 0.25 miles of schools would carry similar risks
(although, generally on a lesser scale) as for construction. Impacts related to
the generation of hazardous emissions or handling of hazardous or acutely
hazardous materials,, substances, or waste within 0.25 miles of an existing
or proposed school are anticipated to be less than significant with
implementation of BMPs an mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5
of this EIS.
O&M activities that involve ground disturbance, such as sediment
removal, and are located near identified hazardous materials sites would
have the potential to create hazards to the public or the environment.
Impacts would be significant levels without BMPs and implementation of
mitigation measures as during construction.
Maintenance activities that have the potential to affect public roads would
require implementation of BMP’s and mitigation measures as described in
Chapter 5 of this EIS, thereby reducing potential impacts. During
operations, the Tunnel Alternative would provide an increased level of
flood protection for urban areas, specifically: a 1-percent flood in Morgan
Hill (Reaches 8, 7A, and 7B); 10-percent flood management for the semiurban area around East Little Llagas Creek (Reach 14); and avoid
induced flooding elsewhere on Llagas Creek (Reaches 6, 5, and 4) due to
upstream improvements. Due to increased flood protection from operation
and maintenance activities, the impact of the Tunnel Alternative on
implementation of Emergency Response or Evacuation Plans would be
beneficial because less flood induced emergencies would occur, and the
use of maintenance roads in all reaches of the Project area would
eliminate potential interference with other emergency responses.
Although O&M activities may be performed within 2 miles of San Martin
Airport, these activities would not interfere with airport operations, would
not involve the use of any equipment that would affect aircraft utilizing the
airport, and would not result in a substantial safety hazard to people
residing or working in the vicinity of the airport. The impacts would be less
than significant.
The Tunnel Alternative would include operation and maintenance of a new
sediment detention basin in Reach 8, which could increase the
opportunity for standing water to accumulate and potentially increase
mosquito breeding. The proposed sediment detention basin is designed
and intended to function in a manner that would collect sediments but
allow water to quickly drain out of the detention basin following rainfallUpper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-218

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

runoff events. However, as sediments collect in the detention basin it is
possible that small residual pools of water could develop and could be
retained for a period of time following runoff, providing mosquito breeding
habitat. SCVWD will implement mitigation measures, which requires the
preparation of a mosquito and vector control plan to reduce the potential
impact to a less-than-significant level.
The potential for fire risk would also be true for maintenance activities,
although to a lesser degree, because fewer pieces of equipment and
vehicles would typically be involved. However, impacts would be reduced
to a less than significant level with implementation of BMP’s.
Impacts to Hazards and Hazardous Materials are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition, after
construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be
similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.18.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

See Section 3.18.3.1 for a discussion of hazards and hazardous materials
impacts under the Tunnel Alternative, which would also apply to the
NRCS Alternative. The difference between the NRCS Alternative and the
Tunnel Alternative is the NRCS Alternative would implement channel
widening and deepening throughout downtown Morgan Hill in Reach 8
without the construction of a tunnel and a sediment detention basin.
Unlike the Tunnel Alternative, a Blasting Plan would not be required for
this alternative to provide guidelines for the safe use and storage of
blasting materials including within the vicinity of 0.25 mile of an existing
school. In addition, there would not be a sediment detention basin
constructed within Reach 8. However, there would be small pools
constructed in Reach 7A for aquatic habitat (a feature applicable to all
action alternatives), which may retain water because the groundwater
table is shallow at the downstream end of this reach. The pools
incorporated in Reach7A could contribute to mosquito habitat. With the
implementation of mitigation measures as described in Chapter 5 of this
EIS, operation and maintenance would not result in a significant increase
in mosquito breeding; therefore, the impact would be reduced to less than
significant.
Impacts to Hazards and Hazardous Materials, not described above, are
similar to the Tunnel Alternative as described and discussed previously.
In addition, after construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M)
activities would be similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel
Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-219

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.18.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

See Section 3.18.3.1 for a discussion of hazards and hazardous materials
impacts under the Tunnel Alternative, which would also apply to the
Culvert/Channel Alternative except without the sediment detention basin.
In Reach 8, the Culvert/Channel Alternative would require a smaller right
of way, reduce the amount of vegetation to be removed along the existing
West Little Llagas channel, and would allow easier maintenance access.
The key feature of the Culvert Alternative is elimination of the need for
channel deepening and widening through residential properties, between
West Main Avenue and West 2nd Street in Reach 8.
Impacts to Hazards and Hazardous Materials are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition, after
construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be
similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.18.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

The construction and maintenance BMPs and necessary mitigation for the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would be the same as those previously
described under the Tunnel Alternative.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would construct a high-flow bypass
channel between Reach 6 of Llagas Creek and Reach 14 of East Little
Llagas Creek. The bypass would be designed so that no flood capacity
improvements would be needed along Reach 6 or Reach 5 of Llagas
Creek downstream of the proposed bypass. Additionally, in Reach 8,
through the City of Morgan Hill, the Project will be exactly the same as the
Tunnel Alternative. Flood conveyance modifications for the upstream
Project Reaches 7A and 7B and for the downstream Reach 4 would
remain the same as that described for the Tunnel Alternative.
Impacts to Hazards and Hazardous Materials are similar to the Tunnel
Alternative as described and discussed previously. In addition, after
construction, the operations and maintenance (O&M) activities would be
similar to the O&M activities described in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-220

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.18.4 Summary of Impacts to Hazard and Hazardous Materials
All the Action Alternatives have similar impacts to Hazard and Hazardous
Materials, except the NRCS and Culvert/Channel Alternatives do not include the
preparation of a Blasting Plan as required for the tunnel construction identified in
the Tunnel and Reach 6 Bypass Alternatives. All the Action Alternatives have
the potential environmental concerns related to hazards and hazardous materials
identified for the Project reaches which include the discovery of pesticides and
fertilizers, nitrates and fecal coliform, potentially hazardous chemicals, petroleum
hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and naturally-occurring asbestos during excavation
activities; the exposure to asbestos-containing building materials, lead-based
paint, and PCB- containing lighting fixtures in moving or demolishing structures in
the Project footprint; use of diesel, solvents, oil, and herbicides during
construction and maintenance; creation of mosquito breeding grounds; and
potential fire hazards. With the implementation of BMPs and mitigation measures,
the potential impacts from these concerns can be reduced.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Population and Housing are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-221

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-222

Chapter 4

4.19

Environmental Consequences

ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
4.19.1 Introduction
This section describes the environmental justice implications of the Project in the
Project area, including an analysis of communities of concerns for both minority
and low-income characteristics and the disproportionate distribution of negative
effects on communities of concern.
A community of concern was defined as a 2010 Census Tract intersected by the
Project that had a:
a.

U.S. Census designated poverty percentage statistically significantly
higher than the average for all Census Tracts in Santa Clara County,
California (P<0.05) or a poverty rate greater than 50 percent.

-orb.

Hispanic population percentage statistically significantly higher than the
average for all Census Tracts in Santa Clara County, California (P<0.05)
or a Hispanic population greater than 50 percent.

The aggregate of all Census Tracts in Santa Clara County represents the
reference population in this analysis and was chosen because of California’s high
minority population and uneven distribution, as well as the localized nature of this
Project. Therefore, each Census Tract intersected by the Project was compared
to the average of all tracts in the county.
Table 4.19-1, below, summarizes the Hispanic and low-income characteristics of
each Census Tract intersected by the Project and the average for all Census
Tracts in Santa Clara County.
Table 4.19-1 Summary of Project Area Demographic Characteristics

Demographic
Characteristic

Tract 5123.07
(Reach 7A
and portion
of 7B)

Tract 5123.13
(majority
portion of
Reach 7B)

Tract
5123.14
(Reach 8)

% Low-Income
% Hispanic

1.2
23.5

19.2
55.3

24.6
48.3

Track 5124.01
Tract 5124.02
(Reaches 4,
(portion of
5, and 14, and Reach 6 and all
portion of
of Reach 6
Reach 6)
Bypass)

9.6
43.1

6.6
40.7

Avg. of all
Tracts in
Santa Clara
County

9.4
26.1

Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2010b; U.S. Census Bureau 2011a

Tract 5123.14, which corresponds to Reach 8, has a population of low-income
individuals that is statistically significantly higher than the average of the tracts in
the county (P<0.05) and is, therefore, a community of concern. Tract 5123.13,
which corresponds to Reach 7B, has a population of Hispanic individuals that is
over 50 percent and is, therefore, a community of concern. The following section
evaluates each alternative by reach to determine if any of the significant impacts

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-223

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
identified elsewhere in Chapter 4 would disproportionately impact Reaches 7B
or 8.
The impacts related with environmental justice originate in the resource
assessments in the preceding sections of this Chapter 4. This section evaluates
if those resource impacts disproportionately affect a community of concern in the
project area. The details associated with the original impacts are provided in the
associated resource section, but the distribution of those impacts on the
communities is discussed below. The structure of this section is dissimilar than
the resource sections, because it takes a broader view of the effects of
alternatives by construction and maintenance activities as it relates to the
communities.

4.19.2 No Action Alternative
Section 4.17.2, Socioeconomic Resources, identified the No Action Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to intermittent
flooding causing business disruptions in and around Reach 8, impacting social
and economic resources in the project area. As compared to the Project
alternatives, which increase flood protection in Reaches 8, 7B, 7A, and 14, and
with no induced flooding in Reaches 6, 5, and 4, the No Project Alternative would
result in continued intermittent flooding. The impact to economic resources is
disproportionately distributed throughout the Project area, primarily impacting
Reach 8, downtown Morgan Hill, due to its high proportion of commercial land
use that are exposed to intermittent flooding. No other reach was identified as
being significantly economically impacted by flooding. Therefore, the No Project
Alternative disproportionately impacts the environmental justice community of
concern in Reach 8.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
The following impacts are associated with:
Operations and Maintenance
Section 4.2.2, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the No Action Alternative
as having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to the potential
to violate water quality standards. Ongoing operations continue to contribute to
bank erosion and sedimentation while ongoing flooding continues to contribute to
water quality degradation and impairment of existing water quality standards in
Reaches 8 and 7B, a disproportionate impact to environmental justice
communities of concern.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.2.2, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the No Action Alternative
as having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to substantially
degrading water quality. Ongoing operations continue to contribute to bank
erosion and sedimentation while ongoing flooding continues to contribute to
water quality degradation and impairment of existing water quality standards in

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-224

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Reaches 8 and 7B, a disproportionate impact to environmental justice
communities of concern.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.2.2, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the No Action Alternative
as having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to alteration of
drainage pattern and course of stream resulting in substantial erosion or siltation
on or off site. Ongoing operations would continue causing channel down-cutting
contributing to bank erosion and sedimentation. The operations currently take
place in all Project reaches and would not disproportionately impact an
environmental justice community of concern.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.2.2, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the No Action Alternative
as having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to alteration of
drainage pattern and course of stream resulting in flooding or increased surface
runoff. Flooding would continue, potentially exposing structures and people to
100-year-flood hazard. According to Section 4.17.2, continued flooding imposes
a potentially significant impact to the businesses in Reach 8 due to the costs of
business interruptions and preventing the sale of goods and services. Reach 8 is
disproportionately impacted by continued flooding.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.10.2, Traffic and Circulation, identified the No Action Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to interference and
inadequate emergency access during flood events. This interference would be
temporary and would impact the areas that experience flooding under the No
Project Alternative, particularly in Reach 8 where the population density is the
greatest and, therefore, would experience the highest need for emergency
services and evacuation routes during a flood event. Reach 8 is
disproportionately impacted by interference of emergency access during flood
events.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.10.2, Traffic and Circulation, identified the No Action Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to interference with
public transit, bicycle, and pedestrian facilities during flood events. This
interference would be temporary and would impact the areas that experience
flooding under the No Project Alternative, particularly Reach 8 where the
population density, access to public transit, number of bicycle, and pedestrian
facilities is the highest. Reach 8 is disproportionately impacted by interference of
emergency access during flood events.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.10.2, Traffic and Circulation, identified the No Action Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to failure to provide

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-225

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
safe access, obstruct access to nearby uses, or fail to provide for future street
right-of-way, particularly during flood events. This interference would be
temporary and would impact the areas that experience flooding under the No
Project Alternative, particularly in Reach 8 where the flooding is greatest.
Reach 8 would be disproportionately impacted.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.18.2, Hazards and Hazardous Materials, indentified the No Action
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to
interference with emergency response or evacuation plans. This interference
would be temporary and would impact the areas that experience flooding under
the No Project Alternative, particularly in Reach 8 where the population density is
the greatest and, therefore, would experience the highest need for emergency
services and evacuation routes during a flood event. Reach 8 is
disproportionately impacted by interference of emergency access during flood
events.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
BMPs for the No Action Alternative, including O&M activities are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 and Appendix B of this EIS.

4.19.3 Action Alternatives

4.19.3.1

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed Action)

Section 4.4.3.1, Botanical Resources, identified the Tunnel Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to removal
or temporary disturbance of vegetation that potentially provides suitable
habitat for special-status plant species or that support rare or important
plan communities. Table 3.4-1 Vegetation Types and Habitats in the
Project Area describes the total acres of each vegetation type per reach.
According to Table 4.4-1 and Table 4.4-2, 100% of the vegetation in
reach 7B for habitats riparian forest (native and non-native), riparian
scrub-shrub (native and non-native), and upland herbaceous) will be
temporarily or permanently impacted. Reach 7B experiences the most
severe impacts to vegetation than any other reach; therefore, an
environmental justice community of concern is disproportionately
impacted.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.1, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Tunnel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the
environment due to Project-related short-term construction equipment
emissions which, although temporary, could contribute to an existing or
projected air quality violation due to peak daily emissions of nitrogen
oxides (NOX, as NO and NO2), which is an ozone (O3) precursor. These
emissions would result from short-term construction activities in every
reach, and are considered significant due to their contribution to regional
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-226

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
nonattainment of the ozone standards. Such construction emissions
would be short-term, because they would permanently cease when
construction is completed after a period of approximately 5 years. This
impact would be relatively evenly distributed throughout the Project area;
however, the construction of the tunnel would result in a slight increase in
NOX emissions compared to excavation of the other reaches, about
16 percent more, but the increase would not be large enough to be
considered a disproportionate impact in Reach 8, because it is within
20 percent estimation precision for construction projects. Comparing
Tables 4.11-11 and 4.11-12, the change in peak NOX emissions would be
about 43 pounds per day, which would not impact Reach 7B.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.1, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Tunnel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the
environment due to a net increase of any criteria pollutant for which the
Project region is nonattainment. The channel excavation and widening
and other construction activity would result in an exceedance of the
significance threshold for NOX. This impact would be relatively evenly
distributed throughout the Project area and would not, therefore,
disproportionately impact an environmental justice community of concern.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.1, Noise, identified the Tunnel Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to Project-related
noise levels in excess of standards established in the local general plan,
noise ordinance, or applicable standards of other agencies. The
construction related to the portal and tunnel as well as blasting would
result in higher noise levels for Reach 8 than any other Project reach with
levels of 107 dBA (according to Table 4.12-25), which would be louder
than a jet taking off and almost as loud as a rock concert (Purdue N.D.).
This noise level could cause serious hearing damage in an 8-hour
exposure. The next highest noise level occurs in Reach 4 at 92 dBA
(according to Table 4.12-14), which would be a little louder than a lawn
mower. This noise level could likely cause hearing damage in an 8-hour
exposure. Reach 8 is, therefore, disproportionately impacted.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.1, Noise, identified the Tunnel Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to the generation of
excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise levels during
construction. The construction related to the portal and tunnel, as well as
blasting, would result in higher vibration levels for Reach 8 than any other
Project reach, but would not be high enough to cause structural damage.
However, all reaches would experience vibration levels that could exceed
state standards for annoyance. Therefore, the impacts would not
disproportionately impact Reaches 8 or 7B.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-227

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.1, Noise, identified the Tunnel Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to temporary and
periodic increases in ambient noise levels in the Project vicinity above
existing baseline levels. According to Table 4.12-24, Estimated Noise
Levels for Construction Activities. Compared with Existing Noise Levels,
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 have similar potential short-term increased noise
levels of 38.7, 35.7, and 38.1 dBA, respectively. Reaches 4 and 5 could
experience similar potential changes to short-term noise levels, with
estimated increases of 31.6 and 26.8 dBA, respectively. Reaches 6 and
14 could experience similar potential changes to short-term noise levels,
with estimated increases of 23.9 and 21.1 dBA, respectively. The
potential short-term noise increases are relatively evenly distributed
across the Project area and, thus, would not disproportionately impact
Reaches 8 or 7B.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.1, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the Tunnel
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of
Statewide and Local Importance being converted to non-agricultural uses.
According to Table 4.7-2, Important Farmlands Within Project Footprint by
Reach, Reaches 7B and 8 contain 0.0 acre of Prime Farmland, Unique
Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance. Therefore,
Reach 7B or Reach 8 is not disproportionately affected.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.1, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the Tunnel
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to 17 acres of Williamson Act designated land being subject to
permanent conversion. According to Table 3.7.3, Williamson Act Lands
within the Project Footprint by Reach, Reaches 7B and 8 contain 0.0 acre
of Williamson Act lands. Therefore, Reach 7B or Reach 8 is not
disproportionately affected.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
The following impacts are associated with Operations and Maintenance
activities:
Section 4.12.3.1, Noise, identified the Tunnel Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to routine operation
and maintenance activities that could produce periodic increases in
ambient noise levels during the life of the Project in excess of standards
established in the local general plan, noise ordinance, or applicable
standards of other agencies. According to Table 3.12-13, the NRCS
Alternative Reaches 8, 7B, and 4 could experience similar periodic noise
elevations. Under the Tunnel Alternative, operations and maintenance

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-228

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
would be similar to the NRCS Alternative, with the exception of increased
maintenance in Reach 8. The nearest residences along all reaches
would exceed corresponding noise standards under the NRCS
Alternative; and under the Tunnel Alternative, Reach 8 would have the
highest noise of any reach. Therefore, the impact would
disproportionately impact Reach 8, an environmental justice community of
concern.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.19.3.2

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Alternative

Section 4.4.3.2, Botanical Resources, identified the NRCS Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to removal
or temporary disturbance of vegetation that potentially provides suitable
habitat for special-status plant species or that support rare or important
plan communities. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected
to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously in the
Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.2, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the NRCS
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to Project-related short-term construction equipment emissions
which, although temporary, could contribute to an existing or projected air
quality violation due to peak daily emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOX, as
NO and NO2), which is an ozone (O3) precursor. Except for within Reach
8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.2, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the NRCS
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to a net increase of any criteria pollutant for which the Project region
is nonattainment. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to
be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously in the
Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.2, Noise, identified the NRCS Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to Project-related
noise levels in excess of standards established in the local general plan,
noise ordinance, or applicable standards of other agencies. Except for

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-229

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts
described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.2, Noise, identified the NRCS Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to the generation of
excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise levels during
construction. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be
similar to the impacts described and discussed previously in the Tunnel
Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.2, Noise, identified the NRCS Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to temporary and
periodic increases in ambient noise levels in the Project vicinity above
existing baseline levels. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.2, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the NRCS
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of
Statewide and Local Importance being converted to non-agricultural uses.
Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the
impacts described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.2, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the NRCS
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to 17 acres of Williamson Act designated land being subject to
permanent conversion. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
The following impacts are associated with Operations and Maintenance
activities:
Section 4.12.3.2, Noise, identified the NRCS Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to routine operation
and maintenance activities that could produce periodic increases in
ambient noise levels during the life of the Project in excess of standards
established in the local general plan, noise ordinance, or applicable
standards of other agencies. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-230

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.19.3.3

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Section 4.4.3.3, Botanical Resources, identified the Culvert/Channel
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to removal or temporary disturbance of vegetation that potentially
provides suitable habitat for special-status plant species or that support
rare or important plan communities. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.3, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Culvert/Channel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to Project-related short-term construction equipment
emissions which, although temporary, could contribute to an existing or
projected air quality violation due to peak daily emissions of nitrogen
oxides (NOX, as NO and NO2), which is an ozone (O3) precursor. Except
for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts
described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.3, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Culvert/Channel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to a net increase of any criteria pollutant for which
the Project region is nonattainment. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.3, Noise, identified the Culvert/Channel Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to
Project-related noise levels in excess of standards established in the local
general plan, noise ordinance, or applicable standards of other agencies.
Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the
impacts described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.3, Noise, identified the Culvert/Channel Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to the
generation of excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-231

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
levels during construction. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.3, Noise, identified the Culvert/Channel Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to
temporary and periodic increases in ambient noise levels in the Project
vicinity above existing baseline levels. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.3, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the
Culvert/Channel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to 50 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or
Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance being converted to
non-agricultural uses. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.3, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the
Culvert/Channel Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to 17 acres of Williamson Act designated land being
subject to permanent conversion. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts
are expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed
previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
The following impacts are associated with Operations and Maintenance
activities:
Section 4.12.3.3, Noise, identified the NRCS Alternative as having a
potentially significant impact to the environment due to routine operation
and maintenance activities that could produce periodic increases in
ambient noise levels during the life of the Project in excess of standards
established in the local general plan, noise ordinance, or applicable
standards of other agencies. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-232

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.19.3.4

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Section 4.4.3.4, Botanical Resources, identified the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to removal or temporary disturbance of vegetation that potentially
provides suitable habitat for special-status plant species or that support
rare or important plan communities. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.10.3.4, Traffic and Circulation, identified the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to increase in traffic that is substantial in relation to the existing traffic
load and capacity of the street system. The construction of bridges to
accommodate the Reach 6 bypass channel is anticipated to interfere with
local traffic patterns and parking and with traffic along U.S. 101. Since
this construction mainly impacts Reaches 5 and 6, Reaches 7B or 8 will
not be disproportionately impacted.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.4, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to Project-related short-term construction equipment
emissions which, although temporary, could contribute to an existing or
projected air quality violation due to peak daily emissions of nitrogen
oxides (NOX, as NO and NO2), which is an ozone (O3) precursor. Except
for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts
described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.11.3.4, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, identified the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to
the environment due to a net increase of any criteria pollutant for which
the Project region is nonattainment. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.4, Noise, identified the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to
Project-related noise levels in excess of standards established in the local
general plan, noise ordinance, or applicable standards of other agencies.
Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are expected to be similar to the
impacts described and discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-233

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.4, Noise, identified the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to the
generation of excessive groundborne vibration or groundborne noise
levels during construction. Except for within Reach 8, the impacts are
expected to be similar to the impacts described and discussed previously
in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.4, Noise, identified the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to
temporary and periodic increases in ambient noise levels in the Project
vicinity above existing baseline levels. Except for within Reach 8, the
impacts are expected to be similar to the impacts described and
discussed previously in the Tunnel Alternative.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.4, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Identified the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the
environment due to 40 acres of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or
Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance being converted to
non-agricultural uses. According to Table 3.7-2, Important Farmlands
Within Project Footprint by Reach, Reaches 7B and 8 contain 0.0 acre of
Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and Local
Importance. Therefore, Reach 7B or Reach 8 is not disproportionately
affected.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.7.3.4, Agricultural and Forest Resources, identified the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative as having a potentially significant impact to the
environment due to 4.0 acres of Williamson Act designated land being
subject to permanent conversion. According to Table 3.7.3, Williamson
Act Lands within the Project Footprint by Reach, Reaches 7B and 8
contain 0.0 acres of Williamson Act lands. Therefore, Reach 7B or
Reach 8 is not disproportionately affected.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
The following impacts are associated with Operations and Maintenance
activities:
Section 4.2.3.4, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative as a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to operations that would perpetuate channel instability (incision) and
resultant water quality impacts in Reach 5 and Reach 6. This impact
would not disproportionately impact Reach 7B or 8, environmental justice
communities of concern.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-234

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.2.3.4, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative as a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to operations that would perpetuate channel instability (incision) and
thus water quality impacts in Reach 5 and Reach 6. This impact would
not disproportionately impact Reach 7B or 8, environmental justice
communities of concern.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.2.3.4, Hydrology and Water Quality, identified the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative as a potentially significant impact to the environment
due to operations that would perpetuate channel instability (incision) and
resultant erosion and siltation impacts in Reach 5 and Reach 6. This
impact would not disproportionately impact Reach 7B or 8, environmental
justice communities of concern.
Impact Determination: no disproportionate adverse effect
Section 4.12.3.4, Noise, identified the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative as
having a potentially significant impact to the environment due to routine
operation and maintenance activities that could produce periodic
increases in ambient noise levels during the life of the Project in excess of
standards established in the local general plan, noise ordinance, or
applicable standards of other agencies. Similar to the NRCS Alternative,
except that Reach 8 would require additional creek and tunnel
maintenance and Reach 6 Bypass would also require maintenance.
Similar to the Tunnel Alternative, discussed above in Section 4.19.3.1, the
nearest residences along all reaches would exceed corresponding noise
standards under the NRCS and Reach 6 Bypass alternatives, Reach 8
would have the highest noise of any reach. Therefore, the impact would
disproportionately impact Reach 8, an environmental justice community of
concern.
Impact Determination: disproportionate adverse effect
Mitigation measures and BMPs for this alternative, including O&M
activities are discussed and described in Chapter 5 and Table 5.4-1
Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives of this EIS.

4.19.4 Summary of Impacts to Environmental Justice
Under the No Project Alternative, flooding would continue causing economic
impact to businesses, substantial degradation and violation to water quality
standards due to bank erosion and sedimentation, structures and people to be
exposed to 100-year flood hazard, interference with emergency access,
emergency response, evacuation plans, public transportation, bicycle paths, and
pedestrian facilities, all of which would disproportionately affect an environmental
justice community of concern.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-235

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences
All alternatives would result in temporary and permanent loss of California
sycamore woodland habitat, excess noise levels, excess groundborne vibration,
periodic increases in ambient noise levels, degraded visual character or quality of
the surrounding area, conversion of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, and
Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance, and conversion of Williamson Act
land. However, the distribution of these impacts would be across multiple Project
reaches and would not disproportionately affect an environmental justice
community of concern, except for the Tunnel and Reach 6 Bypass Alternatives
where excess noise levels disproportionately impact Reach 8, an environmental
justice community of concern.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Environmental Justice are discussed and
described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-236

Chapter 4

4.20

Environmental Consequences

CUMULATIVE IMPACTS
4.20.1 Introduction
Section 1508.7 of the CEQ Regulations defines a cumulative impact as “The
impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the
action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions regardless of what agency (Federal or non-Federal) or person
undertakes such other actions.” Cumulative impacts may result from individually
minor but collectively significant effects of several projects over a period of time.
Cumulative effects may occur when a project’s incremental impacts, added to
those of other closely related past, present, and reasonably foreseeable probable
future projects, become environmentally important.
The cumulative impact analysis is based on a summary of past, present and
reasonably probable future projects within and near the proposed Project area
that would affect similar resources in the same geographic area and in the same
general timeframe. Therefore, these projects could result in cumulative impacts
in combination with the proposed Project alternatives. Table 4.20.2 defines the
Project area for each environmental resource evaluated for cumulative impacts.
Cumulative project information listed in Table 4.20.3 is based on information
supplied by the City of Morgan Hill, the County of Santa Clara, and the SCVWD.
The list identifies projects by the three planning jurisdictions that would likely
contribute to cumulative impacts. Cumulative impacts for some resources are not
quantifiable and are, therefore, discussed in general terms.
Two of the projects listed in the table have been completed but are included in
the cumulative impact analysis because they are located in the same area as the
Proposed Action and continued construction could affect the same of similar
resources. The Butterfield Boulevard South Extension overlaps with the
proposed Project at West Little Llagas near Watsonville and Monterey roads near
Reach 7A. In addition, the Wright-Mañana Residential Development
(constructed near the corner of Hale and Wright Avenues, overlaps with the
project in Reach 8. These two projects are included in the water quality and
hydrology and biological resources discussions. The Cochrane-Borello
Residential Development Project includes removal of existing orchards and
associated uses on Cochrane Road near the base of Anderson Dam. This
project is considered in the cumulative assessment for biological resources,
agricultural resources, and traffic and transportation (Morgan Hill, 2012).
This Draft EIS concludes that impacts associated with socioeconomics, land use
and population and housing, would not have the potential to result in significant
adverse impact in combination with the projects identified in Table 4.20-3.
Support for this conclusion is provided below and no further discussion is
provided in the cumulative impact assessment.
Socioeconomic impacts of the proposed Project alternatives generally would be
beneficial and when land is acquired by easement or otherwise disrupted,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-237

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

property owners would receive appropriate compensation. Property tax revenue
could be lowered as a result of land acquisition, but the amount would be
extremely small in relation to the local tax base. Other projects included in Table
4.20-3 are not expected to result in adverse socioeconomic impacts, and many
would have beneficial impacts due to the creation of employment opportunities,
purchase of goods and services, and creation of housing.
The proposed Project alternatives’ use of lands designated for residential,
commercial, and agricultural uses for flood prevention purposes is consistent with
local health and safety and environmental regulations and land use policies. The
proposed Project would not induce population growth, and although the Project
alternatives could result in displacement of up to 12 residences, many of the
projects listed in Table 4.20-1 would create numerous new residences, and none
of the other projects are known to result in a loss of residences.
The Project area for cumulative impacts varies by resource as shown in Table
4.20-2, depending on likelihood that impacts from the project alternatives could
combine with those of other projects. For some resources, such as noise and
aesthetic resources, the project area is limited to the project vicinity because
projects located further away would not have the potential to affect the same
area. For other resources, such as air quality, the project area includes a
broader area because impacts of the project alternatives could disperse
throughout the region or affect resources located throughout the region thereby
affecting the same resources as other projects.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-238

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.20.2 Resources Analyzed for Cumulative Impacts
Table 4.20-2 Defines Project Area of Each Resource Analyzed for Cumulative Impacts
Resource

Project Area

Geology and Soils

Upper Llagas Creek Watershed

Hydrology and Water
Quality

Llagas Creek Watershed

Mineral Resources

Available Mineral Resources along Upper Llagas Creek

Botanical Resources

Upper Llagas Creek and special-status species habitat in Santa Clara
County

Wildlife Resources

Upper Llagas Creek and special-status species habitat in Santa Clara
County

Aquatic Resources

Upper Llagas Creek and special-status species habitat in Santa Clara
County

Agricultural and Forest
Resources

All agricultural lands within Santa Clara County boundaries

Land Use and Planning

N/A

Cultural Resources

Llagas Creek corridor

Traffic and Circulation

Traffic networks intersecting the Upper Llagas Creek vicinity and haul
routes

Air Quality and
Greenhouse Gases

San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin

Noise

Lands bordering Reaches 4, 5, and 6 on Upper Llagas Creek,
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8 on West Little Llagas Creek, and Reach 14 on
East Little Llagas Creek

Aesthetic Resources

Upper Llagas Creek viewshed

Utilities and Public
Services

The City of Morgan Hill and Sphere of Influence of the City of Gilroy,
and unincorporated Santa Clara County along Upper Llagas Creek

Recreation Resources

The City of Morgan Hill and Sphere of Influence of the City of Gilroy,
and unincorporated Santa Clara County along Upper Llagas Creek

Population and
Housing

N/A

Socioeconomics

N/A

Hazards and
Hazardous Materials

Morgan Hill and unincorporated Santa Clara County along the Upper
Llagas Creek

Environmental Justice

N/A

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-239

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-240

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.20-3 List of Projects Evaluated for Cumulative Impacts in the Upper Llagas Creek Flood Control Project Vicinity
Distance from
Proposed Action

Project Name

Location

Project Description

Santa Clara Valley Water
District (SCVWD) Anderson
Dam Seismic Studies and
Retrofit Project

Anderson Reservoir is a man-made lake
along Coyote Creek in Santa Clara County,
California near Morgan Hill. The dam sits
on the Calaveras Fault, which runs from
Hollister to Milpitas.

Retrofit and strengthen Anderson Dam so it can withstand any
probable earthquake.

SCVWD Almaden Lake

Almaden Lake is a man-made lake fed by
Alamitos Creek upstream of the confluence
of Alamitos Creek and the Guadalupe
River.

Almaden Lake, which has the high concentration of methyl mercury, is
jointly owned by the SCVWD and the City of San Jose (the City); and
the City is responsible for management of recreational facilities at the
lake. To address the mercury issue, the SCVWD is planning the
Almaden Lake project to modify the lake to achieve these objectives:
>

Reduce mercury in target fish and production of methyl mercury to
meet applicable water quality standards;

>

Reduce thermal barrier to anadromous fish migration;

>

Remove entrainment and impacts from predatory species; and

>

Minimize impacts to recreational features.

Potential Cumulative Impact Topics

Schedule/Status

Anderson Dam sits on
Cochrane Road, east of
Morgan Hill, on Coyote
Creek, approximately 5 miles
from Upper Llagas Creek.

Potential construction-related noise, air
quality, and traffic impacts on local access
roads and potential impacts on steelhead.

Planning: 2011–2013
Design: 2013–2016
Construction: 2016–2018

Almaden Lake is
approximately 17 miles for
the north end of Reach 8.

Impacts to steelhead.

Planning and design: 2014
Construction: 2015

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

In Development Process.

Barry Swenson Builder
Downtown Morgan Hill
Revitalization

Redevelopment sites A & B (1st and
Monterey and 2nd and Monterey) in
Downtown Morgan Hill

Barry Swenson Builder to design and develop two crucial locations in
Downtown Morgan Hill.

Less than 1 mile south of
Reach 8.

High Speed Rail
California High-Speed Rail
Authority (CaHSRA)

Two routes under consideration:
One route runs east of existing Union
Pacific tracks through Morgan Hill.
One route runs east of existing U.S.
Highway 101 (U.S. 101) until around
Dunne Avenue. When the freeway bends,
the high speed rail keeps going straight
and lines up along Murphy Avenue and
continues to San Martin.

By 2029, high speed rail running from San Francisco to Los Angeles
via the Central Valley, including 800 miles of new track and up to 24
stations. Morgan Hill is working with other communities, transportation
groups, and the CaHSRA to identify the best location for where the
High Speed rail will pass through Morgan Hill.

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Butterfield Boulevard Linear
Park, Park Facilities – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering Capital
Improvement Projects (CIP)

Butterfield Boulevard

Provides landscaping, walkways, and combination Class 1
bikeway/walkway along Butterfield Channel.

Within 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

This project would provide additional public
access and recreational opportunities.

Phase 1 and Phase 2 are complete.
Phase 3 (San Pedro to Tennant) in
Development

Community Park
Improvements, Park Facilities
– Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Community Park, east and south of Cosmo
Avenue, west of Monterey Road, and north
of West Edmundson Road

Park improvements, including addition of six tennis courts, new multipurpose fields, expanded play area including water feature, second
restroom, new tennis clubhouse, outdoor basketball court lighting,
expanded parking.

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 7B.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts. This project
would provide additional recreational
opportunities.

Phase 1 completed in Fiscal Year
(FY) 07/08. Phase 2 in FY 13/14
includes all improvements west of
the access road.
Phases 3 and 4 contingent on
relocation of PW Corp Yard and Bus
Barn.

Madrone Channel Trail, Park
Facilities – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Between Cochrane Road and Tennant
Avenue

Construct an unpaved trail on existing SCVWD service road, adjacent
to Madrone recharge channel east of Hwy 101, between Cochrane
Road and Tennant Avenue. Construction includes minor
improvements to existing maintenance road, rest areas, and signage.

Approximately 2 miles east
of Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated. This project would provide
additional public access and recreational
opportunities.

Design and construction scheduled
to begin in FY 11/12.

Sanitary Sewer Rehabilitation,
Sanitary Sewer – Part of the
5-Year Engineering CIP

Citywide

Maintaining the City's sewer collection system requires an ongoing
program of evaluation, cleaning, improvement, and repairs. Sewer
lines are routinely cleaned and video-recorded as needed to evaluate
the system.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Possible overlap with the utility relocation
process for the Proposed Project, which
could result in an impact on utility
infrastructure.

Construction slated for 2013–2014

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Draft EIR/Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) currently underway.

December 2015

4-241

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Distance from
Proposed Action

Project Name

Location

Project Description

Potential Cumulative Impact Topics

Schedule/Status

Lift Station Rehabilitation,
Sanitary Sewer – Part of the 5Year Engineering CIP

Citywide

The 14 citywide lift stations are systematically upgraded or replaced as
needed. Various improvements include new pump and motor,
electrical system, high level floats, alarms, generators available for (or
dedicated to) each lift station, generator transfer switches, and a new
telemetry system for after-hours monitoring at Public Works and City
facilities.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Possible overlap with the utility relocation
process for the Proposed Project, which
could result in an impact on utility
infrastructure.

Lift Station P construction was
completed in FY 09/10. Lift Stations
M and O will be designed and
reconstructed in FY 11/12 and FY
13/14, respectively.

New Sewer Mains, Sanitary
Sewer – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Citywide

New sewer mains are required to ensure adequate sewer capacity as
the City expands. In accordance with the 2002 Sewer Master Plan,
some mains will be constructed by the City and some by developers
with partial reimbursement from the City.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads.

In FY 13/14 the second phase of the
Hill-Barrett trunk sewer will be
installed.

Storm Pipe and Inlet
Installation, Storm Drainage –
Part of the 5-Year Engineering
CIP

Citywide

Construction of storm drains and storm inlets at various locations
within the City to resolve existing drainage problems, as needed.
Problem areas are targeted to eliminate local flooding problems.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Possible overlap with the utility relocation
process for the Proposed Project, which
could result in an impact on utility
infrastructure.

In Process

West Little Llagas Local
Drainage, Storm Drainage –
Part of the 5-Year Engineering
CIP

West Little Llagas Creek in Morgan Hill

Due to delay of federal funding, the City and the SCVWD have entered
into a cost-sharing agreement to produce design documents for the
Upper Llagas Flood Control Project (aka PL566).

Within Project footprint in
Morgan Hill.

Possible overlap with the utility relocation
process for the Proposed Project, which
could result in an impact on utility
infrastructure.

Design and Environmental Study
are expected to begin in April 2010
and to be completed by January
2013.

Butterfield Detention Basin,
Storm Drainage – Part of the 5Year Engineering CIP

Maple / Railroad

Construction of 30+-acre detention basin in accordance with adopted
Butterfield Boulevard. EIR. Project would be jointly managed as a
Burrowing Owl habitat. Project will have potential as joint-use
basin/outdoor recreation area. This project is a requirement for the
construction of Butterfield from Tennant Avenue. to Watsonville Road.
If this project is constructed, the Morgan Hill Ranch secondary basin,
now comprising 4 acres, can be developed.

Approximately 1 mile east
Reaches 8 and 7B boundary
at Dewitt Creek.

No overlap of construction periods, since
construction of the detention basin is
complete.

Project slated to begin in 2012.

Butterfield Boulevard South
Extension, Streets and Roads
– Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Butterfield Boulevard from Tennant Avenue
to Watsonville Road, Morgan Hill

Extend Butterfield Boulevard from Tennant Avenue to Watsonville
Road, including a grade separation over the Union Pacific Railroad
tracks. In addition to the roadway work, a stormwater channel and
detention basin will be constructed.

Project area runs less than
0.5 mile from Reach 7A.

No overlap of construction periods, since
construction of the road extension is
complete.

Project is scheduled to be complete
2013.

Butterfield Boulevard North
Extension, Streets and Roads
– Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Butterfield Boulevard north of Cochrane
Road

Extend Butterfield Boulevard north from Cochrane Road to Madrone
Parkway. Improvements include new road section per City standards,
curb and gutter, sidewalks, and streetlights.

Approximately 2 miles
northeast of Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods since
construction of the road extension is
complete.

Scheduled to be complete 2012.

New Signal Construction,
Streets and Roads – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering CIP

Citywide

New traffic signals are installed as needed to meet growing traffic
demands. In FY 07/08, the intersection of Monterey Road and Spring
Avenue was studied. It was determined that a new signal was
warranted for safety and circulation purposes. The recently approved
General Plan Circulation Element includes the Study's
recommendation.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads.

In FY 12/13 and FY 14/15, signals at
locations yet to be determined will
be installed at warranted locations in
accordance with the General Plan.

Pavement Rehabilitation
Program, Streets and Roads –
Part of the 5-Year Engineering
CIP

Citywide

This Program involves the rehabilitation of existing street surfaces by
crack sealing, slurry seal, overlay, or reconstruction in FY 10/11.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Scheduled for FY 10/11.

Cochrane Road Traffic Signal
Timing/ Coordination, Streets
and Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Cochrane Road, Morgan Hill

Interconnect traffic signals and striping to improve traffic movement
and safety. Signals are to be synchronized to facilitate efficiency.

1.5 miles north of Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads.

Timing based on earliest date the
City may receive VTP 2035 Grant.
Staff will pursue other grant
opportunities to accelerate timing of
project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-242

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Distance from
Proposed Action

Project Name

Location

Project Description

Potential Cumulative Impact Topics

Schedule/Status

Underground Monterey
Utilities, Streets and Roads –
Part of the 5-Year Engineering
CIP

Monterey Road, Dunne to 600 feet north of
Cosmo

City's goal is to underground the overhead utility lines along Monterey
Road from Dunne Avenue to Tennant Avenue.
PG&E is responsible for design. Sufficient Rule 20A funds are
available to accomplish undergrounding from Dunne to approximately
600 feet north of Cosmo.

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reaches 8 and 7B boundary
at Dewitt Creek.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Construction anticipated to begin in
FY 10/11.

Residential Development
Control System (RDCS)
School Safety Improvements,
Streets and Roads – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering CIP

Citywide

Construct school pedestrian safety improvements in accordance with
RDCS ordinance. Funds can also be used to supplement improvement
projects undertaken by developers near schools.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads noise impacts.

2010–2015

Underground Utilities, Streets
and Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Misc. Locations – Citywide

The Utility Undergrounding fund receives revenues from developers
authorized by the City to pay an in-lieu fee for the utility
undergrounding required of their projects according to the Municipal
Code. The funds collected are aggregated to pay for utility
undergrounding at key locations in the City. The CIP carries a
placeholder for these funds so that they may be used either as a
stand-alone CIP project or contributed to a larger project to accomplish
undergrounding beyond the limits and responsibility of that project.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts. Possible overlap
with the utility relocation process for the
Proposed Project, which could result in an
impact on utility infrastructure.

2010–2015

U.S. 101 / Tennant
Interchange, Streets and
Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

U.S. 101 / Tennant Interchange

Widen Tennant Avenue bridge over U.S. 101 and construct a loop
ramp for eastbound Tennant Avenue to northbound U.S. 101. In FY
06/07, the Project Study Report was finalized, completing the
environmental clearance for the project.

Less than 2 miles east of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Construction began in FY 09/10 and
is scheduled to be completed in
spring of 2011.

Downtown Parking, Streets
and Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Downtown Morgan Hill

Provide more parking downtown by acquiring properties, creating new
lots, and expanding or connecting existing lots. In addition, the City's
parking lot on the east side of Monterey between Second and Third
streets is targeted for expansion. Other parking lots will be constructed
as sites become available.

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

2010–2015

Santa Teresa Construction,
Streets and Roads – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering CIP

From Main Avenue to Spring Avenue

Construct Santa Teresa from Main Avenue to DeWitt. Project scope
includes roadway improvements, sidewalks, bike lanes, and
streetlights. The recently adopted General Plan Circulation Element
update has designated this road segment to be a two-lane arterial.

Less than 1 mile east of
Reaches 8 and 7B boundary
at Dewitt Creek.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Final design, right-of-way (ROW)
acquisition, and environmental
review may occur in FY 10/11,
followed by construction in FY
11/12.

West Dunne Avenue Widening,
Streets and Roads – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering CIP

West Dunne Avenue from Monterey Road
to Peak Avenue

W. Dunne Avenue to be improved to its ultimate width from Monterey
to Peak. No increase in number of travel lanes at this time: will be one
lane each direction, with center turning lane. Project will feature safety
improvements including new sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streetlights and
bike lanes, and will underground existing overhead utility lines.

Within 2 miles of Reaches 8
and 7B boundary at Dewitt
Creek.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

In FY 08/09 final design,
environmental review and ROW
acquisition began, construction
expected to begin early FY 10/11.

Cochrane Road Widening,
Streets and Roads – Part of
the 5-Year Engineering CIP

Cochrane Road, 300 feet East of Sutter
Boulevard to U.S. 101

Widen Cochrane Road, east-bound direction, to provide Class II Bike
lane and new sidewalk. The City received $162,000 in Transportation
Fund for Clean Air (TFCA) grant funds in July of 2009 for this project.

1.5 miles north of Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

2010–2015

Downtown Street
Revitalization, Streets and
Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Downtown Morgan Hill

MTC Planning grant program focusing on revitalization of Monterey
Road. downtown, including lighting/landscaping of median between
Dunne Avenue and Main Avenue. RDA funding for downtown area
provided includes pavement repair, curb/gutter/sidewalk repair, water
and sewer upgrades, lighting and landscaping upgrades.

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

2011–2015

RDCS Miscellaneous Public
Improvements, Streets and
Roads – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Citywide

Construct public improvements, including street and utility
improvements, to fill gaps and enhance safety, determined by the
need to construct public improvements in areas where gaps exist with
emphasis on major arterial streets and other locations shown on the
RDCS List of Street Improvements.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts. Possible overlap
with the utility relocation process for the
Proposed Project, which could result in an
impact on utility infrastructure.

2010–2015

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-243

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Project Name

Location

Project Description

Distance from
Proposed Action

Potential Cumulative Impact Topics

Schedule/Status

Water Main Replacement,
Water – Part of the 5-Year
Engineering CIP

Citywide

This project budgets for regular improvements to the City's existing
water system.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

The replacement of water main
located in Main Avenue from Peak
to Monterey is scheduled to be
installed in FY 10/11.

New Water Mains, Water –
Part of the 5-Year Engineering
CIP

Citywide

New water mains are required to provide adequate water supply as
the City expands. In accordance with the 2002 Water Master Plan,
some mains will be constructed by the City, and some by developers
with partial reimbursement from the City.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated. Possible relocation required if
within footprint of the utility relocation
process for the Proposed Project, which
could result in an impact on utility
infrastructure.

The new main in Mast Avenue from
Church Street to Railroad Avenue is
scheduled to be installed in FY
12/13.

Morgan Hill Bikeways Master
Plan
Bicycle and Trails Advisory
Committee (BTAC)

Citywide

Would reduce air pollution by increasing use of bicycles for
commuting, reducing automobile use and emissions. Would increase
numbers of children cycling to school.

Within 2 miles of all points of
Project site.

This project would provide additional public
access opportunities.

Slowly incorporated as other
transportation projects are
developed.

Hale Avenue Extension Project
(previously Santa Teresa
Boulevard Improvement
Project)
Project 546007, part of the
5-Year Engineering CIP

From Hale Avenue to DeWitt Avenue,
crossing Dunne Avenue

Currently, north-south traffic west of Monterey Road must take a
circuitous route through residential neighborhoods. Should the Santa
Teresa Boulevard connection be constructed, north-south traffic will
use an arterial street that won't have houses fronting the street, thus
providing a safer and more efficient means of driving north or south
through the western part of Morgan Hill. It will also improve emergency
vehicle access.

Less than 0.5 mile of
Reaches 8 and 7B boundary
at Dewitt Creek.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

Project is planned for construction
beginning in 2013.

The Lodge at Morgan Hill
Community Development
Partners

Northwest corner of Butterfield Boulevard
and Barrett Avenue

138 unit, three-story Senior Apartment project on 5.643 acres. Building
amenities include a 3,132-square-foot (sf) commercial kitchen, dining
commons, hair salon, card room, computer room, family dining room,
reading room, two elevators, exercise room, six laundry rooms, staff
locker room, and storage areas for management staff. Site amenities
include Bocce court, BBQ area, decorative masonry seating area, two
landscaped ponds, covered walkway to vehicle drop off location,
vegetated emergency vehicle EVA access road, and meandering
sidewalks for outdoor exercise.

Approximately 1 mile east of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Vertical Construction began at the
end of February and is scheduled to
be completed December 2013.

Wright-Mañana Residential
Development

Corner of Hale and Wright avenues

15 single-family-residential structures

Within Project footprint in
Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods since
construction of the of the housing
development is complete.

Completed in 2012.

Cochrane-Borello Residential
Development

Cochrane Road near the base of Anderson
Dam

Development of a gated residential community, consisting of
244 single-family homes, up to 180 secondary units; a private
recreation center (including community pool, tennis court, basketball
court, tot lot, fitness center, and outdoor gathering areas), private
streets, approximately 23 acres of private open space, private parks,
and surrounding landscaping.

Within range of haul route of
excavated earth materials
from Proposed Project.

Construction-related traffic impacts on local
roads and cumulative impacts related to
biological resources, noise, air quality, and
agricultural resources.

EIR completed 2012. Project
completion estimated 2023.

Monterey Dynasty

Monterey Road, across from California
Department of Forestry (CDF) Fire Station

Retail Commercial, 268,888 sf.

Within 1 mile southeast of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

In Process March 2012

Michael Dunn,
Villas of San Marcos II

Barrett Avenue, Morgan Hill

41 Multi-Family Units, Low Density, Open Market (consisting of
projects of more than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Approximately 2 miles east
of Reach 7B.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality impacts.

(unknown)

Standard Pacific Homes, Rose
Garden

Between Barrett Avenue and San Pedro,
Morgan Hill

53 Single-Family Units, Medium Density, Open Market (consisting of
projects of more than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Approximately 1 mile east of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Under Construction, March 2012

City Ventures,
Huntington Square

Main Avenue and Butterfield Boulevard,
Morgan Hill

148 Multi-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

(unknown)

EAH, Inc., Casa Diana

Dunne Avenue and Butterfield Boulevard,
Morgan Hill

80 Multi-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Under Construction, March 2012

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-244

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Project Name

Location

Project Description

Distance from
Proposed Action

Potential Cumulative Impact Topics

Schedule/Status

Gunter Building,
Vista Del Toro

17620 Monterey Road, Morgan Hill

15 Small Vertical Mixed Use Units: a mix of ground floor retail or office
and residential use allowed in mixed use districts

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

4 Units Approved, March 2012

Tri Pointe Homes,
Ironhorse

E. Central Avenue at
Calle Mazatan, Morgan Hill

32 Single-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

Site Review in Process, March 2012

Monterey Dynasty,
Diamond Creek

Monterey Road, between Vineyard and
Watsonville

131 Multi-Family Units, Rental, Open Market (consisting of projects of
more than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 7A.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

Tentative Map Approved,
March 2012

City Ventures, E. Dunne – City
Ventures

E. Dunne Avenue and Church Street,
Morgan Hill

50 Multi-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Under Construction, March 2012

E & H Third Fam,
Campoli - E & H

Campoli Drive and Old Monterey Road,
Morgan Hill

Small Project, 11 Single-Family Units

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Under Construction, March 2012

City Ventures,
San Gregorio

Between Hale Avenue and Del Monte
Avenue, Morgan Hill

45 Single-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

No overlap of construction periods is
anticipated.

Under Construction, March 2012

Monterey Dynasty,
Red Jasper

Monterey Road, North of Cosmo Avenue,
Morgan Hill

CC-R/CL-R Project, 38 Multi-Family Units

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 7B.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

(unknown)

Dividend Homes, Connemara

Watsonville Road, Morgan Hill

Senior, 37 Single-Family Units

Less than 0.5 mile from
Reach 7A.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

Under Construction, August 2013

Dividend Investments, Mission
Ranch

Mission View and Cochrane Road Morgan
Hill

328 Single Family Units, Open Market (housing of any type typically
consisting of projects of more than 15 dwelling units at build-out).
Developments can be sold at rates moderate and above moderate
income households

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

Under Construction, August 2013

San Sebastian MH General
Partnership

Peet Road between Hill Road and
Cochrane Road, Morgan Hill

244 Single-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

1.5 miles north of Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality impacts.

Under Construction, August 2013

Meritage Homes,
AS 13-06

2060 Hecker Pass Hwy, Morgan Hill

187-Single Family Homes

Less than 0.5 mile east of
Reach 7B.

No overlap of construction periods since
construction of the housing development is
complete.

Complete, September 2013

Meritage Homes,
Hale-Meritage Homes

Between Hale and Old Monterey Road,
Morgan Hill

108 Single-Family Units, Open Market (consisting of projects of more
than 15 dwelling units at build-out).

Less than 1 mile east of
Reach 8.

Potential construction-related traffic impacts
on local access roads and associated air
quality and noise impacts.

EIR Completed October 2013

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-245

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-246

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

The following describes the potential for cumulative impacts on each resource
area listed in Table 4.20-2.

4.20.2.1

Geology and Soils

As discussed in Section 4.1, maintenance would require activities such as
excavation, stockpiling, and transportation of soils and could result in
substantial erosion and loss of topsoil. However, implementation of
SCVWD BMPs that would avoid or minimize soil erosion and off-site
sediment transport would adequately prevent impacts associated with
erosion and sediment delivery. In addition state (Construction General
Permit) and local regulations (SCVWD BMPs) are in place to prevent the
erosion and transportation of topsoil associated with construction
activities required for the proposed Project. Other projects would also be
required to meet regulatory standards to prevent erosion.
Also discussed in Section 3.1, the proposed Project would include
deepening and widening of existing earthen channels; newly constructed
hydraulic structures such as box culverts and concrete retaining walls;
and roads. Potential damage to Project features, due to earthquake
induced liquefaction, could impede the function of the flood control
system, diminish flood capacity, and present physical hazards such as
ground ruptures, and thus these failures could threaten public health and
safety. Potential effects associated with fault rupture and liquefaction
could be significant, relative to subterranean construction and the
additional Project features, with respect to impeding the function of the
flood management system. Overall the proposed Project would be an
improvement as compared to the No Action Alternative. The proposed
Project, as well as other projects, would be required to meet regulatory
standards to minimize seismic-induced damage and impacts of
liquefaction and other geohazards. Therefore, there should be no
cumulative erosion and loss of topsoil and exposure of people or
structures to geologic and seismic hazards as a result of the project.

4.20.2.2

Hydrology and Water Quality

As discussed in Section 3.2, the Project alternatives would not affect
groundwater levels or groundwater recharge. Thus, no cumulative
impacts would occur. They would have a beneficial impact on flooding, so
would not contribute to a significant cumulative impact related to flooding.
Water quality impacts from construction would be minimized by
compliance with BMPs and the SWPPP required under the GCP, which
would prevent cumulative water quality impacts. The potential for bat
roosting with consequent contamination and degradation of water quality
by bat guano in the tunnel section of Reach 8 is identified as a less than
significant impact with mitigation for the Preferred and Reach 6 Bypass
alternatives. No other projects were identified that are known to have the
potential to affect water quality in Llagas Creek; therefore, no cumulative
impacts would occur.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-247

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Implementation of state and local regulations requiring the use of BMPs
during construction would prevent impacts on water quality related to
runoff. Other construction projects would also be required to implement
BMPs and major projects would need to obtain authorization under the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Construction General
Permit. In addition, the geomorphic design of the creek would reduce
erosion that currently occurs, thus further reducing impacts to water
quality. The mitigation required for the Butterfield Boulevard Extension
included rock riprap and other appropriate erosion control measures that
were installed along critical points of potential erosion from water flow,
including at the outfalls into West Little Llagas Creek and along areas
where the Butterfield Channel may overbank into surrounding land (City of
Morgan Hill 2010a). The Wright-Mañana Residential Development was
required to prepare an Erosion Control Plan as a standard condition prior
to issuance of building and/or site development permit, subject to review
and approval of the Director of Public Works. In addition, postconstruction BMPs implemented by the Wright-Mañana Residential
Development to reduce pollutant loading in local waterways included
installation of a hydrodynamic separator, proper maintenance and
disposal of sediments in the proposed underground detention system, and
stenciling of stormwater catch basins to avoid illegal dumping (City of
Morgan Hill 2005). Both the City of Morgan Hill and the county have
policies in place that require developers to include mitigation to eliminate
the flood-inducing impacts of their projects and protect water quality from
contamination. The City of Morgan Hill Storm Drainage Master Plan would
also include installation of storm drains within the vicinity of the Project.
The use of BMPs and adherence to regulations would result in less than
cumulatively significant impacts to water quality.

4.20.2.3

Mineral Resources

As discussed in Section 4.3 Mineral Resources, the Project action
alternatives could inadvertently impact the local mineral of importance
poppy jasper. The likelihood is low, however, because the existing
identified deposits of poppy jasper are located outside of the Project
boundary, and it is unlikely that a new sizable deposit would be
discovered during construction. There is, however, a potential for other
projects listed in Table 4.6-1 to also inadvertently affect poppy jasper. If
this happened, the cumulative effect would be significant, and the
Project’s contribution would be cumulatively considerable. Mitigation
Measure MIN-2 T would reduce the Project alternatives’ contribution to
less than cumulatively considerable because it would require evaluation of
any discoveries by a qualified geologist and notification of the property
owner, who could determine the appropriate course of action. Therefore,
the Project alternatives’ contribution to the cumulative impact would be
less than cumulatively considerable with mitigation.

4.20.2.4

Biological Resources (Aquatic, Wildlife, and Botanical)

As discussed in Section 4.4, Botanical Resources, the proposed Project
could temporarily and permanently affect native vegetation and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-248

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

jurisdictional wetlands and waters that are located within the stream
reaches, and these impacts would be less than significant with mitigation.
The projects identified within the proposed Project footprint (WrightMañana Residential Development and Butterfield Boulevard South
Extension) did not affect wetlands. Given that most of the proposed
development is in urban areas, they are unlikely to affect wetlands, and
while proposed trails could be located near wetlands, it is not likely that
wetlands would be removed to allow their construction. Thus, cumulative
impacts to wetlands are not expected to occur. If other projects did affect
wetlands, cumulative impacts would be significant, and the Project
alternatives’ contribution would be considerable. It would be reduced to
less than significant through implementation of Mitigation Measures
described in Chapter 5 Table 5.4.1.
All of the proposed Project action alternatives would have less than
significant impacts with mitigation on sensitive plant communities (except
California sycamore woodlands), riparian communities, special-status
plants and their habitats. Impacts on sycamore woodlands would be
significant and unavoidable for all alternatives. The Wright-Mañana
Residential Development, Butterfield Boulevard South Extension, and
Cochrane– Borello Residential Development Project, also had or would
have impacts on trees. The Wright-Mañana Residential Development
removed 36 trees; the Butterfield Extension removed 25 trees, 13 of
which met the definition of a significant size (City of Morgan Hill 2010d);
and the Cochrane–Borello Residential Development Project would
remove 58 ordinance-sized trees in addition to all the orchard trees in the
Project area (Morgan Hill 2012). It is likely that other projects could affect
botanical resources, as well.
Thus, the cumulative impact would be significant, and the Project
alternatives’ contribution would be considerable. It would be reduced to
less than cumulatively considerable with the implementation of Mitigation
Measures (Chapter 5) because impacts would be reduced or avoided,
with the exception of impacts to sycamore trees, which would remain
significant. Other projects would be required to implement measures to
reduce or avoid impacts as well.
The requirements outlined in the Butterfield Boulevard Extension
Mitigated Negative Declaration (MND) (City of Morgan Hill 2010d) to
protect trees and replace trees impacted or removed during demolition
and grading activities also demonstrates that projects in the area are held
to a high standard for tree preservation.
The Butterfield Boulevard Extension also had a riparian habitat restoration
plan with a replacement ratio of 3:1 (3 acres of habitat created for each
acre disturbed), and the restoration will be monitored for 5 years (City of
Morgan Hill 2010d). The local agencies are controlling the cumulative
reduction of vegetation in the region, as demonstrated in the conditions of
these projects.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-249

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Mitigation required with the Proposed Project would result in defined
riparian zones, which would be beneficial to both aquatic and terrestrial
wildlife and would likely be an improvement over current conditions. Thus,
no cumulative impacts would occur.
As discussed in Section 4.5, Wildlife Resources, the Project alternatives
could adversely affect sensitive habitats used by special-status species,
including burrowing owl, western pond turtle, California tiger salamander
(CTS), special-status birds, and San Francisco dusky-footed woodrat.
Direct mortality or injury could occur from animals being crushed by
construction vehicles, or becoming entrapped in construction trenches
associated with channel excavation. Implementation of various SCVWD
BMPs related to water quality and biological resources would minimize the
Project’s potential impacts on special-status birds and bats, CTS, and
western pond turtle, although impacts would remain significant, requiring
mitigation. Other projects likely would have impacts on wildlife resources,
as well, and cumulative impacts would be significant. In particular, future
projects could have the potential to affect dusky footed woodrats and CTS
related to the High Speed Rail Project and various trails, parks, and
recreational master plans or housing development in areas that currently
of minimal urban disturbance. The Project alternatives’ contribution to this
impact would be considerable, but would be reduced to less than
considerable by implementation of Mitigation Measures described in
Chapter 5, as well as other measures described in Section 4.5.
Other projects would be required to implement mitigation measures, as
well. The City of Morgan Hill has a Burrowing Owl Habitat Mitigation Plan,
which includes a 250-foot buffer from occupied burrows during breeding
season (City of Morgan Hill 2005, 2010d). In addition, the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) has new protocols for burrowing
owls, established in 2012. These regulations are focused on preventing
cumulative impacts on burrowing owls in the area.
The Wright-Mañana Residential Development permit also contained
conditions to protect nesting raptors. The permit contains time periods for
avoiding nesting season and surveys and buffers in consultation with
CDFW if breeding season could not be avoided (City of Morgan Hill
2005). The Butterfield project proposed to conduct vegetation and tree
removal during non-breeding season (scheduled removal to occur
between September 1 and February 1) (City of Morgan Hill 2010d). The
Cochrane-Borello Residential Development Project EIR included
mitigation requiring that project construction be scheduled to commence
between February 1 and August 31; a preconstruction survey will be
conducted by a qualified biologist for nesting birds within the onsite trees,
as well as all trees within 250 feet of the site.
Between the Project, the Butterfield Extension, the Wright-Mañana
Residential Development Project, and the Cochrane-Borello Residential
Development Project, approximately 2,300 trees were or would be
removed, and additional trees could be removed by other development.
The trees defined as significant in size that could be considered roosting
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-250

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

habit could total 100 trees or more between the four projects. Although
100 trees are being removed, ample trees would remain in the area that
would be available for nesting including the upper reaches of Llagas
Creek; therefore, the impact on roosting and nesting habitat for raptors
and bats would be cumulatively less than significant.
The Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan is an important program to prevent
cumulative impacts to sensitive biological resources in Santa Clara
County. The Plan will protect, enhance, and restore natural resources in
specific areas of Santa Clara County and contribute to the recovery of
certain special-status species. Rather than separately permitting and
mitigating individual projects, the Plan evaluates natural-resource impacts
and mitigation requirements comprehensively in a way that is more
efficient and effective for at- risk species and their essential habitats. The
Plan allows the County of Santa Clara, Santa Clara Valley Water District,
Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority, and the cities of Gilroy,
Morgan Hill, and San Jose to receive endangered-species permits for
activities and projects they conduct and those under their jurisdiction.
Although the Project is not part of the Plan, all covered activities with
potential impacts to sensitive biological resources would need to comply
with the relevant mitigations outlined in the Plan to obtain necessary
permits, which will reduce the overall cumulative impact to sensitive
biological resources in the county.
As described in Section 4.6, Aquatic Resources, the Project alternatives
would result in significant impacts requiring mitigation on steelhead
migration and spawning and rearing habitat in Llagas Creek during
construction and maintenance, as well as other less than significant
impacts. They also would result in less than significant impacts on other
aquatic resources. Two other SCVWD projects have been identified that
could affect steelhead and other aquatic resources in other watersheds–
the Anderson Dam Seismic Retrofit project and the Almaden Lake Project,
both of which are in the planning stages.
The impacts of the Project alternatives that are characterized as less than
significant would not result in significant cumulative impacts in
combination with the impacts of other projects because SCVWD BMPs
(Appendices B & C)would be implemented that would effectively minimize
the potential for adverse impacts on aquatic resources so that no
population-level impacts would occur, and no other projects are located in
the same watershed that could compound (worsen) the effects of the
Project alternatives.
The SCVWD’s BMPs include provisions to conduct preconstruction
surveys by a qualified biologist to determine the potential for presence of
aquatic species prior to the start of construction and avoidance and
minimization of impacts to salmonids by avoiding routine use of vehicles
and equipment in live salmonid streams between January 1 and June 15
for all instream work. Regardless, the Project alternatives would cause
changes in spawning habitat usage and quality, affect rearing habitat, and
impede downstream migration of juveniles. The Anderson Dam and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-251

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Almaden Lake projects also would affect steelhead by potential water
quality degradation or impeding migration specific to their watersheds.
The impact would be cumulatively significant because each of these
projects could adversely affect the population of steelhead, and the
Project alternatives’ contribution would be considerable.
The Project alternatives’ contribution would be reduced to less than
considerable through implementation of mitigation measures for
construction and maintenance (Chapter 5, Table 5.4.1), which would
reduce or avoid impacts. Additionally, other conditions may be imposed
during the permitting process for all three projects, which would further
reduce the potential for cumulative impacts.

4.20.2.7

Agriculture and Forest Resources

Agriculture is an important industry in Santa Clara County. Santa Clara
County has policies in place to discourage the conversion of productive
farmland to other land uses as discussed in Section 4.7. However, the
Proposed Project would remove Prime Farmland from production, which
would be an unavoidable impact. Although state and local policies
discourage farmland conversion, other projects could convert farmland,
which would contribute to a significant cumulative impact such as the
Cochrane-Borello Project which will have a net loss of 99.9 acres of
Prime Farmland over the next 12 years resulting in a net loss of Prime
Farmland in South County. Implementation of Project mitigation
measures described in Section 4.7 protect other agriculturally productive
land in the region on a 1:1 basis but would not eliminate the net loss of
farmland. Therefore, Project impacts on agriculture conversion would be
cumulatively considerable and, therefore, significant, even with mitigation.
Further mitigation, such as converting lands currently not available for
farming to agricultural use was dismissed as too costly to be considered
as a feasible mitigation. No other feasible mitigation is available to reduce
the impact to a less-than-significant level. The mitigation measures for the
Cochrane-Borello Project are similar to those developed this Project; but,
overall there would be a net loss of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or
Farmland of Statewide and Local Importance in South County.

4.20.2.8

Land Use and Planning

Ongoing operations under the No Project Alternative conflicts with at least
two county policies: Health and Safety Policy C-HS 34 and Health and
Safety Policy C-HS (i) 32; and a City of Morgan Hill policy (General Plan
4i), as cited in Section 4.8.2. The benefits of reduced flooding would not
be realized for the No Project Alternative; thus, the local agency goals and
policies related to flood protection would not be realized.
This impact is significant since it does not provide for flood protection
which conflicts with local jurisdictions’ policies designed to avoid an
environmental effect.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-252

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

4.20.2.9

Cultural Resources

Cumulative development in the county of Santa Clara and the cities of
Morgan Hill and Gilroy, including growth adopted in the general plans,
may result in the unanticipated discovery and removal of cultural
resources including archaeological, paleontological, historical and Native
American resources. Any future project that requires a Department of the
Army permit would include consultation under Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act and conditions to avoid, reduce, and or mitigate
adverse effect to cultural resources eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places.
As discussed in Section 4.9, a variety of cultural resources exist in the
Project area. Under all of the action alternatives any known resources
would be avoided, during Project design, if possible. If avoidance is not
possible, adverse effect would be minimized and/or mitigated. SCVWD
BMPs would require the construction to stop if any cultural resources are
discovered during construction activities. Required consultation under
section 106 of the NHPA and the aforementioned BMPs would ensure
cumulative adverse effects to cultural resources are mitigated.

4.20.2.10

Traffic and Circulation

The Project would result in a temporary increase in traffic levels during
construction, largely in the immediate Project area and along access
routes. Construction would involve heavy equipment access,
construction-related traffic, truck trips to dispose of fill at Anderson Dam
(223,866 truck trips over a 6-year period), deterioration of local roads,
temporary detours on U.S. 101 (Reach 6 Bypass Alternative only), and
temporary impacts to parking spots at the Morgan Hill Plaza Shopping.
The action alternatives were found to cause an increase in traffic in
relation to the existing traffic load and capacity of the street system for a
number of local roads, including Cochrane Road.
These effects are expected to be separated in location and time from the
traffic effects of other projects, with the exception of the Cochrane-Borelo
Project. The Cochrane-Borello Project has a schedule similar to that for
the proposed Project and would require use of some of the same major
roadways, primarily Cochrane Road. According to the project’s EIR, the
Cochrane-Borello proposed project would result in approximately 3,255
new daily vehicle trips, and 248 and 324 new morning and afternoon peak
hour vehicle trips, respectively. The project-generated vehicle trips would
be distributed as follows: 45 percent from the north on US 101, 25 percent
from the south on US 101, and 30 percent from the west on Cochrane
Road. According to the EIR, the addition of project trips would not
degrade acceptable LOS E freeway operations to unacceptable levels
(LOS F), and under project conditions, all study intersections are
estimated to operate at acceptable levels of service, at LOS C or better
during both peak hour periods. The addition of traffic associated with
Project construction to that generated by the Cochrane- Borelo Project
would cause a significant cumulative impact on Cochrane Road during
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-253

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

construction, and the Project’s contribution would be cumulatively
considerable. The Project’s contribution to the significant impact would be
reduced to less than cumulatively considerable by the implementation of
mitigation measures included in Chapter 5 and implementation of the
Traffic Management Plan as an additional measure.

4.20.2.11

Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases

Given the nonattainment status for particulates (PM10 and PM2.5), NOx,
and ROG in the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin, the combined
emissions of these contaminants, by the Project and other projects, is
considered a significant cumulative impact, and the Project’s contribution
would be cumulatively considerable. Project construction activities would
require daily use of construction equipment and vehicles powered by
diesel and gasoline fuel, the combustion of which would emit criteria air
pollutants, including NOx, ROG, and exhaust-based PM10, and PM2.5. In
addition, Project ground-disturbing activities would release fugitive dust
emissions of fine particulate matter—both PM10 and PM2.5.
The thresholds for a significant project-level impact related constructionrelated emissions are summarized in Section 4.11, Table 4.11-10. These
thresholds also represent the levels at which a project’s individual
emissions of criteria air pollutants, precursors, would result in a
considerable contribution to existing air quality impairments.
As discussed in Section 5.5.11, Impact AQ2 and AQ3, the Project’s
construction emissions are estimated to exceed the Bay Area Air Quality
Management District (BAAQMD) daily emission threshold for NOX. Even
with the implementation AQ2 NRCS above, NOX emissions would still
exceed BAAQMD’s threshold. Therefore, the Project’s construction
activities on cumulative air quality impact are expected to be significant
and unavoidable. There are no feasible mitigation measures available to
further reduce the impact to a less than significant level.
Project construction would generate some greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, but would not conflict with present plans, policies, or
regulations which primarily affect large stationary sources in California. No
significant impact would occur as a result of the Project, and BMPs would
further reduce emissions and subsequent impacts. Even with BMPs, the
Project would generate GHG emissions and incrementally contribute to
climate change, but only in the short-term.
When Project emissions are viewed in combination with world-wide GHG
emissions that are contributing to the existing cumulative impact on global
climate change, the incremental contribution of Project emissions would
not be cumulatively considerable, because they would occur over the
short-term. Therefore, the Project would not have a cumulatively
considerable impact on global climate change. With the implementation of
Mitigation Measures Chapter : Exhaust Emissions Reduction Measures,
the Project’s incremental contribution would be reduced further.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-254

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Therefore, long-term cumulative impacts on climate change by the Project
would be less than significant.

4.20.2.12

Noise

As discussed in Section 4.12, noise generated by the Project actions
alternatives during construction and operations/maintenance activities
could exceed established standards and cause a substantial temporary or
periodic increase in ambient noise levels. Nearby receptors also would be
exposed to excessive groundborne vibration due to the limited distance
from the work areas to the nearest sensitive receptors. Overall, noise and
vibration impacts would be localized, involving only the receptors in the
immediate vicinity, and because construction of the Project would occur
along a linear alignment, no receptor would be exposed to excessive
noise levels or vibration from construction for an extended period of time.
Noise and vibration impacts from some activities would be significant and
unavoidable, however.
Noise attenuates, or is reduced, rapidly with distance, and most of the
projects identified in Table 4.20.3 are located too far from the Project area
to generate noise that could contribute to a cumulative impact in
combination with the Project alternatives. The two projects located within
the footprint have already been constructed, and it is anticipated that any
noise generated by maintenance activities from these developments
would be temporary and minor. Certain development projects would be
located nearby, however, and capital improvement projects could be
implemented in the immediate Project area, such as the sanitary sewer
rehabilitation projects, underground utilities, and storm drainage projects,
and new construction, upgrades, and repairs could generate considerable
noise. If such projects were implemented in the same general timeframe
and location as the Project while construction or maintenance was
underway, cumulative impacts would be significant, and the Project’s
contribution would be considerable.
Implementation of the SCVWD mitigation measures, discussed in Section
5.5.12, would minimize noise and vibration impacts associated with
construction and operations/maintenance activities; however, residual
noise impacts would remain significant.

4.20.2.13

Aesthetics Resources

As described in Section 4.13, the Project has the potential to degrade the
existing visual character and quality of the Project area and surroundings
for viewer groups, because construction would require the removal of
vegetation within the construction footprint. Additionally, the presence of
construction equipment and construction personnel may impede views of
the creek during construction activities and may generally change the
visual character in the area during construction activities. Removal of
structures related to channel widening and realignment during
construction, as discussed in 4.13, would also change the general visual
character in all reaches where removal or relocation is necessary. During
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-255

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

the operations phase of the Project, the primary visual issues would
involve the permanent change in visual character of the area due to the
flood management improvements along all reaches. The primary visual
issues would involve changes in views in terms of channel widening,
addition of new access roads, and removal/relocation of structures and
vegetation within the Project footprint. As the vegetation matures, the
areas of the Project within the viewshed would be improved from its
current state, which includes areas of debris accumulation. Although the
Wright-Mañana Residential Development and Butterfield Boulevard South
Extension required removal of a number of trees within or adjacent to the
Proposed Project footprint, they were required to be replaced. Thus, the
cumulative impact on visual resources would be less than significant.

4.20.2.14

Utilities and Public Services

As discussed in Section 4.14, a network of underground and overhead
utility lines providing water, electricity, phone service, sewer, among other
utilities services to customers exists in the Project footprint. Excavation for
construction, depending on depth, could result in damage to existing
underground utilities and wells providing water for households, industrial,
or agricultural users, and some utilities would require relocation. Use of
construction equipment could also result in damage or disruption of
aboveground utilities. The Morgan Hill Master Plan for storm drainage and
sewer also could cause disruption of utilities, and it if is going to be
implemented in the Project area within in the next 5 years, it may overlap
with the relocation process for the Project. This would result in a
cumulatively significant impact on utility infrastructure if utilities were
relocated, and then upgraded within a short period of time, and the
Project alternatives’ contribution would be considerable. Implementation
of Mitigation Measures UPS-1b (Section 5.5.14) would reduce potential
cumulative impacts to less than considerable because projects would be
scheduled to minimize disruption.
Currently, landfills serving Santa Clara County have sufficient capacity for
the construction waste and unsuitable excavation materials to be
generated by the Project alternatives. In addition, the maximum 1.3 million
CY of excavated material is planned to be reused and only the nonsuitable materials would bedisposed of. Because landfills have sufficient
capacity to accommodate planned development within the construction
timeframe, this impact is cumulatively less than significant.
Mitigation Measures as described in 5.5.14 will further minimize impacts
to this resource category.

4.20.2.15

Recreation Resources

As discussed in Section 4.15, recreational opportunities in the Project
footprint include two facilities that are partially within, or very close to, the
Project footprint (these facilities are adjacent to each other near the
Morgan Hill Community Park along Reach 7B): the Skate and BMX Park
and Centennial Recreation Center. Also, the Project footprint is close to
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-256

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Galvan Park and Britton Field ball fields adjacent to Britton Middle School
(both along Reach 8). The Culvert/Channel Alternative would cross under
the ball fields. Currently, a trail is located along Reach 7B near La Crosse
Drive and the West Llagas Trail in Morgan Hill provides opportunities for
walking and other trail-related activities. The trails are within the Project
footprint and would be affected by the various alternatives. Construction
activities in the vicinity of the Project footprint may create temporary
impacts to recreation resources due to noise, visual quality issues, or
traffic attributable to construction-related activities. Additionally, there is
the potential to affect parklands if construction occurs on or around these
facilities, given the proximity of the Project to recreational facilities along
Reaches 7A, 7B, and 8. These impacts to recreational facilities would be
temporary and end with the completion of construction. No other projects
have been identified that would result in a cumulative impact on the same
recreational facilities in the same general timeframe as the Project;
therefore, no cumulative impacts from construction activities would occur.
Santa Clara County and Morgan Hill General Plan recreation policies,
provided in Section 4.15, promote trails along Llagas Creek, as well as
other creek corridors. Although two trails would be removed by the Project
alternatives, access to the newly constructed maintenance roads,
although unpaved, would be available after the Project construction was
complete. This would at least partially offset impacts from the trail
removal. Adverse impacts on recreational resources have not been
identified for other projects listed in Table 4.20.3; moreover, several of the
projects would result in enhanced recreational resources. Therefore,
cumulative impacts would be less than significant.

4.20.2.16

Population and Housing

No cumulative impact is antiicapted for population and housing for any
alternative considered in this EIS. As described in Section 4.16.4 the
numbers of residents displaced and residents removed with the
Applicants Proposed Action Alternative and Reach 6 Bypass Alternative
is low (i.e. 3) which is less than the other two alternatives, NRCS (12
residents) and Culvert/Channel (7) which is also low considering the total
number of residential dwellings within the action area. While residences
will be removed, the impacts for all alternatives are considered less-thansignificant.
Mitigation measures and BMPs, as appropriate, for the various Action
Alternatives to reduce the impacts to Population and Housing are
discussed and described in Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation
Measures for the Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.20.2.17

Socioeconomics Resources

As discussed in Section 4.17.4, the No Action Alternative would impose a
significant and unavoidable impact on socioeconomic resources because
intermittent flooding of Upper Llagas Creek would continue in the absence
of the Project, resulting in sustained business closures and property
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-257

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

damages. Cumulative impacts were considered for this rescouce
category in relation to other projects identified in 4.20.3 and no
foreseeable impacts to Socioeconomic Resoursces are anticipated.
The action alternatives would result in less than significant impacts to
socioeconomic resources within the Project area. A few of the specific
Project features would result in beneficial impacts to many of the area’s
socioeconomic resources, particularly the end product of increased flood
protection.
Mitigation measure for the various Action Alternatives to reduce the
impacts to Socioeconomic Resources are discussed and described in
Chapter 5 (Table 5.4-1 Summary of Mitigation Measures for the
Alternatives) of this EIS.

4.20.2.18

Hazards and Hazardous Materials

As discussed in Section 4.18, the Project alternatives would improve
some contaminated areas as part of the excavation and in preparation of
the revegetation sites, resulting in less overall contamination in the area.
The Project alternatives also could result in the accidental release of
hydrocarbons, routine emission of dust and pollutants, hazardous
materials used within 0.25 mile of a school, and excavation near sites
known to have soil or groundwater pollution. Cumulative development in
the County of Santa Clara and the cities of Gilroy and Morgan Hill, shown
in Table 4.20.3 could result in the additional release of hazardous
materials in the area, primarily during construction. Hazards and
hazardous materials impacts are generally site-specific and are
contingent on past and present land uses and existing soil and
groundwater conditions. Due to the potential for releases within the local
community, cumulative impacts are significant, and the Project
alternatives’ contribution would be considerable. Implementation of
SCVWD BMP HM-12 (Hazardous Materials Management) (Appendix C)
would address the risk of an unanticipated encounter with hazardous
materials and require that all workers are trained in implementation of the
appropriate procedures in the event of encountering hazardous materials,
which would reduce the Project alternatives’ contribution to less than
cumulatively considerable.
The presence of construction equipment and vehicles, worker activities,
and materials storage could have the potential to impede emergency
access to the Project sites and/or interfere with emergency evacuation
plans. As part of the Project’s identified mitigation measure Section 5.5.10 a
Traffic Control Plan would be developed to ensure that construction
activities do not impede emergency response or evacuations. Therefore,
any cumulative impacts associated with emergency access would be less
than significant.
The use of construction equipment, in particular, equipment with internal
combustion engines, gasoline- powered tools, and equipment or tools that
produce a spark, fire, or flame—in grassland and woodland areas could
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-258

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

pose a fire risk. Some Project elements would be constructed in areas
that could pose wildfire risks under dry conditions. Portions of Reaches
7A, 7B, and 8 are located less than 1 mile from a very high fire hazard
severity zone in a local area of responsibility. SCVWD BMP HM-14:
Incorporate Fire Prevention Measures, is applicable to the construction
and operations phase of all elements (Appendix C). In addition, this
Project, as well as other projects, would be required to adhere to fire
safety provisions of the Public Resources Code. Therefore, the
cumulative impact for this rescouce category would be less than
significant.

4.20.2.19

Environmental Justice

The Preferred and Reach 6 Bypass alternatives would result in
disproportionate environmental justice effects where excess noise levels
would disproportionately impact Reach 8, an environmental justice
community of concern. If capital improvement projects were implemented
in the same area in the same general timeframe as these alternatives, the
cumulative impact would be significant, and the Project’s contribution
would be considerable. Mitigation measures would minimize the impacts
from the Project, but the cumulative impact would remain significant and
unavoidable, as discussed under Section 4.19.
Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources
Under NEPA guidelines, the EIS analysis includes a discussion on
irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources as it pertains to the
Action Alternatives. An irreversible commitment of resources refers to
effects to the resources that cannot be reversed or that would not be
reversed in a foreseeable amount of time. An example would be when a
species becomes extinct. Irretrievable commitment of resources
describes a resource that is lost for a period of time or as long as the
action exists. For example, fishing productivity would be lost in an area
closed to be converted to oil exploration for as long as the oil exploration
remains.
Construction of any of the Project Alternatives would result in an
irreversible commitment of natural resources through the direct
consumption of fossil fuels, primarily through the use of refined petroleum
products. The Alternatives would also require commitment of other
nonrenewable resources, including lumber and other forest products;
sand and gravel for concrete; petrochemical construction materials, such
as solvents, engine coolant, and lubricants, for construction machinery;
steel, copper, lead, and other metals for reinforced concrete and pipes;
and water for dust suppression and erosion control. However, this
irreversible consumption of natural resources would occur mainly as
construction-related impacts and their duration would be limited to
approximately 6 years.
Implementation of any of the Project Alternatives would also result in the
permanent conversion of land within the Project study area. Long-term
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-259

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

changes associated with flood risk management measures along the
Upper Llagas Creek would require up to 287 acres of land, depending on
the alternative, for permanent easements. Additionally, out of the total
acres of land required for permanent easement, approximately 50 acres
of Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide and
Local Importance would be converted from agriculture to nonagricultural
uses. However, implementation of Mitigation Measure AG-1 NRCS would
offset agricultural conversion on a 1:1 basis. The use of the land would
result in a long-term change and would preclude other development or
use of land along each reach. However, the land would retain a riparian
corridor that has been impacted through urban development in the past.
Accidental releases of fuels, paints, or other chemicals could occur during
construction of any of the Project alternatives. However, pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code Sections 25500–25520, the
construction contractor would be required to limit spills by training
construction workers, supervising all construction work, and reporting and
cleaning up any inadvertent spills of chemicals used during construction
(e.g., fuel, lubricants) with oversight from Santa Clara County Department
of Environmental Health Hazardous Materials Compliance Division and
the California Department of Toxic Substances Control.
4.20.3 Summary of Environmental Effects
Table 4.20-4 provides a comparison of the environmental effects of the
alternatives considered in this EIS. For clarity, the impacts that would result from
each alternative are compared to the Applicant’s Proposed Action, the Tunnel
Alternative. The table is organized by resource area and identifies the most
severe impact for each resource. Unavoidable significant adverse impacts are
those effects that would significantly affect either natural systems or other
community resources, and cannot be mitigated to less than significant. Nearly all
the potentially significant impacts associated with the Project action alternatives
identified could be reduced to less- than-significant levels by mitigation measures
specified in this EIS. Almost all of the potentially significant unavoidable impacts
associated with the action alternatives are short-term and associated with
construction. Resources with the only significant impacts associated with the No
Project Alternative include: Aquatic Resources, Land Use and Planning, Utilities
and Public Services, Socioeconomic Resources, and Hazards and Hazardous
Materials. Significant, unavoidable impacts are summarized below by
environmental resource area.
Table 4.20-4 identifies both the impact level and if the impact degree is more,
less, or the same as the Tunnel Alternative. The differences in the degree of an
impact are related to the geographical or temporal. The following summarizes, by
resource section, the impact level determinations and the degree to which there
may be differences even though the designated “impact level” may be the same.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-260

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

Table 4.20-4 Alternatives Comparison with the Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

Alternative

Tunnel
Alternative

NRCS
Alternative

Culvert/Channel
Alternative

Reach 6
Bypass
Alternative

Geology and Soils

NI

LTSM

LTSM (-)

LTSM (-)

LTSM (+)

Hydrology and Water Quality

SU

LTSM

LTS

LTS

SU

Mineral Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM (+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM (-)

Botanical Resources

NI

SU

SU(+)

SU(+)

SU(-)

Wildlife Resources

LTS

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Aquatic Resources

SU

LTSM

LTSM(=)

LTSM(=)

LTSM(+)

Agricultural and Forest Resources

NI

SU

SU(=)

SU(=)

SU(-)

Land Use and Planning

SU

LTS

LTS(+)

LTS(+)

LTS(-)

Cultural Resource

NI

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Traffic and Circulation

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

SU

Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases

LTS

SU

SU(-)

SU(-)

SU(-)

Noise

LTS

SU

SU(-)

SU(-)

SU(=)

Aesthetic Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

Utilities and Public Services

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Recreation Resources

NI

LTSM

LTSM(=)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(=)

Population and Housing

NI

LTS

LTS(+)

LTS(+)

LTS(-)

Socioeconomic Resources

SU

LTS

LTS(=)

LTS(=)

LTS(-)

Hazards and Hazardous Materials

SU

LTSM

LTSM(+)

LTSM(+)

LTSM(-)

Environmental Justice

DAE

DAE

NDAE

NDAE

DAE(=)

No Project
Resource Category

NI: No Impact
(-): Level of impacts are less severe than the Preferred Alternative
LTS: Less Than Significant
(+): Level of impacts are more severe than the Preferred Alternative
LTSM: Less Than Significant with Mitigation
(=): Level of impacts are equal to the Preferred Alternative
SU: Significant and Unavoidable
DAE: Disproportionate Adverse effect
NDAE: No disproportionate Adverse Effect

4.20.3.1

Geology and Soils and Minerals Resources

The construction of the tunnel has the highest degree of impact to
geology when comparing the alternatives because it would be creating a
new feature that could be impacted in the case of an earthquake.
However the degree to the impacts would be higher for the Reach 6
Bypass alternative because it contains more structures that could be
susceptible to failure in the event of a large magnitude earthquake such
as the bypass and modifications to U.S. 101. In Mineral Resources, there
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-261

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

is greater degree of impacts related to the extent of construction
excavation associated with the NRCS and Culvert Channel alternatives,
which could result in an increase in unanticipated discoveries of poppy
jasper.

4.20.3.2

Hydrology and Water Quality

As stated in Section 4.2, there are no significant and unavoidable impacts
associated with the Preferred, NRCS, or Culvert/Channel Alternatives.
There is a significant and unavoidable impact associated with alteration of
the drainage pattern resulting in substantial erosion and siltation in the
Reach 6 Bypass Alternative (impact significance criteria HYDRO-5). This
is due to the ongoing processes of channel incision that over time would
cause over-steepening of streambanks, bed and bank instability, erosion,
and sedimentation in Reach 5 and Reach 6 downstream of the proposed
bypass channel location. There is no construction in Reach 5 and 6
because the bypass channel would divert that portion of the high flow
which is generated by the upstream flood improvements so that there is
no induced flooding in these downstream reaches. As such, the Reach 5
and 6 channel segments do not need to be deepened and widened to
accommodate the additional flow from the upstream flood improvements.
But as a result, and unlike the other action alternatives, there would be no
stable channel form constructed in either reach. Consequently, Reach 5
and Reach 6 would be subject to incision and erosion. Additionally, over
time the unstable Reach 5 and 6 channel segments would be subject to
degradation of water quality and would have a potential to violate water
quality standards as erosion and siltation progresses. These are
significant and unavoidable impacts of the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative.
Operation and maintenance activities under the No Project Alternative
would also have significant and unavoidable impacts associated with the
potential for substantial erosion (impact significance criteria HYDRO-5).
This is the same channel instability issue as described for the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative, except that the incision and erosion process is
applicable to all of the Project reaches. There would also continue to be
flooding under the No Project Alternative (significance criteria HYDRO-6),
since no flood protection improvements would be implemented, and there
would be a potential to degrade water quality and violate water quality
standards due to both channel instability and periodic flooding
(significance criteria HYDRO-1 and HYDRO-2).

4.20.3.3

Biological Resources (Aquatic, Wildlife, and Botanical)

As discussed in Section 4.6 Aquatic Resources, there is essentially no
habitat for special-status aquatic species in Reach 8. Therefore, the
increased excavation along the existing channel under the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives compared to the Tunnel Alternative does not
increase effects on aquatic resources. This results in an equal level of
impacts associated with the Tunnel, NRCS, and Culvert/Channel
alternatives for aquatic resources because the main impacts, such as, to
sensitive habitats are in the less urbanized reaches (4, 5, 6, 7a, and 14)
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-262

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

where construction for each of the alternatives would be the same. There
is a greater degree of impacts to wildlife and botanical resources from the
NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives related to the greater number of
trees removed, which would have a greater degree of impact to birds in
the area.. Impacts associated with the Reach 6 Bypass would be to a
lesser degree than the Tunnel Alternative; because there is no
construction and, therefore, no loss of mature trees or disturbance to
aquatic habitat in Reaches 5 and 6, particularly to the perennially watered
section of Reach 6.

4.20.3.4

Agricultural and Forest Resources

Under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, impact level determinations are
the same; but to a lesser degree compared with the Tunnel Alternative
because of the lack of construction in Reaches 5 and 6. As shown on
Section 3.7 and 4.7 and, Reach 5 has 6.5 acres of Important Farmland
and 2.6 acres of Williamson Act; and Reach 6 has 5.0 acres and 10.8
acres that would be impacted by the NRCS, Tunnel, and Culvert/Channel
alternatives.

4.20.3.5

Cultural Resources

As is the case with mineral resources, there is greater degree of impact
related to the larger spatial extent of construction excavation associated
with the NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives due to the increased risk
of unanticipated discoveries of cultural resources. The Reach 6 Bypass
has the least risk for unanticipated discoveries due to the reduced extent
of excavation.

4.20.3.6

Traffic and Circulation

The degree of traffic and transportation impacts would be greater for the
NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives because construction would
occur in a larger portion of the urban area in Reach 8, along roads
causing more detours and interaction between construction-related
activities and traffic at various areas in Morgan Hill. However, the Reach
6 Bypass has a higher impact level determination than all of the other
alternatives (significant vs. less than significant) due to the detour on U.S.
101 during construction of the bypass channel.

4.20.3.7

Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases

In relation to Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, the Reach 6 Bypass
Alternative estimated emissions from fuel combustion would be about 13
percent higher than the NRCS Alternative while fugitive dust emissions
would be about 2 to 6 percent lower than the NRCS Alternative. The
Reach 6 Bypass avoids the need for extensive excavation and
earthmoving work in Reaches 5 and 6; but comparing to the tunnel
construction, more emissions will be generated constructing the tunnel
than excavating the creek. The end result is the Tunnel Alternative has

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-263

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

the highest emissions because of the tunnel construction and excavation
of all the channel reaches downstream.

4.20.3.8

Noise

In relation to Noise, the greatest degree of impact is associated with the
construction of the tunnel, which is in close proximity to residences.
Consequently, the Reach 6 Bypass has the same degree of impacts as
the Tunnel Alternative (both alternatives use the tunnel feature) while the
Culvert/Channel and NRCS alternatives have a lower degree of impacts.

4.20.3.9

Aesthetic Resources

Aesthetic impacts would be to a higher degree for the NRCS and
Culvert/Channel alternatives compared with the Tunnel Alternative,
because more trees and structures would be removed in the urban areas
(Reaches 7a and 8) where the change would be apparent to more
viewers. However, the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative would also have a
higher degree of impact on the visual character than the Tunnel
Alternative due to the addition of the bypass channel in Reach 6, which is
a new feature on the existing landscape.

4.20.3.10

Utilities and Public Services

The NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives’ excavation footprint in
Reach 8 would increase the required abandonment and/or relocation of
some utilities compared to the tunnel construction. Reach 6 Bypass will
likely affect the fewest utilities since no construction in Reaches 6 and 5
compared with the Tunnel Alternative.

4.20.3.11

Recreation

Recreation impacts are the same except for having a higher degree of
impact under the Culvert/Channel Alternative, because of the temporary
closure of the Britton ball fields adjacent to Britton Middle School for
installation of the culvert.

4.20.3.12

Land Use and Planning, Population and Housing, and
Socioeconomics Resources

Under the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative, impact level determinations are
the same but to a lesser degree compared with the Tunnel Alternative for
Land Use and Planning, Population and Housing, and Socioeconomics
Resources; because of the lack of construction in Reaches 5 and 6,
which reduces the amount of agriculture lands taken out of commission
and structure removal. The Culvert/Channel and NRCS alternatives have
a higher degree of impact on land use and population and housing
because of the increased removal of structures and land use conversion
in the urban Reach 8 but have equal impacts associated with
socioeconomics resources, because of the reduction of agricultural lands
would be the same as the Tunnel Alternative. As discussed and as
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-264

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

described in Section 3.8 and 4.8 , Reach 5 has 6.5 acres of Important
Farmland and 2.6 acres of Williamson Act; and Reach 6 has 5.0 acres
and 10.8 acres that would be impacted by the NRCS, Tunnel, and
Culvert/Channel alternatives.

4.20.3.13

Hazards and Hazardous Materials

In Hazards and Hazardous Materials, there is greater degree of impact
related to the larger extent of construction excavation associated with the
NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives because of the increased risk of
unanticipated discoveries of contaminated soil. Also, the extensive work
in the urban area could interfere with emergency responses if routes
overlap with the construction area.

4.20.3.14

Environmental Justice

As discussed in Section 4.19 Environmental Justice, the definition of
environmental justice is a disproportionately high and adverse
environmental or human-health impact on a community of concern. A
community of concern is either a low-income population or a minority
population. In the Project area, the community of concern is in Reaches 8
and 7B. The No Action Alternative has the most disproportionate adverse
effects due to the continued impact on Reach 8 due to flooding. The
Tunnel and the Reach 6 Bypass Alternative have a disproportionate
adverse effect on Reach 8 due to noise and vibration caused by
construction of the tunnel. The NRCS and Culvert/Channel alternatives
have no disproportionate impact to communities of concern.
4.20.4 Summary
The No Action Alternative has the most resources with determinations of “No
Impact” but also with the most “Significant Impact” determinations. The significant
impacts are related to the continued flooding and also to degradation of the creek
channel (due to ongoing incision and to water quality issues associated with
flooding), which indicates it is not the environmentally superior alternative.
The Reach 6 Bypass Alternative has the least severe impacts relative to the
Tunnel Alternative, except for the significant impact associated with traffic effects
on U.S. 101 and to anticipated significant impacts of ongoing channel incision in
Reaches 5 and 6 with attendant lack of geomorphic stability that leads to bank
erosion and associated adverse water quality effects. The Reach 6 Bypass would
minimize potential environmental effects when compared to the other
alternatives, particularly in relation to Biological Resources, Cultural Resources,
Agricultural Resources, Land Use and Planning, Utilities and Public Services,
Population and Housing, Socioeconomics, and Hazards and Hazardous
Materials. The severity of many of the impacts is less due to the elimination of
construction in Reaches 5 and 6; and particularly in Reach 6, which has a section
of perennial water that supports aquatic habitat. However, it is not the Proposed
Project, because over the long term, without improvements to arrest incision in
Reaches 5 and 6, the ecology of the stream will be degraded compared to the
Tunnel Alternative and will eventually require greater bank erosion control and
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-265

Chapter 4

Environmental Consequences

maintenance. Therefore, with the mitigation implemented to restore the riparian
habitat after construction, and the aquatic benefits of additional channel stability,
the Preferred Alternative would be the Environmentally Superior Alternative.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

4-266

CHAPTER 5
5.1

MITIGATION

INTRODUCTION
As defined by the Council on Environmental Quality, Title 40 Code of Federal Regulation
(C.F.R.) §1508.20, mitigation requirements include the following:
•

Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

•

Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its
implementation;

•

Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
environment;

•

Reducing or eliminating the impacts over time by preservation and maintenance
operations during the life of the action; and

•

Compensating for the impacts by replacing or providing substitute resources or
environments.

Under the Clean Water Act (CWA) Section 404(b)(1) guidelines implemented through 40
C.F.R. Part 230, the Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD) shall be required to
avoid and minimize impacts to waters of the United States, then provide compensatory
mitigation for unavoidable adverse impacts. In accordance with Title 40 C.F.R. 1508.20,
where significant, adverse impacts were identified, mitigation described in this chapter
will include a description of measures made to avoid and minimize (i.e., limit the degree
or magnitude) impacts to the environment through planning and design modifications,
Best Management Practices (BMPs), and compensatory mitigation. Additionally, this
chapter will describe measures to rectify and compensate the impact to Llagas
Watershed for the proposed action by repairing and rehabilitating the riparian corridor in
Llagas Creek and compensation for impacts by replacing and improving functions and
values of riparian and wetland habitats.
5.2

AVOIDANCE AND MINIMIZATION
Avoidance and minimization strategies have been incorporated into various stages of
Project progression. Since the initial proposed design in the 1982 Environmental Impact
Report/Environmental Impact Statement (EIR/EIS), the SCVWD has made refinements
to address and better adapt the Project to increasing urbanization, changes in runoff
conditions, conservation and protection of wetland and riparian habitat, and to the
federal listing of steelhead. Preliminary avoidance strategies included the development
of a bankfull hydrologic design to emulate a natural stable channel and provide for
improved sediment transport in the Llagas watershed to avoid and minimize the need for
future maintenance (i.e., bank protection and sediment removal), as Llagas Creek in its
current state is unstable and incising.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-1

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Additional avoidance and minimization strategies include:
•

Design the Project to better balance flood protection and habitat objectives;

•

Provide 1% flood protection in the urban areas of Morgan Hill only where
property damage would be greatest;

•

Alternating the grading footprint to avoid large clusters of higher quality
vegetation (i.e., Sycamores and Oaks);

•

Reduced the number of maintenance roads and access ramps from the NRCS
alternative;

•

Installation of instream complexity (i.e. rootwads, boulder clusters etc.) for
improving aquatic habitat;

•

Installation of a low flow channel to promote sediment transport and fish
passage;

•

Reuse of existing higher quality gravels and cobbles in Llagas Creek to line low
flow channel;

•

Removal of invasive plant species, Giant Reed (Arundo donax) and Himalayan
Blackberry (Rubus armeniacus) in all reaches to be replaced with native riparian
vegetation;

•

Removal of six rock chute drop structures from the 1982 design to provide free
passage for steelhead migration and localized movement of native fish and better
support sediment transport processes;

•

Reuse of higher quality topsoil excavated for construction, stockpiled and
replaced in revegeation planting;

•

Minimize use of riprap to protect creek from erosion;

•

Installation of woodpiles within the riparian corridor for improved small mammal
habitat;

•

Girdling invasive trees to produce snag habitat;

•

Purchasing additional right of way in Reach 6 where quality of aquatic habitat is
high;

•

Modification of design (i.e., placement of maintenance road and ramps) to avoid
large clusters of native trees and;

•

Develop an alternative with an underground tunnel (The Tunnel Alternative) to
avoid impacts to West Little Llagas Creek in Reach 8. The Tunnel Alternative
(Applicant’s Proposed Action) was conceived because the alternative reduces
impacts by requiring a smaller right of way footprint, reduces the amount of
vegetation to be removed and excavation needed along the existing West Little

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-2

Chapter 5

Mitigation
Llagas Creek within a portion of Reach 8, reduces the extent of utilities to be
relocated, and reduces the culvert replacements required, which results in less
construction related interference with the surrounding environment.

More recent avoidance and minimization strategies to reduce the number of trees
impacted by Project design included: strategic placement of access ramps, alternating
locations of maintenance roads, purchasing additional right of way and alterations to
grading plans. These recent efforts have reduced the number of trees from 1980 to be
removed to 1734 resulting in the preservation of an additional 246 trees.
5.3

ONSITE COMPENSATORY MITIGATION
The Lake Silveira compensatory mitigation element which includes creek restoration and
wetland creation is common to all alternatives analyzed in detail for this environmental
review. The proposed compensatory mitigation for the Project has a protracted history
with the first EIS/EIR prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS),
United States Department of Agriculture, and the District in 1982. In 2001, a draft
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (SEIS)/Supplemental Environmental
Impact Report (SEIR) was prepared. At that time, under the authority of the Fish and
Wildlife Coordination Act, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS)
assessed fish and wildlife impacts and mitigation needs for the proposed project. A
Coordination Act Report (CAR) was prepared by the USFWS in 2001 and revised in
2003 (USFWS, 2003). As a major mitigation element for the flood protection
improvements in Llagas Creek, the USFWS recommended restoration of approximately
1,980 linear feet of abandoned stream channel and conversion of the present day Lake
Silveira (Lake) to emergent marsh habitat to replace lost functions and values, and
provide aquatic habitat diversity with the mosaic of wetlands adjacent to the restored
channel (USFWS, 2003). The Lake was artificially created prior to 1989 when unknown
parties breached a portion of the northern levee forcing stream flows into an abandoned
gravel quarry pit. The rerouting of the stream subsequently isolated and dewatered a
portion of the higher quality riparian habitat of Llagas Creek (Figure 5.4-1).
The SCVWD has developed this compensatory mitigation element to include site
specific objectives and a detailed design for implementation. The Applicant began
developing the objectives for design of Lake Silveira with the expressed intent or
restoring stream functions using the Function Based Framework for Stream Assessment
and Restoration Projects (Harmen et. al., 2012). This started with an analysis of
hydrology and hydraulics, and geomorphology. Focused studies commenced to address
both physicochemical and biological parameters into the planning process. As a result,
a series of specific objectives were developed for wetland creation and creek restoration
at Lake Silveira.
The multiple objectives in the development of the design are as follows:
•

Maximize mitigation value for the proposed action and provide for overall
increased ecological functions and values;

•

Provide improved habitat for steelhead, turtles, and other special status wildlife
species known to occur at the site;

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-3

Chapter 5

Mitigation

•

Reduce suitable habitat for non-native predatory fish;

•

Provide riparian habitat within the 52 acre parcel to provide connectivity to
existing high quality riparian habitat in Reach 6 (downstream of Monterey Road)
and upstream of the lake to Chesbro Reservoir;

•

Improve or protect upstream and downstream functions and resources, hydraulic
conveyance, groundwater recharge, ecological resources;

•

Contribute to improved sediment supply to downstream reaches; ensure
geomorphic stability for the Lake, the restored historic channel, and downstream
reaches;

•

Provide a stable, low-maintenance confluence with the Lake and/or restored
historic channel and;

•

Improve water quality, including turbidity, temperature, circulation/flushing.

•

Remove 12 acres of invasive Himalayan Blackberry (Figure 5.4.3)

The proposed Lake Silveira design will split Llagas Creek flows to re-establish creek low
flows to the historic channel (Figure 5.4-1). . Portions of the 8-acre lake would be filled
to create approximately 4.25 acres of emergent perennial wetlands, approximately 10.8
acres of forested habitat types including riparian and oak woodland, Sycamore forest,
willow forest, and with about 3.2 acres of open water remaining of the original 8-acre
lake surface. Figure 5.4.2 provides a proposed design for this mitigation element. This
would be accomplished by constructing a hydraulically roughened open-channel flow
split structure recommended by the NMFS, that would route some of the Llagas Creek
flow back into the historic channel, with a portion of the flows going to the wetland, which
would be created by partially filling the lake. When base flows in Llagas Creek upstream
of the lake are very low, less than 3 cfs may occur in drought years, most of that flow
would be directed into the wetlands. When flows exceed 3 cfs (which is most of the
time), the flow would be directed mostly to the historic channel. A lake outlet structure
would be installed where the lake ties back into Llagas Creek. The outlet structure would
be a weir gate, which would include a grade control structure at or downstream of the
lake outlet to prevent incision and destabilization of the bank.
The outlet structure would temporarily have a means to control lake elevations; so that if
there is settlement of the wetland surface after construction, the water elevation can be
adjusted to optimize the wetland viability and function. It is expected that over the longterm, the permanent outlet structure would not need to be adjustable and that the
seasonal water surface elevation in the wetland is expected to only fluctuate within a
range of about 0.5 foot.
The wetland would be created by partially filling the lake area at depth with coarse earth
materials and providing surface soils of clay and sandy loams potentially derived from
the channel excavation in Reach 7A. The submerged wetland fill slopes created around
the northern margin of the wetlands would be approximately 2:1 grade and would be
compacted to about 90 percent to minimize liquefaction potential. The approximately 4
acre wetland marsh created would have an undulating surface so that there are deeper
ponding areas punctuated by islands that are elevated between 1 to 4 feet above the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-4

Chapter 5

Mitigation

water surface of the “marsh plain”. The design is intended to create a habitat mosaic of
open water and vegetated marsh. By keeping the islands close to the deeper open
water, predation by mammals can be reduced. Willows and cottonwoods would be
planted on the islands above the water surface elevation, as well as on the northeastern
edge of the marsh plain. The rest of the marsh plain would be seeded and planted with
species, such as rushes, bulrush, and flatsedge (see H.T. Harvey & Associates 2013a
for planting details), including around the perimeter of the islands. The portion of the lake
south of the marsh plain would mostly remain as open water with depths approximately
as they are today. There are existing gravel bars extending out from along the southern
shoreline of the lake into the open water areas. These bars would remain as they
currently exist, as they provide turtle and bird habitat during low water periods.
Approximately 1,980 linear feet of abandoned Llagas Creek would be re-established. A
pilot channel would be excavated starting at the inlet flow split structure downstream for
several hundred feet into the abandoned Llagas Creek channel. The pilot channel would
help to focus flows when the Project becomes operational to purposely encourage initial
scouring and formation of a stable channel at the junction with the split structure. No
other grading work is proposed in the abandoned channel. The abandoned channel is
heavily over-grown with non-native blackberry, which would be removed manually and
with follow-up herbicide sprays over a 3- to 4-year period before planting native
understory shrub species. Any understory left bare after blackberry and replanting
shrubs would be seeded with an understory mix of mugwort, blue wild rye, and creeping
wild rye. The existing channel over-story is well vegetated and it is anticipated that
additional natural recruitment would occur once the blackberries are removed and the
channel is rewatered. Some in-fill plantings of shrubs, such as mugwort, California
blackberry, and snowberry, along with some willows, are proposed.
Along the inlet channel to the wetland, there is a raised berm area that would be planted
with oak woodland species. Adjacent to the inlet channel at the level of the floodplain
native willow trees are well-established. The existing understory has apparently been
completely cleared (by unknown parties). The understory floodplain along the inlet
channel would be planted with mugwort, blackberry, snowberry, and a seeding mixture
that includes wildrye.
The existing outlet channel would be filled in to reduce the potential of groundwater
migrating toward the proposed Reach 7A channel and potentially lowering water levels
in the wetland. The new outlet would be excavated 100 feet to the south of the existing
outlet. Grade control is likely to be needed in the channel in the vicinity of the outlet
structure to prevent channel incision. About 1.5 feet of existing highly compacted soils
along the floodplain of the outlet channel would be excavated and replaced with new
loam surface soils imported from Reach 7A. Willow forest would be planted along the
outlet channel, which includes red, arroyo, and sandbar willow types. Oak woodland
forest would be used on higher elevations further away from the channel and lake.
Fill would be placed against an existing soil berm that separates the lake from the
historic channel immediately north of the marsh plain (see Figure 5.4.2). The fill slope
would be constructed with gradients between 3:1 to 5:1 and will have 2 to 3 feet of
imported topsoil, likely from the proposed Reach 7A excavation. The fill slope would be
planted with riparian and oak woodland forest.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-5

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Just north of the historic channel are upland terraces that are situated about nine feet
above the channel and border neighboring agricultural fields. A concrete wall would be
removed and some grading would occur on a portion of the upland terrace (Figure
5.4.3). A sycamore forest planting pallete would be used in this part of the upland
terrace. The rest of the upland terrace areas would be planted with the forest pallete
including oaks, buckeye, sagebrush, coffeeberry, toyon, and others.
The “bow-tie” parcel (informally called as such due to its shape) is adjacent to Lake
Silveira along the most downstream portion of the proposed Reach 7A channel. The
bow-tie parcel is part of the Lake Silveira element. Clay and sandy loams salvaged from
the excavation in this reach would be used to provide topsoil with Sycamore forest to be
planted on the lower elevations and willow forest to be planted in a strip along part of the
channel. Outside the willow forest higher on the bank would be planted with savanna,
which is upland herbaceous habitat with a few individual sycamore trees spaced
approximately every 200 feet.
A comparison between the existing and preliminary proposed Lake Silveira habitats is
provided in Table 5.3-1.
Based on preliminary design, the Lake Silveira wetland and riparian enhancement site
would result in a net increase of about 4.11 acres of Sycamore Forest, 8.13 acres of
Riparian Forest, and 4.08 acres of wetland. Upland herbaceous habitat would decrease
by about 11.46 acres.
Instream channel habitat improvements consisting of large logs in the Lake would be
installed to function as basking surfaces for western pond turtles. Approximately 10
turtle-basking logs are proposed. Additionally, instream habitat complexity, such as logrootwad structures, would be installed in the re-established Llagas Creek to provide
steelhead rearing and refuge habitat.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-6

Chapter 5

Mitigation
Table 5.3-1

Existing Acreage1

Preliminary Proposed
Acreage1

Net Increase/
Decrease1,2

Riparian Forest Native
(except Sycamore)

15.56

23.68

8.13

Riparian Forest Non-native

0.78

0.62

-0.15

Riparian Shrub-scrub native

0.33

0.24

-0.09

Riparian shrub-scrub non-native

0.09

0.07

-0.02

Perennial Marsh

0.21

4.29

4.08

Upland Herbaceous

15.51

4.06

-11.46

Aquatic

7.71

3.13

-4.58

Sycamore

1.43

5.54

4.11

Total

41.62

41.62

0.15

Scientific Name

1
2

Lake Silveira Approximate Restoration Areas

Numbers may not add up due to rounding
Negative numbers denote a decrease of the habitat type indicated

Maintenance is anticipated to be minor once the construction is completed and
vegetation begins to establish. Maintenance would consist of activities to allow the Lake
Silveira component to hydrologically function as planned, so that the wetlands thrive and
the historic channel is re-watered. No maintenance would be performed for purposes of
flood management. Maintenance work would include clearing sediment from the inlet
structure, minor vegetation clearing around the inlet and outlet structures, and along the
inlet of the channel to keep the flow split structure functioning. Exotic species control
would occur over a period of up to 4 years for blackberry.
5.4

SUMMARY OF MITIGATION MEASURES FOR ALTERNATIVES
To reduce the severity of impacts in all action alternatives, BMPs as well as mitigation
measures are proposed for the following resource categories: Geology and Soils,
Hydrology and Water Quality, Mineral Resources, Botanical Resources, Wildlife
Resources, Aquatic Resources, Agricultural and Forest Resources, Cultural Resources,
Traffic and Circulation, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases, Noise, Aesthetics, Utilities
and Public Services, Recreation, Population and Housing, Socioeconomics, and
Hazards and Hazardous Materials. However, even with proposed mitigation, some
impacts remain significant. Resources with significant impacts only associated with the
No Action Alternative include: Aquatic Resources, Land Use and Planning, Utilities and
Public Services, Socioeconomic Resources, and Hazards and Hazardous Materials.
Table 5.4-1 summarizes the specific mitigation measures developed for the four
alternatives analyzed in this EIS.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-7

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-8

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Figure 5.4-1 Ortho-Rectified Aerial Photo of Lake Silveira Depicting Historic Channel Alignment

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-9

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-10

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Figure 5.4-2 Proposed Design for Lake Silveira

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-11

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-12

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Figure 5.4-3 Map Depicting the Locations of Himalayan Blackberry Infestation at Lake Silveira

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-13

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-14

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Table 5.4-1
Environmental Resource Issue

No Project Alternative

Summary of Mitigation Measures for the Alternatives

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Geology and Soils
GEO-1: Project features could be subject to
failure due to earthquake-induced
liquefaction ground failures, which could
diminish flood capacity and protection and/or
present physical hazards to public safety.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
GEO-1a: Post Earthquake
Inspections.
GEO-1b: Post Earthquake Tunnel
Inspection.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
GEO-1a: Post Earthquake
Inspections.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
GEO-1a: Post Earthquake
Inspections.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
GEO-1a: Post Earthquake
Inspections.
GEO-1b: Post Earthquake Tunnel
Inspection.

HYDRO-1: Potential to violate water quality
standards.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
None required

HYDRO-2: Substantially degrades water
quality.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-3c: Development and Implementation
of a Bat Monitoring Program and
Development of Bat/Tunnel Exclusion
Devices.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
WILD-3c: Development and Implementation
of a Bat Monitoring Program and
Development of Bat/Tunnel Exclusion
Devices.

HYDRO-3: Creates or contributes runoff
water that would exceed the capacity of
existing or planned stormwater drainage
systems or provides substantial additional
sources of potentially impacted runoff.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

HYDRO-4: Substantially depletes or
interferes with groundwater supplies,
groundwater recharge, or water table level.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

HYDRO-5: Alteration of drainage pattern and
course of stream resulting in substantial
erosion or siltation on- or off-site.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
None required

Hydrology and Water Quality

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-15

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-16

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue
HYDRO-6: Alteration of drainage pattern and
course of stream resulting in flooding or increased
surface runoff on- or off-site. Places housing within
a 100-year-flood hazard area. Places within a
100-year-flood hazard area structures that would
impede or redirect flood flows, and exposes
people or structures to a significant risk of loss,
injury, or death involving flooding, including
flooding as a result of the failure of a levee or dam.

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

MIN-1: Result in the loss of availability of a known
valuable mineral resource that would be of value
to the region and the residents of California

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

MIN-2: Result in the loss of availability of a locally
important mineral resource recovery site
delineated on a local general plan, specific plan, or
other land use plan.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
MIN-2: Inadvertent Discovery of Poppy
Jasper.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
MIN-2: Inadvertent Discovery of Poppy
Jasper.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
MIN-2: Inadvertent Discovery of Poppy
Jasper.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
MIN-2: Inadvertent Discovery of Poppy
Jasper.

BOT-1: Potential for adverse effects on rare or
important plant communities, and special-status
plant species and their suitable habitat.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level
Surveys for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level
Surveys for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level
Surveys for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level
Surveys for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

BOT-2: Potential for adverse effects on
jurisdictional wetlands, other Waters of the United
States and Waters of the State.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non-native
Species.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for
West/East Little Llagas Creek.
BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non- native
Species.

Mineral Resources

Botanical Resources

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-17

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-18

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level Surveys
for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for West/East
Little Llagas Creek.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level Surveys
for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for West/East
Little Llagas Creek.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level Surveys
for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for West/East
Little Llagas Creek.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-level Surveys
for Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plant Species.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for West/East
Little Llagas Creek.

WILD-1: Potential for adverse
effects on common and
special-status nesting birds.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-1a: Vegetation Removal during Avian Nonbreeding Season.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-1a: Vegetation Removal during Avian Nonbreeding Season.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-1a: Vegetation Removal during Avian Nonbreeding Season.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-1a: Vegetation Removal during Avian Nonbreeding Season.

WILD-2: Potential for adverse
effects on special-status reptiles
and amphibians, including
western pond turtle and California
tiger salamander.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2a: Preconstruction Surveys for
Special-status Amphibian and Reptile Species.
WILD-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.
WILD-2c: Relocate Special-status
Species from Construction Area.
WILD-2d: Implement Compensatory Mitigation for
Special-status Amphibians and Reptiles, including
California tiger salamander.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-2g: Bullfrog population monitoring and
control at Lake Silveira.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2a: Preconstruction Surveys for
Special-status Amphibian and Reptile Species.
WILD-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.
WILD-2c: Relocate Special-status Species from
Construction Area.
WILD-2d: Implement Compensatory Mitigation for
Special-status Amphibians and Reptiles, including
California tiger salamander.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-2g: Bullfrog population monitoring and
control at Lake Silveira.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2a: Preconstruction Surveys for
Special-status Amphibian and Reptile Species.
WILD-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.
WILD-2c: Relocate Special-status Species from
Construction Area.
WILD-2d: Implement Compensatory Mitigation for
Special-status Amphibians and Reptiles, including
California tiger salamander.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-2g: Bullfrog population monitoring and
control at Lake Silveira.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2a: Preconstruction Surveys for
Special-status Amphibian and Reptile Species.
WILD-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.
WILD-2c: Relocate Special-status
Species from Construction Area.
WILD-2d: Implement Compensatory Mitigation for
Special-status Amphibians and Reptiles, including
California tiger salamander.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-2g: Bullfrog population monitoring and
control at Lake Silveira.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Environmental Resource Issue
BOT-3: Conflicts with local
policies and/or plans.

No Project Alternative

Wildlife Resources

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-19

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-20

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

WILD-3: Potential for adverse
effects on common and
special-status bats.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-3a: Preconstruction Surveys for Common
and Special-status Bats prior to Removal of Trees
and Removal/Replacement of Road Culverts.
WILD-3b: Provide Alternative Bat Roost.
WILD-3c: Development and Implementation of a
Bat Monitoring Program and Development of
Bat/Tunnel Exclusion Devices.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-3a: Preconstruction Surveys for Common
and Special-status Bats prior to Removal of Trees
and Removal/Replacement of Road Culverts.
WILD-3b: Provide Alternative Bat Roost.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-3a: Preconstruction Surveys for
Common and Special-status Bats prior to
Removal of Trees and
Removal/Replacement of Road Culverts.
WILD-3b: Provide Alternative Bat Roost.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork
Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-3a: Preconstruction Surveys for Common and
Special-status Bats prior to Removal of Trees and
Removal/Replacement of Road Culverts.
WILD-3b: Provide Alternative Bat Roost.
WILD-3c: Development and Implementation of a Bat
Monitoring Program and Development of Bat/Tunnel
Exclusion Devices.

WILD-4: Potential for adverse
effects on San Francisco
dusky-footed woodrats.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-4: Preconstruction Surveys for San
Francisco Dusky-footed Woodrat Nests prior to
Vegetation Removal.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-4: Preconstruction Surveys for San
Francisco Dusky-footed Woodrat Nests prior to
Vegetation Removal.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation,
Monitoring, and Mitigation Plan.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-4: Preconstruction Surveys for San
Francisco Dusky-footed Woodrat Nests
prior to Vegetation Removal.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-4: Preconstruction Surveys for San Francisco
Dusky-footed Woodrat Nests prior to Vegetation Removal.

WILD-5: Potential for adverse
effects on special-status
invertebrates (i.e., Opler’s
longhorn moth and Bay
checkerspot butterfly).

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-5a: Conduct Plant Surveys for Host Plants of
Special-status Invertebrates.
WILD-5b: Compensatory Mitigation for Impacts to
Serpentine-associated Special-status
Invertebrates.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-5a: Conduct Plant Surveys for Host Plants of
Special-status Invertebrates.
WILD-5b: Compensatory Mitigation for Impacts to
Serpentine-associated Special-status
Invertebrates.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-5a: Conduct Plant Surveys for Host
Plants of Special-status Invertebrates.
WILD-5b: Compensatory Mitigation for
Impacts to Serpentine-associated
Special-status Invertebrates.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-5a: Conduct Plant Surveys for Host Plants of
Special-status Invertebrates.
WILD-5b: Compensatory Mitigation for Impacts to
Serpentine-associated Special-status Invertebrates.

WILD-6: Potential for adverse
effects on migratory mammals,
including San Joaquin kit fox and
American badger.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-6: Implementation of USFWS Standardized
Recommendations for Protection of the San
Joaquin Kit Fox prior to or during Ground
Disturbance.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-6: Implementation of USFWS Standardized
Recommendations for Protection of the San
Joaquin Kit Fox prior to or during Ground
Disturbance.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species
Environmental Awareness Training and
Construction Avoidance Measures.
WILD-6: Implementation of USFWS
Standardized Recommendations for
Protection of the San Joaquin Kit Fox prior
to or during Ground Disturbance.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to Wildlife.
WILD-2f: Special-status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance
Measures.
WILD-6: Implementation of USFWS Standardized
Recommendations for Protection of the San Joaquin Kit
Fox prior to or during Ground Disturbance.

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-21

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-22

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Aquatic Resources
AQUA-1: Potential for adverse
effects on upstream migration of
adult S-CCC steelhead.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1: Construction of Fish Exclusion Barrier at the
Downstream End of Reach 14.
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and Structure Design.
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of In-channel of
Large Woody Debris prior to Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.

AQUA-2: Potential for adverse
effects on S-CCC steelhead
spawning habitat usage and
quality.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-2a: Preconstruction Surveys prior to Inwater Construction.
AQUA-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-2a: Preconstruction Surveys prior to
In-water Construction.
AQUA-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-2a: Preconstruction Surveys prior to Inwater Construction.
AQUA-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering
Activities.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-2a: Preconstruction Surveys prior to In-water
Construction.
AQUA-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering Activities.

AQUA-3: Potential for adverse
effects on S-CCC steelhead
rearing habitat.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.
AQUA-3: Installation of Instream Complexity
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plants.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.
AQUA-3: Installation of Instream Complexity
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plants.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of
In-channel of Large Woody Debris prior to
Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.
AQUA-3: Installation of Instream Complexity
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for
Special-status Plants.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring,
and Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of In-channel of
Large Woody Debris prior to Removal for Management of Flood
Conveyance Channels.
AQUA-3: Installation of Instream Complexity
BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for Special-status Plants.
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and Mitigation
Plan.

AQUA-4: Potential for adverse
effects on downstream migration
of juvenile S-CCC steelhead.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and
Structure Design.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
AQUA-4: Construction of Fish Screen and Fish Bypass Facility
at the Upstream End of the Bypass Channel.
AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and Structure Design.

AQUA-5: Potential for adverse
effects to aquatic species from
construction and maintenance
within and outside the active
channel.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-23

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-24

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Agricultural and Forest Resources
AG-1: Convert Prime Farmland, Unique
Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide or Local
Importance.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments:
AG-1b: Agricultural Conversion Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments:
AG-1b: Agricultural Conversion Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments:
AG-1b: Agricultural Conversion Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments:
AG-1b: Agricultural Conversion Offsets.

AG-2: Conflict with existing zoning for
agricultural use, or a Williamson Act
contract.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments.
AG-2: Williamson Act Lands Conversion
Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments.
AG-2: Williamson Act Lands Conversion
Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments.
AG-2: Williamson Act Lands Conversion
Offsets.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and
Treatments.
AG-2: Williamson Act Lands Conversion
Offsets.

AG-3: Involve other changes in the existing
environment which, due to their location or
nature, could result in conversion of
Farmland to non-agricultural use.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

LAND-1: Physically divide an established
community.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

LAND-2: Conflict with any applicable land
use plan, policy, or regulation of an agency
with jurisdiction over the Project adopted for
the purpose of avoiding or mitigating an
environmental effect.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Land Use and Planning

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-25

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-26

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Cultural Resources
CU-1: Potential for impacts to unidentified
cultural and paleontological resources
caused by ground disturbing activities.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
one required

CU-2: Construction impacts to known
cultural resources.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
CU-2: Avoid Known Cultural Resources
during Implementation.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
CU-2: Avoid Known Cultural Resources
during Implementation.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
CU-2: Avoid Known Cultural Resources
during Implementation.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
CU-2: Avoid Known Cultural Resources
during Implementation.

TRAFFIC-1: Cause an increase in traffic that
is substantial in relation to the existing traffic
load and capacity of the street system.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-1: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Access.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to
Local Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-1: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Access.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.

TRAFFIC-2: Exceed, either individually or
cumulatively, an LOS standard established
by the County Congestion Management
Agency for designated roads or highways.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

TRAFFIC-3: Result in inadequate
emergency access.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses. TRAFFIC-1:
Coordinate with Local Businesses Regarding
Access.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-1: Coordinate with
Local Businesses Regarding Access.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.

TRAFFIC-4: Conflict with adopted policies,
plans, or programs supporting alternative
transportation.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Traffic and Circulation

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-27

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-28

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

TRAFFIC-5: Fail to provide safe access;
obstruct access to nearby uses, including
due to the loss of parking facilities; or fail to
provide for future street right-of-way.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-5: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Parking.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-5: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Parking. TRAFFIC-1:
Coordinate with Local Businesses Regarding
Access.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-5: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Parking.
TRAFFIC-1: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Access.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local
Residences and Businesses.
TRAFFIC-5: Coordinate with Local
Businesses Regarding Parking.

TRAFFIC-6: Potential damage to roads due
to construction- generated traffic.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-6: Repair Local Roadways to PreProject Conditions.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-6: Repair Local Roadways to PreProject Conditions.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-6: Repair Local Roadways to PreProject Conditions.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
TRAFFIC-6: Repair Local Roadways to PreProject Conditions.

AQ-1: Conflict with or obstruct
implementation of the applicable Air Quality
Attainment Plan or Congestion Management
Plan.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

AQ-2: Violate any stationary source air
quality standard or contribute to an existing
or projected air quality violation.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

AQ-3: Result in a net increase of any criteria
pollutant for which the Project region is
nonattainment under an applicable federal or
state ambient air quality standard (including
releasing emissions which exceed
quantitative thresholds for ozone
precursors).

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction
Measures.

AQ-4: Expose sensitive receptors to
substantial pollutant concentrations.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-29

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-30

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

AQ-5: Create objectionable odors
affecting a substantial number of
people.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

GHG-1: Generate greenhouse gas
emissions, either directly or indirectly,
that may have a significant impact on
the environment.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

GHG-2: Conflict with any applicable
plan, policy, or regulation of an
agency adopted for the purpose of
reducing the emissions of greenhouse
gases.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

NOI-1: Noise generation levels in
excess of established standards.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c T: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c T: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
S
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

NOI-2: Generation of excessive
groundborne vibration.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-2a: Vibration Limits.
NOI-2b: Alternate Overnight Accommodations.
NOI-2c: Notify Residents of Pile Driving
Activities/Vibratory Compactor Use.
NOI-2d: Prohibit Vibratory Pile Driving within 200
feet of Residential Structures.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-2a: Reduce Vibration from Construction
Activity.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-2a: Reduce Vibration from Construction
Activity.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-2a: Vibration Limits.
NOI-2b: Alternate Overnight Accommodations.
NOI-2c: Notify Residents of Pile Driving
Activities/Vibratory Compactor Use.
NOI-2d: Prohibit Vibratory Pile Driving within 200
feet of Residential Structures.

NOI-3: Substantial permanent
increase in ambient noise levels.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Noise

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-31

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-32

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

NOI-4: Substantial temporary
increase in ambient noise levels.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and
Operational Activity.
NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan.
NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work;
Implement Noise Complaint Procedure.

NOI-5: Excessive noise levels from
public airport.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

NOI-6: Excessive noise levels from
private airstrip.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

AES-1: Substantially degrade the
visual character or quality of the site
or surrounding area.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

AES-2: Permanently and
substantially obstruct or block any
scenic vista or view corridor that is
designated on local plans as
significant or important.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
N/A

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

AES-3: Conflict with local plans and
policies on protecting visual and
aesthetic resources.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan.

Aesthetic Resources

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-33

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-34

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue
AES-4: Create a new source of substantial
light or glare which would adversely affect
day or nighttime views in the area

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
N/A

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to
Wildlife.

UPS-1: Disrupt utility service by damaging or
displacing infrastructure.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-1a: Well Replacement.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-1a: Well Replacement.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-1a: Well Replacement.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-1a: Well Replacement.

UPS-2: Served by a landfill with sufficient
permitted capacity to accommodate the
Project’s solid waste disposal needs.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

UPS-3: Implementation of an alternative
would have a significant impact on one or
more of the following public services: (a) Fire
protection; (b) Police protection; (c) Schools
(d) Other public facilities.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Response Plan and
Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Response Plan and
Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Response Plan and
Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Response Plan and
Notification.

REC-1: Disrupt access to or diminish
existing recreational resources, such as
parks or trails.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
REC-1a: Trail Detour.
REC-1b: Recreational Facility Protection.
REC-1c: Public Outreach.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
REC-1a: Trail Detour.
REC-1b: Recreational Facility Protection.
REC-1c: Public Outreach.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
REC-1a: Trail Detour.
REC-1b: Recreational Facility Protection.
REC-1c: Public Outreach.

Construction
LTSM
Location of Project Features
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
REC-1a: Trail Detour.
REC-1b: Recreational Facility Protection.
REC-1c: Public Outreach.

REC-2: Displace recreational users to
outlying and/or other regional facilities and
physically deteriorate these areas.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Location of Project Features
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Utilities and Public Services

Recreation Resources

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-35

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-36

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Population and Housing
POP-1: Induce substantial population growth
in an area.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

POP-2: Displace substantial numbers of
existing housing and/or people.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

ECON-1: Create a housing shortage,
whether by inducing population growth,
depleting the housing stock, or constraining
future housing development.

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
NI
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

ECON-2: Result in substantial losses of real
property, whether physically or by sustained
diminution in value.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

ECON-3: Substantially reduce employment
or income.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
B
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI
Mitigation
None required

ECON-4: Displace or substantially disrupt
business operations.

Construction
S
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

ECON-5: Substantially reduce the supply of
fiscal resources to local jurisdictions through
property assessments and taxable sales.

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
NI

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
None required

Socioeconomic Resources

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-37

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-38

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

Hazards and Hazardous Materials
HAZ-1: Creation of hazard
through transport, use, or disposal
of hazardous material.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

HAZ-2: Exposure of workers or
the public to existing hazardous
materials contamination.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-2b: Soil and Groundwater Management Plan.
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow- Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2g: Conduct Asbestos and Lead Surveys for
Buildings that need to be Demolished.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.
HAZ-2i: Evaluation of Soil for Reuse.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-2b: Soil and Groundwater Management Plan.
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2g: Conduct Asbestos and Lead Surveys for
Buildings that need to be Demolished.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.
HAZ-2i: Evaluation of Soil for Reuse.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-2b: Soil and Groundwater Management Plan.
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2g: Conduct Asbestos and Lead Surveys for
Buildings that need to be Demolished.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.
HAZ-2i: Evaluation of Soil for Reuse.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-2b: Soil and Groundwater Management Plan.
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2g: Conduct Asbestos and Lead Surveys for
Buildings that need to be Demolished.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.
HAZ-2i: Evaluation of Soil for Reuse.

HAZ-3: Generation of hazardous
emissions or handling of
hazardous or acutely hazardous
materials, substances, or waste
within 0.25 mile of an existing or
proposed school.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of
Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ 2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of
Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.
HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation
Plan and Implement other Actions Required by the
BAAQMD ATCM.

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-39

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-40

Chapter 5

Environmental Resource Issue

Mitigation

No Project Alternative

Tunnel Alternative (Applicant’s Proposed
Action)

NRCS Alternative

Culvert/Channel Alternative

Reach 6 Bypass Alternative

HAZ-4: Be located on a site which is
included on a list of hazardous materials
sites compiled pursuant to Government
Code Section 65962.5 and, as a result,
would it create a significant hazard to the
public or the environment.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow- Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that
Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search.
HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or
Phase II Hazardous Materials Investigation and
Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance.
HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous
Materials Investigations and Remediation in the
Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials are
Encountered.

HAZ-5: Potential to result in safety hazard
due to location within 2 miles of a public
use airport.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

HAZ-6: Interference with emergency
response or evacuation plan.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
S

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Plan and Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Plan and Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Plan and Notification.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
B
Mitigation
UPS-3: Emergency Plan and Notification.

HAZ-7: Breeding or harborage of disease
vector organisms.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-7: Prepare and Implement a Mosquito and
Vector Control Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-7: Prepare and Implement a Mosquito and
Vector Control Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-7: Prepare and Implement a Mosquito and
Vector Control Plan.

Construction
LTSM
Operations and Maintenance
LTSM
Mitigation
HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures.
HAZ-7: Prepare and Implement a Mosquito and
Vector Control Plan.

HAZ-8: Exposure of people or structures
to risk of wildland fires.

Construction
N/A
Operations and Maintenance
LTS

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

Construction
LTS
Operations and Maintenance
LTS
Mitigation
None required

NI = no impact; S = significant; LTS = less than significant; LTSM = less than significant with mitigation; B = beneficial; N/A = not applicable

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-41

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-42

Chapter 5

5.5

Mitigation

DESCRIPTION OF MITIGATION MEASURES
5.5.1

Geology and Soils
Mitigation Measure GEO-1a: Post Earthquake Inspections. In the aftermath of
a major earthquake, the SCVWD would inspect the Project culverts, maintenance
roads, and channel for any failures that require repair or remediation and
implement repairs. In some circumstances, state and federal governments may
provide disaster assistance to enable rapid response, funding, and resources for
repairs under Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) disaster
assistance.
Mitigation Measure GEO-1b: Post Earthquake Tunnel Inspection. When an
earthquake of Magnitude 3.7 (typically the smallest magnitude with visually
observable damage) or greater occurs in the Project vicinity, tunnel displacement
bands will be inspected for any structural instability and any necessary repairs
will be made.

5.5.2

Hydrology and Water Quality
Mitigation Measure WILD-3c: Development and Implementation of a Bat
Monitoring Program and Development of Bat/Tunnel Exclusion Devices. A bat
monitoring program will be implemented upon completion of tunnel construction
per the guidance of regulatory agencies and local bat experts. The monitoring
program will include, but not be limited to, maintaining air flow through the tunnel
to inhibit the use of the tunnel by roosting bats. Exterior grade plywood will be
used to exclude bats from smaller manholes and a braided nylon net with 0.25inch mesh suspended over larger access points (H.T. Harvey & Associates
2012a). Visual inspections by a qualified biologist for bats and bat sign (i.e.,
individual animals and guano) will be conducted in the tunnel annually prior to
annual maintenance activities in the tunnel. If bats are detected, acoustic
monitoring with AnaBat™ or Petersson units will be installed to monitor the
number of bats using the tunnel. After establishing a baseline count of bats
occupying the tunnel, consultation with resource agencies would be consulted to
determine if further action is necessary. In the event that bats would need to be
excluded from the tunnel, SCVWD staff will install one-way exits at the tunnel
entrances through which the bats can leave, but cannot return. Exits will consist
of netting with 1/60.25-inch mesh to prevent bats from returning. This mitigation
measure would identify if bats are using the tunnel and, if so, would exclude
them. This would reduce the potential for harm or injury in case of a large flood
and would protect against water quality degradation.

5.5.3

Mineral Resources
Mitigation Measure MIN-2: Inadvertent Discovery of Poppy Jasper. If, during the
course of Project construction, any deposit of poppy jasper is discovered, all
work shall immediately stop within 50 feet of the discovery and a geologist shall
be notified immediately. The geologist shall initiate investigation to determine the
significance of the discovery. The property owner would be notified of the
discovery, as they would be the legal owner of the mineral and have final
decision on its disposition (Maxey Pers. Com. 2013b).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-43

Chapter 5

5.5.4

Mitigation

Botanical Resources
Mitigation Measure BOT-1a: Conduct Focused Protocol-Level Surveys for
Special-Status Plant Species. Pre-construction protocol-level focused specialstatus plant surveys shall be conducted in suitable habitat for the four specialstatus plant species that may occur in the study area (big-scale balsamroot,
Loma Prieta hoita, fragrant fritillary, and arcuate bush-mallow). These surveys
shall be conducted according to the CNPS (2001), CDFG (2009), and USFWS
(2003) special-status plant survey protocols. Protocols require surveys during
the appropriate blooming periods of the target species to determine presence or
absence. Different species flower at different times of the year; therefore, more
than one survey would likely be necessary. Surveys shall include mapping any
sensitive communities observed during the focused plant surveys.
Mitigation Measure BOT-1b: Prepare a Mitigation Plan for Special-Status Plant
Species. If special-status plant species are found in the study area (see
Mitigation Measure BOT-1a T), consultation shall be initiated with USFWS or
CDFW to finalize a mitigation plan, as appropriate. If required, the mitigation
plan shall minimally include:


Preparation by a qualified botanist with experience in native plant
restoration, mitigation, and management;



Description of avoidance measures, such as construction setbacks,
installation of exclusionary fencing prior to and during construction, and
pre-construction training of construction personnel on the identification
and location of these plants. If sensitive plant species can be avoided,
then no further mitigation is required;



If special-status plants cannot be avoided, compensatory mitigation for
unavoidable impacts, which will include preservation or creation;



Creation of a new population using propagules collected from the impact
site or protection of an existing population at a ratio of 2 acres preserved
for each acre removed or as determined in agency consultation; including
clearly defined performance criteria focusing on plant establishment and
non-native species control measures and locations and procedures for
restoration. Plants shall be salvaged only where feasible as determined
by a qualified botanist. Plant salvage will not be conducted in lieu of
population creation using local propagules or population preservation.



Specification of a minimum 5-year post-construction maintenance and
monitoring plan for any plant salvage or habitat creation to ensure that the
plant establishment performance criteria are met. The monitoring
program shall include potential remedial action measures. Annual reports
and a final report shall be prepared and submitted to USFWS or CDFW,
as appropriate, to document the success of the mitigation;



Secure a source of funding for mitigation and monitoring operations; and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-44

Chapter 5

Mitigation


Alternatively, plant credits may be purchased at a mitigation bank at a
ratio of 2:1 at a local site, or in southern Santa Clara Valley if local options
are not available.

Mitigation Measure BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan. A revegetation and monitoring plan shall be prepared to
compensate for impacts to wetlands, riparian woodland, Riparian Scrub-shrub,
and California sycamore woodland. This plan will address on-site revegetation,
as well as off-site mitigation.
The plan shall provide very specific mitigation requirements for western
sycamores, including minimum number for planting, number that must meet
performance criteria, very specific performance criteria (to measure vigor, height,
stem diameter, period of time without irrigation, period of time without protection
from herbivores, etc.), and remedial measures if trees fail.
The plan shall include the following minimum components:


Funding



Implementation schedule



Limits of area for collection of propagules, including very specific
requirements for western sycamores to ensure the non-hybrid stock



Planting types and densities



Irrigation plans



Weed control



Performance criteria for trees



Performance criteria for habitat



Reporting



Adaptive management plan

Mitigation Measure BOT-1d: Prepare a Monitoring Plan for West/East Little
Llagas Creek. A plan will be prepared to monitor changes to vegetation and
vegetative communities in West/East Little Llagas Creek that may result from
altered hydrology related to the Project. Monitoring shall be conducted for a
minimum of 5 years. The Plan will include monitoring timing, methods, reporting
and funding contingencies for replacement for the loss of native mature trees at a
minimum 5:1 ratio.
Mitigation Measure BOT-1e: Dispose of Invasive Non-Native Species. When
invasive non-native species are removed during construction, precautions shall
be taken to prevent the spread and establishment of these species, including

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-45

Chapter 5

Mitigation

off-site disposal and ensuring all plant parts capable of starting new individuals
are hauled off site.
5.5.5

Wildlife Resources
Mitigation Measure WILD-1a: Vegetation Removal During Avian Non-breeding
Season. To the extent possible, vegetation will be removed during the avian
non-breeding season between September 1 and February 1. If vegetation
removal occurs outside of this timeframe, a general preconstruction survey for
nesting bird will be conducted no more than 14 days before ground disturbance
and no more than 7 days before vegetation removal to avoid disturbance to
active nests, eggs, and/or young. If an active nest is discovered within the work
area, a “no disturbance” buffer zone will be established around the nest until a
qualified biologist has determined that all young have fledged and are
independent of parental care; the buffer zone size would depend on the species,
location, and placement of nest, in consultation with CDFW. The removal of
vegetation will be the minimal amount necessary to achieve Project goals.
Mitigation Measure WILD-2a: Preconstruction Surveys for Special-Status
Amphibian and Reptile Species. Preconstruction survey for special-status
amphibian and reptiles will include, but not be limited to WPT and CTS. Surveys
will be conducted by a qualified biologist in reaches with perennial water,
standing ponds, and where in-water construction would be required. Surveyed
area would also include adjacent upland habitat, including scrub and annual
grassland and clearings in riparian woodland, within dispersal range of the
species. Preconstruction surveys will be performed by a qualified biologist within
48-hours prior to construction activities. For areas where construction would
occur within identified CTS habitat, SCVWD will consult with CDFW and USFWS
to obtain authorization for activities that could affect the species and implement
all applicable protection measures specified through the consultation. Protection
measures shall be focused on locations where special-status species have been
identified within and adjacent to the ROW and where special-status amphibian
and reptiles could potentially be affected, as determined in consultation with
CDFW and/or USFWS. Protection measures could include, but are not limited
to, the following:


Where impacts on potential special-status amphibians and reptile
breeding habitat can be avoided, establish site-specific exclusion zones
to protect these areas. Install temporary fencing around the exclusion
areas with “Sensitive Habitat Area” signs posted.



Where it is not possible to avoid work within or adjacent to potential
special-status amphibians and reptile breeding sites, limit work in those
areas to the period of June 1 to October 14 or From October 15 to
May 31, within potential CTS dispersal habitat, minimize operation of
proposed Project vehicles and equipment at night off pavement during
rain events and within 24 hours following rain events. Check under
vehicles parked overnight off pavement before moving them.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-46

Chapter 5

Mitigation


From April 1 to August 31 within potential WPT dispersal habitat,
minimize operation of proposed Project vehicles and equipment in upland
habitat to minimize potential of crushing nests and dispersing females.

Mitigation Measure WILD-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering Activities.
During clearance of the work area, after preconstruction surveys have been
conducted, an on-site biological monitor will be present, from prior to start of
construction activities until the site is dewatered and completely isolated. The
monitor will inspect the work area to determine if any wildlife are present and
have become entrapped during the dewatering. If special-status species are
detected, all construction activity will cease, except as directed by the biological
monitor, until these species can be captured and relocated following the
guidance of the appropriate regulatory agency.
Mitigation Measure WILD-2c: Relocate Special-status Species from
Construction Area. If special-status amphibians and reptiles, such as WPT and
CTS, are found in the construction area and need to be relocated, CDFW or
USFWS, as appropriate, will be notified prior to commencing the relocation effort.
Prior to capturing the animals, the biologist will propose a capture method,
handling procedures, and area to which the animals will be moved with the
agencies listed above. The person performing the relocation will have all
necessary permits for doing such work including FESA Section 10(a)(1)(A)
permit. If special-status amphibian and reptile species are found, SCVWD will
consult with resource agencie(s) regarding translocation to suitable habitat that
will not be affected by construction activity. In the unlikely event that egg nests
or suitable estivating burrows are discovered within upland habitat, the area will
be flagged and a buffer will be installed until proper guidance is received from the
appropriate regulatory agencie(s). If an individual is discovered, aquatic barriers
will be installed and the animal will be relocated by a qualified USFWS and/or
CDFW-approved biologist and excluded from the work area.
Mitigation Measure WILD-2d: Implement Compensatory Mitigation for
Special-Status Amphibians and Reptiles, including California tiger salamander.
SCVWD will provide mitigation to compensate for unavoidable impacts to
special-status amphibians and reptiles and their habitat. Quantification of
impacts to special-status amphibians and reptiles will be completed by
determining the extent of impacts to lands that are within potentially suitable
habitat based upon scientific information and occurrence or in consultation with
the appropriate resource agency. The extent of impacts to suitable upland CTS
habitat will guide the ratio of compensation necessary to mitigate impacts to less
than significant. The ratio of and type of compensation for impacts will follow the
appropriate resource agency guidance and recommendation. SCVWD will work
with resource agencies to utilize the Valley HP to provide compensation for the
protection, enhancement, and/or management of suitable habitat that currently
supports or could support the species; mitigation lands for CTS. The suitable
habitat will consist of upland habitat, must be located within Santa Clara County,
and within the area where the species is thought to currently occur. Mitigation
lands identification would be based on scientific information and/or in
consultation with the appropriate resource agency.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-47

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Mitigation Measure WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to Wildlife.
Operational area boundaries should be determined prior to nightfall. As
construction areas shift throughout the project, night work areas will be
determined prior to construction. Illumination beyond the immediate work area
will be minimized. All required lights should be shielded and pointing downward
to control light beyond the immediate work area. If possible, red filters or red
vellum should be placed over any lights attached to equipment. Acceptable
stationary light fixtures include: Low Pressure Sodium (LPS) 18w, 35w, red,
orange or amber LED (true red, orange or amber diodes, NOT filters), true red
neon, other lighting sources that produce light of 560 nm or longer. Equipment
shall not be operated at speeds that exceed a fast walk (< 5 mph) if off road.
Noise beyond necessary operations should be minimized. Verbal
communication should be at a conversational level.
Mitigation Measure WILD-2f: Special-Status Species Environmental
Awareness Training and Construction Avoidance Measures. Worker training will
be conducted to educate workers about the potential presence of special-status
wildlife with potential for occurrence within and adjacent to the Project area.
Training will include, but not be limited to, special-status amphibian and reptile
species with potential to occur in the Project area. The training will include a
brief description of special-status wildlife’s listing status, identification keys,
behavior, habitat, sensitivity to human disturbance, the definition of take and
consequences, and Project measures to implement to protect the biological
resource and prevent take of the species. Protection measures may include
limiting construction activities to daylight hours (beginning when the sun rises
and ending when the sun goes down in most situations), speed limits, and clean
construction.
Mitigation Measure WILD-2g: Bullfrog Population Monitoring and Control at
Lake Silveira. SCVWD will initiate a bullfrog population monitoring program prior
to the restoration project construction at Lake Silveira and include three sets of
day and night surveys to be conducted in the spring or early summer (i.e., the
bullfrog breeding season). The three sets of day/night surveys will be repeated
every 3 years. If significant increases in the bullfrog population are observed,
SCVWD, in consultation with resource agencies, may undertake control
measures, to reduce the population.
Mitigation Measure WILD-3a: Preconstruction Surveys for Common and
Special-status Bats prior to Removal of Trees and Removal/Replacement of
Road Culverts. If tree and building removal is undertaken during the migration
season from late August through October, no additional measures are required.
For tree or building removal during the breeding and maternity season from
November through mid-August, preconstruction surveys of trees and structures
proposed for removal within the Project area would be conducted.
Before tree and culvert removal activities occur, a qualified biologist will conduct
a preconstruction survey for roosting bats in the trees scheduled for removal no
more than 7 days prior to removal activities and culverts scheduled for
replacement or removal no more than 7 days prior to disturbance activity. If bats,
or the presence of bats (e.g., guano), are detected roosting in the trees or manmade structures identified for removal, the biologist will work with CDFW (if the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-48

Chapter 5

Mitigation

bat species detected is a special-status bat species) to determine acceptable
ways to minimize disturbance to roosting bats.
Project activities will avoid occupied roosts, implement non-disturbance buffers
around active maternity colonies and hibernacula in consultation with wildlife
agencies, and ensure safe eviction of non-breeding bats where avoidance is not
feasible.
If the roost is determined to be a maternity roost, the biologist will consult with the
appropriate resource agency biologists to determine appropriate measures to
protect the maternity roost. Such measures could include the prohibition of
removal of the maternity roost tree and trees within 250 feet of the tree until the
maternity roost is no longer active.
Mitigation Measure WILD-3b: Provide Alternative Bat Roost. In coordination
with the resource agency, to compensate for the loss of roosting trees, bat boxes
will be installed in the areas of the removed roosting habitat, but at least 150 feet
from construction zone. The number and location of the bat boxes will be
determined in consultation with CDFW.
If a tree or structure containing special-status bats, such as pallid bat, is
removed, destroyed, and its suitability to provide habitat for the bat is diminished
by Project activities, then a qualified biologist will design and determine an
appropriate location for an alternative roost. If a tree or structure containing a
maternity roost of special-status bats is disturbed by Project activities, to the
point that the disturbance causes abandonment of the roost site, then an
alternative roost will be constructed. The type and placement of an alternative
roost will be determined by a qualified biologist in consultation with the
appropriate resource agency. The alternative roost site will be monitored until
occupancy is determined (or based on guidance by the appropriate resource
agency); if by that time the structure is not occupied by special-status bats, a
qualified bat biologist, in consultation with CDFW, will identify alternative
structures, placement locations, and monitoring lengths.
Mitigation Measure WILD-3c: Development and Implementation of a Bat
Monitoring Program and Development of Bat/Tunnel Exclusion Devices. See
5.5.2 for description.
Mitigation Measure WILD-4: Preconstruction Surveys for San Francisco
Dusky-Footed Woodrat Nests prior to Vegetation Removal. A preconstruction
survey would be conducted for San Francisco dusky-footed woodrats and
woodrat nests within a 10-foot buffer area of areas proposed for vegetation
removal and areas that provide suitable habitat for the species, such as riparian
forests along the West Little Llagas Creek, the confluence of Lake Silveira and
West Little Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek. Pre-construction surveys
will be conducted no more than 30 days prior to the period of disturbance. If
wood rat nests are found, they would be reported to CDFW and flagged for
avoidance. Stakes, flags, or plastic tape will be used to enforce avoidance. If
any woodrat nests are found that cannot be avoided, trapping and relocation of
the wood rat(s) upstream or to a suitable adjacent river or creek nearby will be
implemented in consultation with CDFW. If pups are found within the nest, the
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-49

Chapter 5

Mitigation

nest material should be replaced until young are weaned (up to 6 weeks from
birth) and are independent of parental care, at which point the nest should be
dismantled and relocated.
The species’ habitat is relatively widespread; impacts to woodrat habitat would
not require additional species-specific mitigation. However, implementation of
Mitigation Measure BOT-1c T would increase riparian habitat supporting the
dusky-footed woodrat, by providing riparian mitigation that could benefit the
species.
Mitigation Measure WILD-5a: Conduct Plant Surveys for Host Plants of
Special-Status Invertebrates. Plant surveys will be conducted during the
appropriate blooming period for host plants of special-status invertebrates within
the Project area. Plant surveys will be conducted in annual grassland habitat (or
other suitable habitat for serpentine associated plants) that would be proposed
for removal or impacted by Project activities. Surveys would focus on primary
host plants of special-status invertebrates and will include Plantago erecta and
Platystemon californicus, as well as secondary host plants, Castilleja
densilforous and C.exerta. Surveys will be conducted by a qualified
biologist/botanist and if native host plants are observed the area, they will be
flagged and avoided. No vegetation removal will occur within designated buffer
until guidance has been provided by appropriate regulatory agencies.
Mitigation Measure WILD-5b: Compensatory Mitigation for Impacts to
Serpentine-associated Special-status Invertebrates. If impacts to
serpentine-associated special-status invertebrates cannot be avoided, SCVWD
will compensate for impacts as a result of Project activities through the
preservation and management of serpentine communities. Serpentine habitat
will be mapped and quantification of impacts to serpentine habitat would occur
will be completed by determining the extent of impacts to lands that are within
potentially suitable habitat for the species based upon scientific information and
occurrence or in consultation with the appropriate resource agency.
Compensation for unavoidable impacts to serpentine communities will be
provided through the enhancement, management, or protection of in-kind
communities at a ratio identified by the appropriate resource agency.
Procedures for identifying impacts to potential habitat and preservation and
management of mitigation lands, will follow the guidance and recommendation of
appropriate resource agencies. Prior to Project implementation, a management
and monitoring plan will be developed in consultation with the USFWS or
appropriate resource agency.
Mitigation Measure WILD-6: Implementation of USFWS Standardized
Recommendations for Protection of the San Joaquin Kit Fox prior to or during
Ground Disturbance. To prevent the potential take and avoid any short- or
long-term impact to San Joaquin kit fox, SCVWD will comply with BMPs outlined
in the USFWS Standardized Recommendations for Protection of the San Joaquin
Kit Fox prior to or during Ground Disturbance (USFWS 1999) during the
construction phase of the Project to mitigate for potential impacts.
Recommended measures include:

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-50

Chapter 5

Mitigation


Restrict Project-related vehicle traffic to established roads or other
designated areas onsite. Vehicles should observe a 20 MPH speed limit
in all Project areas (except on paved pre-existing roads with an
established speed limit). Off-road traffic outside of the designated Project
areas should be prohibited;



All excavated, steep-walled holes or trenches more than 2 feet deep shall
be covered at the close of each working day by plywood or similar
materials or provided with one or more escape ramps constructed of
earth fill or wooden planks. Before such holes or trenches are filled, each
shall be thoroughly inspected for trapped animals that should be allowed
to escape before proceeding;



All construction pipes, culverts, or similar structures with a diameter of
4 inches or greater that are stored open onsite for one or more nights
shall be thoroughly inspected for animals before the pipe is subsequently
buried, capped, or otherwise used or moved in any way;



All food-related trash items, such as wrappers, cans, bottles, and food
scraps, shall be disposed of in closed containers and removed at least
once a week from the Project site;



No firearms shall be allowed on the Project site; and



No pets (i.e., dogs, cats, etc.) shall be permitted onsite.

If a kit fox is found onsite, all work within the area should cease until a qualified
biologist, approved by the Applicant, is notified in order to outline additional
avoidance measures to be implemented, as well as consult with regulatory
agencies (USFWS and CDFW). Any recommendations from the agencies shall
be implemented.
5.5.6

Aquatic Resources
Mitigation Measure AQUA-1: Construction of Fish Exclusion Barrier at the
Downstream End of Reach 14. To mitigate the potential migration of adult
steelhead into Reach 14, a fish exclusion barrier would be constructed at the
downstream end of the reach. The exclusion barrier would be designed following
the criteria and guidelines in Anadromous Salmonid Passage Facility Design
(NMFS 2008) for exclusion barriers.
Mitigation Measure AQUA-1a: Steelhead Passage: Channel and Structure
Design. To mitigate the potential passage impediment through the Project area,
final channel design will incorporate criteria from Anadromous Salmonid Passage
Facility Design (NMFS 2008). Detailed within this document are criteria,
rationale, and guidelines for designing proper fish passage. Designing instream
structures to allow fish passage requires site-specific analysis of each type of
structure in addition to analysis of hydrology information and river morphology
trends, as well as biological information including life stage, run size, and period
of migration. Passage for adult salmonid through different types of instream
structures would be obtained by following type specific criteria and guidelines,

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-51

Chapter 5

Mitigation

and analyzing site-specific attributes to maintain water velocities of less than 3 to
4 meters per second, fall heights of less than 3 meters, and depth of pools below
the falls at least 1.25 times the fall height (Bjornn and Reiser 1991).
Mitigation Measure AQUA-1b: Steelhead Passage: Inspection of In-channel of
Large Woody Debris prior to Removal for Management of Flood Conveyance
Channels. To mitigate the potential removal and loss of in-channel LWD that
may be used as hydraulic refuge for upstream migrating adult salmonids, size
criteria will be developed whereby in-channel LWD above the size criteria would
be inspected prior to removal for flood conveyance. Pieces of wood below the
size criteria would not require inspection prior to removal. LWD above the size
criteria will be inspected to determine if it poses an erosion hazard of flood threat,
and a biologist will assess if it is ecologically important to the channel. If
determined not to be a threat, the LWD will remain in the channel but may be
modified to prevent debris capture, bank scour, or aggradation. If determined to
be a threat, the LWD will be removed and replaced, removed from the channel
permanently, or moved to a nearby instream location that reduces flood hazard
and maintains ecological function.
Mitigation Measure AQUA-2a: Preconstruction Surveys prior to In-channel
Construction. Perform preconstruction surveys in areas where in-water
construction would be required during steelhead spawning periods prior to
January 1. Preconstruction surveys will be performed by a qualified biologist to
determine if steelhead are present or have recently spawned (as indicated by the
presence of redds) in the construction area. Steelhead surveys will consist of
visual surveys. If present and not spawning, steelhead will be captured and
relocated to areas of suitable habitat that will not be affected by the construction
activity. If the steelhead are spawning or a redd is detected in the proposed work
area; work would cease until such time that work would not impact the redd.
Mitigation Measure AQUA-2b: Biological Monitor for Dewatering Activities.
During the isolation of the work area, after preconstruction surveys have been
conducted, an on-site biological monitor will be present during all working hours
from prior to the time activities to isolate the site begin until the site is dewatered
and completely isolated. The monitor will inspect the work area to determine if
any spawning steelhead or redds are present during the dewatering. If either are
detected, all construction activity will cease, except as directed by the monitor,
until the individual can be captured and relocated or until such time that work
would not impact the redd.
5.5.7

Agricultural and Forest Resources
Mitigation Measure AG-1a: Agricultural Soil Amendments and Treatments. For
areas converted temporarily for construction, the SCVWD would rip and disk the
ground after Project work is completed as to not leave the area in a compacted
state after construction is complete. The landowner would be consulted as to the
necessary depth of the sub-soiling. Additionally, soil amendments, such as
compost, could be added to the lands to return the soil to its original or better
texture and tilth.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-52

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Mitigation Measure AG-1b: Agricultural Conversion Offsets. For each acre of
Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Statewide Importance that
is permanently converted to nonagricultural use, the SCVWD will offset (at a 1:1
ratio) the conversion of these lands by either contributing to a fund that protects
agricultural land at current market value or acquiring the land. SCVWD could
collaborate with other local governmental agencies, including cities, the county,
Santa Clara County Open Space Authority, and/or non-profits, including the
Santa Clara County Farm Bureau, to identify lands suitable for mitigation. In the
event that active agricultural lands currently designated as Important Farmlands
are not available within the county, SCVWD could work with the aforementioned
agencies and organizations to develop an alternative to compensate for the
conversion of these Important Farmlands by the Project. For example, SCVWD
could also consider contributing to local or regional land conservation banking
program or organization. Additionally, SCVWD could purchase off-site
conservation easements at the same 1:1 ratio.
Mitigation Measure AG-2: Williamson Act Lands Conversion Offsets. For each
acre of Williamson Act Lands that is converted as a part of this alternative, the
SCVWD will offset (at a 1:1 ratio) the conversion of these lands by either
contributing to a fund that protects agricultural land at current market value or
acquiring the land. Lands that are classified both as FMMP and Williamson Act
lands would not be subject to double mitigation. As such, SCVWD would only
need to mitigate for these lands at a 1:1 ratio. SCVWD could work with existing
growers in the county and the Farm Bureau along with local agencies, such as
the Santa Clara County Department of Agriculture and the Santa Clara County
Open Space Authority, to identify lands eligible for Williamson Act classification.
SCVWD could work with these entities and landowner(s) to enter these lands
under Williamson Act contracts to mitigate for the loss of these lands under this
alternative. Given the partial overlap of Williamson Act Lands and other
Important Farmlands, this mitigation measure should be implemented in
conjunction with Mitigation Measure AG-1b T.
5.5.8

Land Use and Planning
None required.

5.5.9

Cultural Resources
Mitigation Measure CU-2: Avoid Known Cultural Resources during
Implementation. A qualified archeologist will mark site boundaries of known
cultural resources prior to the start of construction to avoid these resources. A
qualified archaeologist shall be on call through the duration of the Project and
shall be on site during activities occurring within 100 feet of known cultural
resources. The archaeologist shall have the authority to stop work if Project
construction impacts cultural resources.

5.5.10 Traffic and Circulation
Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-1 NRCS: Coordinate with Local Businesses
Regarding Access. Where construction will take place along Monterey Road in
downtown Morgan Hill (Reach 8), the Applicant shall work with the construction
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-53

Chapter 5

Mitigation

contractors and the local business owners to ensure that employee and patron
access is maintained at all times during business hours. Prior to any
construction activities in Reach 8 that would affect the downtown area, the
Applicant shall develop an access mitigation plan that specifically defines the
areas of the sidewalk/street affected by Project construction and includes
provisions to ensure that customers can park and walk to those businesses.
These provisions should include, but not be limited to, signage stating that
“Businesses are Open During Construction,” signage directing motorists to
alternate parking locations on side streets, and detour signage for any segments
of sidewalk that are closed during construction. A public meeting or other
outreach efforts shall be conducted to ensure that local business owners are
provided an opportunity to review these provisions and discuss Project impacts
prior to the start of construction. The SCVWD shall conduct the construction
operations in a manner that will cause as little inconvenience as possible to
adjacent property owners. Mitigation shall accomplish the following:


Convenient access by vehicles and pedestrians to driveways, houses,
buildings, and businesses shall be maintained in operational condition;
and temporary approaches to crossings or intersecting streets shall be
provided and kept in good condition.



When construction operation is directly within a driveway area, the
SCVWD shall provide temporary access. The existing access shall not
be closed until the temporary replacement access is usable. Once
construction is completed, access shall be restored to a condition equal to
or better than the existing condition prior to the operation.

Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-1: Maintain Access to Local Residences and
Businesses. The SCVWD shall include specifications for vehicle and pedestrian
access control during construction activities that would serve as mitigation as
follows:


Convenient access by vehicles and pedestrians to driveways, houses,
buildings, and businesses along the work shall be maintained in
operational condition and temporary approaches to crossings or
intersecting streets shall be provided and kept in good condition.



When construction operation is directly within the driveway area, the
SCVWD must provide temporary access. The existing access shall not
be closed until the temporary replacement access is usable. Once
construction is completed, restore access to a condition equal to or better
than the existing condition prior to the operation.

Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-5: Coordinate with Local Business Regarding
Parking. The Applicant and its contractors shall work with the operators/business
owners, such as the Morgan Hill Plaza Shopping Center, to ensure that sufficient
customer parking is maintained for those businesses during Project construction.
Prior to any construction activities, the SCVWD shall develop a circulation and
parking mitigation plan that specifically defines the areas of the parking lot that
will affect the Morgan Hill Plaza shopping center and any other Project locations
where construction may affect parking that is used to access local residences or
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-54

Chapter 5

Mitigation

businesses. The mitigation shall provide temporary restriping of remaining
parking areas to provide additional spaces, if necessary and temporary restriping
of circulation drive aisles, as needed. Construction vehicle and equipment
staging and storage shall be limited to the immediate construction area to the
extent feasible so as not to affect customer vehicle traffic.
Mitigation Measure TRAFFIC-6: Repair Local Roadways to Pre-Project
Conditions. The SCVWD will consult with Santa Clara County and the City of
Morgan Hill before the start of construction to discuss use of local roadways as
haul routes. The SCVWD shall document the existing condition of the roads and
haul routes. Following construction, SCVWD will consult with Santa Clara
County and the City of Morgan Hill and will repair any damage to local roads that
occurred as a result of construction activities. If it is determined that the Project
construction activities caused road damage along haul routes, then those roads
will be restored to pre-Project conditions immediately after all construction work
using a haul road has been completed. If there is interim damage identified to a
roadway segment on a haul route prior to completion of Project construction that
requires repairs, then the County and City will consult with SCVWD and
determine if temporary repairs are needed until the Project construction is
completed and the SCVWD can implement a permanent repair of the road.
5.5.11 Air Quality and Greenhouse Gases
Mitigation Measure AQ-2: Exhaust Emissions Reduction Measures. The
Applicant and its contractor(s) shall implement the following measures during
construction of all Project activities to reduce construction-related exhaust
emissions:


Idling time of diesel powered construction equipment shall be minimized
by shutting equipment off when not in use and reducing idling time to two
minutes. Clear signage shall be provided for construction workers at all
access points.



All construction equipment shall be maintained and properly tuned in
accordance with manufacturer’s specifications. All equipment shall be
checked and determined to be running in proper condition prior to
operations.



All diesel-powered construction equipment shall be in compliance with the
In-Use Off-Road Diesel-Fueled Fleets Rule and all portable equipment
shall be in compliance with PERP as effective and applicable at the time
construction work is performed (see Section 3.11.3.5).

5.5.12 Noise
Mitigation Measure NOI-1a: Reduce Noise from Construction and Operational
Activity. Use noise-reducing enclosures around stationary noise-generating
equipment capable of 6-dB attenuation and take advantage of existing barrier
features, including material stockpiles, to block sound transmission.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-55

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Mitigation Measure NOI-1b: Noise and Vibration Control Plan. Prepare a
Noise and Vibration Control Plan that will include noise control measures to
achieve compliance with applicable noise performance standards for non-tunnel
construction activity (as the Noise and Vibration Control Plan listed in BMPs
above are related to tunnel construction only).
Mitigation Measure NOI-1c: Notify Residents of Construction Work; Implement
Noise Complaint Procedure. Before construction, the SCWVD shall send out a
notice to residences within 1,500 feet of the Project work areas, which will
include the proposed start date and contact information for reporting complaints
related to noise. The Applicant will designate a Project liaison to respond to
noise complaints during construction.
Mitigation Measures NOI-2a: Vibration Limits. The Applicant will incorporate
restrictions on controlled detonations into the contract specifications. Ground
surface vibration shall be limited to 0.5 in/sec PPV, measured at the nearest
residential structure or nearby location of comparable slant distance; if it is not
possible to measure at a comparable slant distance, then the vibration should be
monitored at several distances to verify the propagation curve and to provide a
reliable estimate at the structure. Prior to use of controlled detonations, the
contractor shall perform tests to determine the vibration dampening properties of
the rock. This information will be used to control the vibration from controlled
detonations to within the required PPV limit of 0.5 in/sec. Such tests may include
small test blasts in sealed borings to measure vibration attenuation. The contract
specifications shall also limit blast overpressure to 0.0145 psi or 134 dB at
nearby residences. The contract specifications shall require the contractor to
notify neighbors at the portals within 500 feet of near-surface detonation activity
of the construction activity schedule and to advise residents to remove precious
and fragile items from walls and shelves. The contract specifications shall
require the contractor to notify neighbors within 500 feet slant distance of
underground detonation activity (away from the portals) of construction activity
schedules.
Mitigation Measures NOI-2b: Alternate Overnight Accommodations. If
construction monitoring indicates that the tunnel excavation would exceed
nighttime disturbance (annoyance) criteria and no other feasible mitigation is
available, the Applicant shall offer to provide alternate sleeping accommodations
for the impacted residents for the nights that the tunneling operations would be
within the confirmed impact zone.
Mitigation Measures NOI-2c: Notify Residents of Pile Driving
Activities/Vibratory Compactor Use. Notify residents within 25 feet of any access
road or within 200 feet of any impact pile driving or vibratory compactor activities
regarding the potential for perceptible vibration. Advise them that vibration from
vibratory compactors or impact pile driving activities temporarily operating along
nearby haul roads may cause objects on walls and shelves to move and
encourage them to move precious and fragile items off walls and shelves.
Mitigation Measures NOI-2d: Prohibit Vibratory Pile Driving within 200 feet of
Residential Structures. The Applicant shall limit the use of vibratory pile driving
equipment to greater than 200 feet away from residential structures.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-56

Chapter 5

Mitigation

5.5.13 Aesthetic Resources
Mitigation Measure BOT-1c: Prepare a Revegetation, Monitoring, and
Mitigation Plan. A revegetation and monitoring plan shall be prepared to
compensate for impacts to wetlands, riparian woodland, Riparian Scrub-shrub,
and California sycamore woodland. This plan will address on-site revegetation,
as well as off-site mitigation.
The plan shall provide very specific mitigation requirements for western
sycamores, including minimum number for planting, number that must meet
performance criteria, very specific performance criteria (to measure vigor, height,
stem diameter, period of time without irrigation, period of time without protection
from herbivores, etc.), and remedial measures if trees fail.
The plan shall include the following minimum components:


Funding



Implementation schedule



Limits of area for collection of propagules, including very specific
requirements for western sycamores to ensure the non-hybrid stock



Planting types and densities



Irrigation plans



Weed control



Performance criteria for trees



Performance criteria for habitat



Reporting



Adaptive management plan

Mitigation Measure WILD-2e: Minimize Nightwork Disruption to Wildlife. See
Section 5.5.5 for description.
5.5.14 Utilities and Public Services
Mitigation Measure UPS-1: Well Replacement. The SCVWD will identify wells,
if any, that may be impacted by construction and will make a new well operable
or provide an equally reliable source of water to the current well owner or
operator prior to the construction activities that would interrupt the service of the
original well.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-57

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Mitigation Measure UPS-3: Emergency Response Plan and Notification. The
SCVWD will develop an emergency response plan, which would include:


A map of all underground and above ground utilities;



A response plan for potential damage to infrastructure including
identification of other close proximity utilities; and



A detailed construction schedule with locations of construction and
alternative routes identified for emergency responders.

This plan will be developed in consultation with emergency responders prior to
construction and the implementation of the response plan. The response plan
will determine if the road closures may affect emergency response times and
SCVWD will work with local police, sheriff, and fire protection services to address
their concerns, if any. The plan will be updated if construction schedules change
to reduce response time delays that could result from lack of information of
construction on arterial or collector roads used by emergency response.
5.5.15 Recreation Resources
Mitigation Measure REC-1a: Trail Detour. The Applicant will work with the City
of Morgan Hill to determine an alternate route for the trail through city streets until
the city decides that they will re-establish the paved trail in the future. The detour
trail would be on sidewalks and city streets with signage and markings to
delineate the detour.
Mitigation Measure REC-1b: Recreational Facility Protection. Public
recreational lands or facilities within or close to the Project footprint should be
avoided during construction, if possible. If a public recreational facility is
impacted during construction, SCVWD will return the facility to equal or better
condition after construction is completed. If parking areas are impacted during or
after Project construction, alternative parking will be provided. If a facility is
completely closed due to Project construction, SCVWD will, to the best extent
possible, limit the amount of time of the closure or target the closure for times of
lower park use. If it is determined that parklands or parking areas would need to
be closed for an extended time period, the viability of developing a temporary
opportunity in lieu of the closed facility should be considered and provided, if
possible. This mitigation measure would not apply to SCVWD owned lands,
including the West Llagas Trail.
Mitigation Measure REC-1c: Public Outreach. If a park or trail is impacted
during construction, an outreach plan will be developed to inform the public
before the closure or access limitation. Outreach will be conducted by posting
flyers or informational boards at parks or other public spaces, posting information
on pertinent websites or in a newspaper. The outreach information will inform
residents and park visitors about the purpose of the construction, the length of
time expected to complete the Project, and of similar recreational opportunities in
the vicinity of the study area.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-58

Chapter 5

Mitigation

5.5.16 Population and Housing
One less-than-significant impact was identified for each of the action alternatives.
The less-than-significant impact is associated with the removal of residences,
and the subsequent displacement of the residents due to construction of the
various proposed Project features. The Tunnel Alternative and the Reach 6
Bypass Alternative would result in the displacement of individuals who live in
three residences which is less than the NRCS (12 residences) and
Culvert/Channel (7 residences) Alternatives.
The Applicant’s Proposed Action requires removal of three residences. To
mitigate impacts, appropriate compensation will be provided to the owners for the
loss of their residences as well as finding them new residences through the
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of
1970.
5.5.17 Socioeconomic Resources
At over $80 million annually, greenhouse nursery production is the highest gross
value crop in Santa Clara County. While these displacements are not expected to
be substantially disruptive of business within the Project area as a whole, they
could result in substantial disruptions to individual operations and owners.
Relocation efforts, complying with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, would ensure the business operations
are not significantly affected and owners are appropriately compensated for the
disruption during relocation. Any business closure associated with relocation
would be temporary. There is no additional mitigation required beyond
compliance with the Act.
However, to mitigate impacts to greenhouse corps, besides compensating the
owners for their land, for the improvements (greenhouse structures and any
appurtenances) within the required project right of way, compensation is to also
be granted for the loss of the crops/plants in their growing cycle beyond a year.
For crops with a year or less growing cycle, included in the acquisition process,
the Applicant will issue the owner a permit to allow the owner to operate and
maintain their greenhouse until the crops/plants have been harvested.
5.5.18 Hazards and Hazardous Materials
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2a: Work Site Housekeeping Procedures. To reduce
impacts related to unknown hazardous materials releases from construction and
operations and maintenance, the following measures will be implemented:


The work site, areas adjacent to the work site, and access roads will be
maintained in an orderly condition, free and clear from debris and
discarded materials. Personnel will not sweep, grade, or flush surplus
materials, rubbish, debris, or dust into storm drains or waterways.



Upon completion of work, all building materials, debris, unused materials,
concrete forms, and other construction-related materials will be removed
from the work site.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-59

Chapter 5

Mitigation


To prevent mosquito breeding on construction sites, the Applicant will
ensure that surface water is gone within 4 days (96 hours). All outdoor
grounds will be examined and unnecessary water that may stand longer
than 96 hours will be drained. Construction personnel will properly
dispose of unwanted or unused artificial containers and tires. If possible,
any container or object that holds standing water that must remain
outdoors will be covered, inverted, or have drainage holes drilled.

Mitigation Measure HAZ-2b: Soil and Groundwater Management Plan. Prior to
ground breaking activities, the SCVWD shall include in construction
specifications the implementation of a Soil and Groundwater Management Plan
(SGMP) prepared by state registered hazardous waste investigation and
remediation professionals. The SGMP shall be present on site at all times and
readily available to site workers. The SGMP shall include a health and safety
plan, emergency notification protocols, and handling and sampling procedures
for site workers in accordance with OSHA and Santa Clara County Hazardous
Materials Compliance Division requirements. The SGMP shall also describe
protocols for offsite disposal of contaminated soils or groundwater. In addition,
the SGMP shall include coordination and notification protocols and requirements
for any inadvertent releases of hazardous materials within the vicinity of any
schools.
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2c: Existing Hazardous Site Search. Prior to
construction, and for maintenance activities as part of its annual preparation of
the Notice of Proposed Work (NPW), the Applicant will conduct a search for
existing known contaminated sites on the State Water Resource Control Board’s
GeoTracker Web site (http://www.geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov). The
GeoTracker search will only be performed for the SCVWD’s ground disturbing
activities. For any proposed ground disturbing maintenance sites located within
1,500 feet of any “open” sites where contamination has not been remediated, the
SCVWD will contact the RWQCB case manager listed in the database. The
Applicant will work with the case manager to ensure construction and
maintenance activities would not affect cleanup or monitoring activities or
threaten the public or environment.
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2d: Implement Recommended Phase I or Phase II
Hazardous Materials Investigation and Any Required Follow-Up Remediation.
Prior to Project-related groundbreaking at sites for which a Level I/Phase I
investigation has identified the need for a Phase II investigation within the Project
footprint, the Applicant would conduct a Phase II hazardous materials
investigation consistent with all applicable federal, state, and local codes and
regulations. The Applicant would also be responsible for ensuring that all
recommendations of the Phase II investigation, including site remediation and/or
additional coordination with regulatory agencies, would be implemented
consistent with the Phase II and all applicable codes, standards, and regulations.
If waste disposal is necessary, the Applicant will ensure that all hazardous
materials removed during construction would be handled and disposed of by a
licensed waste-disposal contractor and transported by a licensed hauler to an
appropriately licensed and permitted disposal or recycling facility, in accordance
with local, state, and federal requirements.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-60

Chapter 5

Mitigation

Mitigation Measure HAZ-2e: Minimize the Area of Disturbance. To minimize
potential impacts from unknown soil contamination, soil disturbance will be kept
to the minimum footprint necessary to complete the construction or maintenance
activity.
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2f: Stop Work and Implement Hazardous Materials
Investigations and Remediation in the Event that Unknown Hazardous Materials
are Encountered. In the event that unknown hazardous materials are
encountered during construction or maintenance activities, all work in the area of
the discovery will stop and the Applicant will conduct a Phase II hazardous
materials investigation to identify the nature and extent of contamination and
evaluate potential impacts on Project construction and human health.
If no Phase I investigation was previously conducted and is identified as
appropriate, it may be done concurrent with or prior to Phase II. If necessary,
based on the outcomes of the Phase II investigation, the Applicant will implement
Phase III remediation measures consistent with all applicable local, state, and
federal codes and regulations.
Construction in areas known or reasonably suspected to be contaminated will not
resume until remediation is complete. If waste disposal is necessary, the
Applicant will ensure that all hazardous materials removed during construction
are handled and disposed of by a licensed waste-disposal contractor and
transported by a licensed hauler to an appropriately licensed and permitted
disposal or recycling facility, in accordance with local, state, and federal
requirements.
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2g: Conduct Asbestos and Lead Surveys for Buildings
that need to be Demolished. Prior to construction, the SCVWD would conduct an
asbestos and lead-based paint survey of any buildings that need to be
demolished or relocated and verify that soil around the building(s) is free of lead
chips. If asbestos is found, proper disposal methods would be implemented as
described under BMP HM-12, Assure Proper Hazardous Materials Management.
Mitigation Measure HAZ-2h: Develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation Plan and
Implement other Actions Required by the BAAQMD ATCM. In the event of an
unanticipated discovery of NOA, work will be stopped, and the SCVWD will
develop an Asbestos Dust Mitigation Plan to minimize emissions. The following
types of operations are subject to the indicated control, administrative, and
reporting requirements under the asbestos BAAQMD ATCM for construction and
grading operations:


For Construction and Grading Operations that will disturb more than
1 acre:
o

Prepare and obtain BAAQMD approval for an Asbestos Dust
Mitigation Plan prior to any construction or grading activity;

o

The Asbestos Dust Mitigation Plan must specify how the operation
will minimize emissions and must address specific emission
sources; and

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-61

Chapter 5

Mitigation

o




Prevent visible emissions from crossing the project boundaries
regardless of the size of the disturbance.

For Construction and Grading Operations that will disturb 1 acre or less:
o

Vehicle speed is limited to 15 mph or less; Water must be applied
prior to and during ground disturbance;

o

Keep storage piles wet or covered; and

o

Track-out prevention and removal.

For Road Construction and Operations and Maintenance:
o

Must use dust control measures for a specified set of emission
sources;

o

Prevent visible emissions from crossing the project boundaries;
and

o

The BAAQMD must be notified before any work begins.

Mitigation Measure HAZ-2i: Evaluation of Soil for Reuse. Prior to construction,
the Applicant will perform a limited risk assessment to determine whether
constituents in soil may affect sensitive ecological receptors’ or impact water
quality objectives. Specifically, arsenic, cobalt, nickel, and vanadium are present
in soils in study area at levels that exceed ESLs established by RWQCB-SF on
the basis of the Urban Area Ecotoxicity Exposure Criteria. Nickel concentrations
in soil also exceed commonly used screening values (for San Francisco Bay
sediments) for surface and foundation material used in wetland creation (Weiss
2011). Although the Proposed Project is in the CCRWQCB, they do not have
established ESLs for ecotoxicity, so the San Francisco ESLs will be utilized in the
absence of CCRWQCB standards.
The concentrations of arsenic, cobalt, nickel, and vanadium should be evaluated
to ensure that soil reuse will meet the water quality objectives established in the
Basin Plan and will not impair the beneficial uses of the East Little Llagas Creek,
West Little Llagas Creek, Llagas Creek, or downstream water bodies.
5.5.19 Environmental Justice
At over $80 million annually, greenhouse nursery production is the highest gross
value crop in Santa Clara County. While these displacements are not expected to
be substantially disruptive of business within the Project area as a whole, they
could result in substantial disruptions to individual operations and owners.
Relocation efforts, complying with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, would ensure the business operations
are not significantly affected and owners are appropriately compensated for the
disruption during relocation. Any business closure associated with relocation
would be temporary. There is no additional mitigation required beyond
compliance with the Act.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-62

Chapter 5

Mitigation

However, to mitigate impacts to greenhouse corps, besides compensating the
owners for their land, for the improvements (greenhouse structures and any
appurtenances) within the required project right of way, compensation is also to
be granted for the loss of the crops/plants in their growing cycle beyond a year.
For crops with a year or less growing cycle, included in the acquisition process,
the Applicant will issue the owner a permit to allow the owner to operate and
maintain their greenhouse until the crops/plants have been harvested.
5.6

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS)
In addition to the specific mitigation measuring detailed in this chapter, to protect, restore
and mitigate any further impacts to waters of the US the Applicant has prepared for
implementation a list of Best Management Practices. The BMPs for maintenance (no
action alternative) are located in Appendix B with a comprehensive list of additional
BMPs located in Appendix C of this EIS.

5.7

SUMMARY
The District Engineer adds special conditions to DA permits when such conditions are
necessary to satisfy legal requirements or to otherwise satisfy the public interest
requirement. Permit conditions are directly related to the impacts of the proposal and
appropriate to the scope and degree of those impacts. The mitigation measures
discussed in the Chapter were developed by the Applicant in coordination with resource
agencies to minimize the Project’s effect on the environment. Additional mitigation
measures may be developed as a result of public and agency review of this Draft EIS
and review and evaluation of the DA permit application. Mitigation measures necessary
to ensure the project is not contrary to public interest as well as a requirement for
adhering to the terms and conditions to implement reasonable and prudent measures
associated with ‘incidental take” of any federally listed species would be incorporated as
special conditions of any issued permit. Regulatory permits also include specific
conditions that contain the compensatory mitigation requirements including performance
standards for measuring success and assurances for long-term maintenance.
Concurrent with the EIS and as part of the evaluation of the DA permit application, the
USACE will determine if the Applicant’s proposed compensatory mitigation plan is
sufficient to offset unavoidable impacts to aquatic resources as a result of the Proposed
Action. Prior to issuance of any permit, the Applicant would be required to submit a final
mitigation plan determined by the USACE to meet the requirements of 33 C.F.R. Part
332. A final mitigation plan would include corrective actions/adaptive management and
evaluation of sufficient financial assurances for the performance of all obligations,
covenants, terms, conditions, and agreements required under any issued permit.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-63

Chapter 5

Mitigation

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

5-64

CHAPTER 6

COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL
REQUIREMENTS

This chapter provides a description of the major Federal regulations and Executive orders that
may currently or in the future apply to the various alternatives analyzed in this Upper Llagas
Creek Project Environmental Impact Statement (Upper Llagas EIS).
6.1

NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT OF 1969
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 (42 United States Code
[U.S.C.] § 4321 et seq.) establishes a national policy requiring that Federal agencies
consider the environmental impacts of major Federal actions significantly affecting the
quality of the human environment before making decisions and taking actions to
implement those decisions. Implementations of NEPA requirements in accordance with
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations [C.F.R.] Parts 1500 through 1508 [40 C.F.R. Part 1500-1508]) can result in
a Categorical Exclusion, an environmental assessment, a Finding of No Significant
Impact, or an environmental impact statement (EIS). This EIS has been prepared in
accordance with NEPA requirements, CEQ regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 1500 et seq.),
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provisions for implementing the procedural
requirements of NEPA (33 C.F.R. Part 230; USACE Engineering Regulation ER 200-22); and the NEPA Implementation Procedures for the Regulatory Program (Appendix B
of 33 C.F.R. Part 325).
NEPA requires federal agencies to cooperate with other federal agencies, state and
local governments, and to involve public stakeholders or citizens. Chapter 7 and
Appendix D document the public involvement process as part of this EIS.

6.2

ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT OF 1973
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531),
requires federal agencies to consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of the
Department of the Interior and/or the National Marine Fisheries Service of the
Department of Commerce (Services) to ensure that agency actions do not jeopardize the
continued existence of endangered or threatened species or adversely modify critical
habitat that supports such species. Species are listed as endangered if found to be in
danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their ranges; species are
listed as threatened if they are likely to become endangered within the foreseeable
future. The ESA also protects designated critical habitat for listed species, which are
areas of physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the species and
which may require special management considerations.
Chapter 3 of the EIS documents listed species and critical habitat within the proposed
action area and Chapter 4 of the EIS assess effects to listed species as a result of the
proposed action including effects from construction of flood protection components,
mitigation, and ongoing vegetation maintenance. Coordination with the Services has
been ongoing as described in Chapter 7 and Appendix D. Concurrent with the public

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-1

Chapter 6

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

and agency review comment period of this EIS, the USACE will request initiation of
consultation with the Services pursuant to Section 7 of the ESA.
6.3

MAGNUSON-STEVENS FISHERY CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT OF
1996
The Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act
(Magnuson-Stevens Act) mandated the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and
Fisheries Management Councils to include the identification and protection of essential
fish habitat (EFH) in all federal fishery management plans. The Magnuson-Stevens Act
requires all federal agencies to consult with NMFS for any federally permitted, funded, or
proposed work that may adversely affect EFH. EFH is defined as “waters and substrate
necessary for spawning, breeding, feeding, or growth to maturity.” The phrase
“adversely affect” refers to any impact that reduces the quality or quantity of EFH. As
documented in Chapter 3 and Appendix D, no EFH exists within the project area.
The Magnuson-Stevens Act states that consultation regarding EFH should be
consolidated, where appropriate, with the interagency consultation, coordination, and
environmental review procedures required by other federal statutes, such as NEPA, the
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act, and the ESA. EFH consultation requirements can be
satisfied through concurrent environmental compliance requirements.

6.4

FISH AND WILDLIFE COORDINATION ACT (FWCA)
The FWCA (16 U.S.C. § 661 et seq.), amended 1946, 1958, 1978, and 1995, requires
federal agencies to consult with the USFWS or, in some instances, with NMFS and with
state fish and wildlife resource agencies before undertaking or approving water projects
that control or modify surface water. The purpose of this consultation is to ensure that
wildlife resources held in public trust receive appropriate consideration and be
coordinated with the features of these water resource development projects. Federal
agencies undertaking water projects are required to fully consider recommendations
made by the USFWS, NMFS, and state fish and wildlife resource agencies in Project
reports, such as documents prepared to comply with NEPA and to include measures to
reduce impacts on wildlife in Project plans.

6.5

MIGRATORY BIRD TREATY ACT (MBTA)
The MBTA (16 U.S.C. § 703 et seq.) implements various treaties and conventions
among the United States, Canada, Japan, Mexico, and Russia; providing protection for
migratory birds as defined in 16 U.S.C. § 715j. The MBTA makes it unlawful for any
“person” to take, kill, capture, collect, possess, buy, sell, trade, ship, import, or export
any migratory bird, including feathers, parts, nests, or eggs. The MBTA does not protect
the habitat of migratory birds. Violations of the MBTA are considered criminal offenses.
Case law from 1977 held that federal agencies are not considered persons under the
MBTA and are considered exempt from its provisions. Therefore, the provisions of the
MBTA do not regulate the USACE activities. SCVWD activities, however, continue to be
regulated by the MBTA.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-2

Chapter 6

6.6

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

CLEAN WATER ACT OF 1972 (CWA)
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) is the federal agency responsible
for water quality management and administers the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 and 1987, collectively known as the CWA. The CWA establishes
the principal federal statutes for water quality protection. It was established with the
intent “to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the
nation’s water, to achieve a level of water quality that provides for recreation in and on
the water, and for the propagation of fish and wildlife.”
Several key sections of the CWA guide the regulation of water pollution in the United
States:
Section 208, Water Quality Control Plans. This section requires the preparation of local
water quality control plans by regulatory agencies throughout the nation. Each water
quality control plan covers a defined drainage area. The primary goal of each water
quality control plan is to attain water quality standards established by the CWA and the
state governments within the defined area of coverage. Minimum content requirements,
preparation procedures, time constraints, and federal grant funding criteria pertaining to
the water quality control plans are established in Section 208 of the CWA. Preparation
of the water quality control plans has been delegated to the individual states by the
USEPA.
Section 401, Water Quality Certifications. This section of the CWA requires that, prior to
the issuance of a federal license or permit for an activity or activities that may result in a
discharge of pollutants into navigable waters (Section 404 discussed below), the permit
applicant must first obtain a certification from the state in which the discharge would
originate. A state certification indicates that the proposed activity or activities would not
result in a violation of applicable water quality standards established by federal or state
law, or that no water quality standards apply to the proposed activity.
Section 402, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The NPDES
requires permits for pollution discharges into water bodies such that the permitted
discharge does not cause a violation of federal and state water quality standards. The
NPDES permits define quantitative and/or qualitative pollution limitations for the
permitted source and control measures that must be implemented to achieve the
pollution limitations. Pollution control measures are often referred to as BMPs. State
Water Board Water Quality Control Order No. 97-03-DWQ lists industry-specific waste
discharge requirements applicable to this Project, which include mining requirements.
Section 404, Discharge of Dredge and Fill Material. Section 404 assigns the USACE
with permitting authority for proposed discharges of dredged and fill material into waters
of the U.S., defined as “ . . . waters which are currently used, or were used in the past, or
may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which
are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; territorial seas and tributaries to such waters.”
Section 404 is applicable to projects in which fill material would be placed within or
below the ordinary high-water mark (OHWM) of a stream. Any project requiring a 404
permit also requires a Section 401 water quality certification (discussed above). The
USACE typically considers all natural drainages with defined beds and banks to be
waters of the U.S. Section 404 establishes procedures by which the permitting agency is
to review, condition, approve, and deny permit requests. Per the regulations, permitting

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-3

Chapter 6

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

agencies are responsible to conduct public noticing and provide the opportunity for
public hearings during the review of each permit request. This responsibility includes
informing the Services of each permit request. Consultation is required for proposed
discharges that could affect species protected by the ESA. Measures that are required
by the Services to minimize impacts to federally protected species must be included as
conditions of the permit.
6.7

CLEAN AIR ACT OF 1972
The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.) is intended to “protect and enhance the
quality of the Nation’s air resources so as to promote the public health and welfare and
the productive capacity of its population.” Section 118 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §
7418) requires that each Federal agency with jurisdiction over any property or facility
engaged in any activity that might result in the discharge of air pollutants comply with “all
Federal, state, interstate, and local requirements” with regard to the control and
abatement of air pollution.
Section 109 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7409 et seq.) directs USEPA to set
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for criteria pollutants. USEPA has
identified and set NAAQS under 40 C.F.R. Part 50 for the following criteria pollutants:
particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, and lead.
Section 111 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7411) requires establishment of national
standards of performance for new or modified stationary sources of atmospheric
pollutants. Section 160 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7470 et seq.) requires that
specific emission increases be evaluated prior to permit approval to prevent significant
deterioration of air quality. Section 112 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412) requires
specific standards for releases of hazardous air pollutants (including radionuclides).

6.8

NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT OF 1966
Federal regulations for cultural resources are governed primarily by Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended. Section 106 requires
federal agencies to take into account the effects of their undertakings on historic
properties and, if appropriate, afford the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
(ACHP) an opportunity to comment on such undertakings. The ACHP’s implementing
regulations, “Protection of Historic Properties” can be found in 36 C.F.R. Part 800.
Specific regulations for the USACE Regulatory Program are found in Appendix C of 33
C.F.R. Part 325, Procedures for the Protection of Historic Properties. The goal of the
Section 106 review process is to offer a measure of protection to sites, which are
determined eligible for listing or listed in the National Register of Historic Properties
(NRHP). The criteria for determining NRHP eligibility are found in 36 C.F.R. Part 60.
Recent amendments to the NHPA (1986 and 1992), and subsequent revisions to the
implementation regulations have strengthened the provisions for Native American
consultation and participation in the Section 106 review process.
The criteria at 36 C.F.R. Part 60.4 [a-d] for determining the significance and eligibility of
prehistoric and historic sites for inclusion in the NRHP are listed as follows:

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-4

Chapter 6

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, culture, and
engineering is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association,
and that are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; that are associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; that embody the distinct characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values,
or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction; or that have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important
in prehistory or history.
The Section 106 process includes identifying cultural resources, determining any
impacts to cultural resources, and determining the eligibility of cultural resources for
inclusion in the NRHP. The Section 106 process also includes completing a
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), if any undertaking would have an adverse effect on
cultural resources listed in or eligible for the NRHP (i.e., historic properties). The MOA
would identify measures to resolve any adverse effects to historic properties.
6.9

NATIVE AMERICAN GRAVES PROTECTION AND REPATRIATION ACT
The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act 25 U.S.C. §3001 presents
a systematic process for determining the rights of lineal descendants and Indian tribes
and Native Hawaiian organizations to certain Native American human remains, funerary
objects, sacred objects, or objects of cultural patrimony with which they are affiliated.

6.10

UNIFORM RELOCATION ASSISTANCE AND REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION
POLICIES ACT OF 1970
This act, passed in 1970, is “To provide for uniform and equitable treatment of persons
displaced from their homes, businesses, or farms by federal and federally assisted
programs and to establish uniform and equitable land acquisition policies for federal and
federally assisted programs.” The act covers any person displaced from “real property”
as a direct result of a written notice of intent to acquire the property of the individual for
programs or projects undertaken by a state agency, federal agency or with the financial
assistance of a federal agency. The act covers residents who own private property as
well as businesses (excepting farm operations). The displaced individual, business or
property owner is entitled to receive “comparable replacement dwelling” as well as
relocation assistance. Compensation to displaced persons may be in the form of
expenses associated with relocation, costs of direct losses as a result of moving a
business or farm operation (as determined by the state), and actual expenses to
reestablish a displaced farm, nonprofit organization or small business up to $10,000.
This act prohibits the state from acquiring property through means of condemnation and
provides the state act in good faith in negotiating a fair market value for property with the
owner as a preferred means of acquisition.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-5

Chapter 6

6.11

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988, FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Executive Order (EO) 11988 requires federal agencies to recognize the values of
floodplains and to consider the public benefits from restoring and preserving floodplains.
Under this EO, the federal agencies must ensure their actions avoid, to the extent
practicable, the long and short term adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and
modification of floodplains, and avoid direct and indirect support of floodplain
development whenever there is a practicable alternative. Federal agencies shall reduce
the risk and hazard associated with floods; minimize the impact of floods on human
health, welfare, and safety; and restore and preserve the beneficial and natural values of
the base floodplain.

6.12

EXECUTIVE ORDER 11990, PROTECTION OF WETLANDS
Executive Order 11990 directs federal agencies, in carrying out their responsibilities, to
provide leadership to minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands and to
preserve and enhance the natural and beneficial values of wetlands. This policy states
that federal agencies should avoid, to the extent possible, the long- and short-term
adverse impacts associated with destruction or modification of wetlands. It also states
that agencies should avoid undertaking and providing support for new construction in
wetlands, including draining, dredging, channelizing, filling, diking, impounding, and
other related activities, unless the agency finds that no practicable alternatives exist and
all practical measures have been taken to minimize harm to wetlands.
All of the Project alternatives carried forward for detailed analysis in this EIS would result
in the permanent and temporary loss of wetlands and riparian habitat. Each of the
alternatives has been designed to minimize impacts on wetlands to the extent
practicable.

6.13

EXECUTIVE ORDER 12898, FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS ENVIRONMENTAL

JUSTICE IN MINORITY POPULATIONS AND LOW-INCOME POPULATIONS
Executive Order 12898, issued by the President on February 11, 1994, requires each
federal agency to identify and address disproportionately high and adverse human
health or environmental impacts, including social or economic impacts of programs,
policies, and activities on minority and low-income populations of the United States
(CEQ 1997). The memorandum accompanying the order specifies that federal agencies
should analyze the environmental effects on minority and low-income populations, and
Indian tribes of federal actions, when such analysis is required by NEPA (CEQ 1997).
The CEQ provides additional guidance on environmental justice analysis, including
definitions of minority and low-income populations in their 1997 publication,
Environmental Justice Guidance under the National NEPA (CEQ 1997). In 2004, the
USEPA published a Toolkit for Assessing Potential Allegations of Environmental
Injustice to provide some standardization in methodology for performing environmental
justice analysis within the NEPA framework (USEPA 2004).

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-6

Chapter 6

6.14

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

EXECUTIVE ORDER 13112, INVASIVE SPECIES
Executive Order 13112, Invasive Species (February 3, 1999), requires agencies to
prevent the introduction of invasive species; to provide for their control; and to minimize
their economic, ecological, and human health impacts. The proposed alternatives take
all feasible and prudent measures to minimize the introduction and spread of invasive
species.

6.15

EXECUTIVE ORDER 11593, PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT OF THE

CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Under Executive Order 11593, the federal government will provide leadership in
preserving, restoring, and maintaining the Nation’s historic and cultural environment.
This EO addresses the NRHP and provides guidance to those involved with federal
properties that should be inventoried and nominated for listing on the NRHP.
6.16

EXECUTIVE ORDER 13007, INDIAN SACRED SITES
Pursuant to EO 13007, agencies must consider the effects of their actions on the
physical integrity of sacred sites, and access to and ceremonial use of such sites, by
Indian religious practitioners.

6.17

EXECUTIVE ORDER 13084, CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION WITH INDIAN

TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS
Pursuant to EO 13084, the United States has a unique legal relationship with Indian
tribal governments, as set forth in the U.S. Constitution, treaties, statutes, EOs, and
court decisions. Since the formation of the Union, the United States has recognized
Indian tribes as domestic dependent nations under its protection. In treaties, our Nation
has guaranteed the right of Indian tribes to self-government. As domestic dependent
nations, Indian tribes exercise inherent sovereign powers over their members and
territory. The United States continues to work with Indian tribes on a
government-to-government basis to address issues concerning Indian tribal
self-government, trust resources, and Indian tribal treaty and other rights.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-7

Chapter 6

Compliance With Environmental Requirements

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

6-8

CHAPTER 7
7.1

AGENCY CONSULTATION AND PUBLIC OUTREACH

PUBLIC SCOPING PROCESS
Under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), all agencies are required to
consider all environmental impacts for federal projects and federal rules. NEPA also
requires agencies to cooperate with other federal agencies, and with state and local
governments, and to involve public stakeholders or citizens. All persons and
organizations that have a potential interest in the Proposed Action are urged to
participate in the NEPA environmental analysis process. These persons and
organizations may include federal, state, and local agencies; federally recognized Indian
tribes; interested stakeholders; and minority, low-income, or disadvantaged populations.
Pursuant to National Environment Policy Act (NEPA), 40 C.F.R. §1501.7(b), U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) published a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Proposed Project on September 28, 2015,
in the Federal Register, Vol. 80, No. 187, pages 58232-58234, Document
No. 2015-21475 (Appendix*). The NOI provided information on the purpose and need
for the Proposed Action, background, the alternatives to be evaluated, and the
geographic locations of the project sites. The NOI further provided the point of contact
information at U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to submit comments and receive
additional information. Due to previous environmental reviews as outlined in
Section 1.5.1, including the prior NOI to prepare a EIS ,the number of public meetings
including the public scoping meeting in October 2012, and since the Proposed Action
has not changed, a public scoping meeting following circulation of the NOI was not held.
7.1.1

Public Involvement
A number of public and agency meetings have been held on the Proposed
Action. Past meetings have involved members of the interested public as part of
the community process and meetings were conducted to keep resource agencies
informed of the progressing scope and design of the Project. The California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) lead agencies held nine formal meetings from
May 2001 to fall 2013 (Table 7.1-1), with the objective of listening to and
recording questions and comments from the general public, stakeholders, and
local, state, and federal agencies. Questions and comments provided by the
meeting attendees will be addressed and incorporated into the alternatives
formulation and the environmental review process (NEPA and CEQA process).
Section 1.3, Permits, Approvals, and Regulatory Requirements, is a synopsis of
the federal, state, and local regulatory requirements that must be met prior to the
implementation of the Upper Llagas Creek Project.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-1

Chapter 7

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

Table 7.1-1
Date
May 30, 2001
November 14, 2001
October 3, 2002
September 22, 2004
February 24, 2011
October 25, 2012
August 2, 2012
April 10, 2013
November 6, 2013

Meeting Records

Topic
Public Meeting—Design (Restoration) Workshop
Public Scoping Meeting
Public Meeting—Workshop for Reach 8 Alternatives
Joint Resource Agency Meeting
Update Meeting
Public Scoping—Community Meeting
Joint Agency Meeting—Lake Silveira
Public Meeting—Lake Silveira
Public Meeting—Property Owners

Official transcripts of the most recent Public Scoping/Update Meeting in
October 2012 were prepared by Leila S. Strand, Certified Shorthand Reporter
2098. The scoping process involved solicitation of comments from the general
public, local focus groups, and input from federal, state, and local agencies and
organizations with interest or jurisdiction within the Upper Llagas Creek
watershed.
At the 2012 scoping meeting, the SCVWD provided information on the
background and purpose of the Proposed Action, requested public comment on
relevant environmental and socioeconomic issues to be addressed in the
EIS/EIR analysis, and provided preliminary information to the public on the NEPA
and CEQA processes. Individuals spoke on behalf of themselves, stakeholders,
or local and state government agency representatives. A total of 28 questions
were received during the October 3, 2002 meeting. A total of 29 unique projectrelated questions were also received during the October 25, 2012 meeting. A
comment summary is presented in Table 7.2-1. The public was invited to submit
written comments by November 12, 2012. During that meeting several
comments were made by attendees that just upstream from the Project there has
been a persistent, long-term flooding problem at Llagas Road. The public
requested SCVWD to consider whether the flooding could be addressed under
the Proposed Project design. As a result of the meeting and the stated public
concerns, the SCVWD incorporated measures into the Project design to address
flooding at Llagas Road.
Public meetings and the ongoing informal public review period fulfill the NEPA
requirement to receive input from the public on the scope of the Project, including
the scope of the issues to be addressed. Santa Clara Valley Water District has
made available the presentation given on October 25, 2012, at the following web
address: http://valleywater.org/Services/UpperLlagas.aspx.
7.2

SUMMARY OF SCOPING COMMENTS
All unique Project-related comments received during the prior USACE public scoping
meeting and scoping period (comments were due by November 12, 2012), as well as
written comments received during the scoping period for this EIS that ended in
October 2015, are included in Appendix A. Comments received are categorized into four

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-2

Chapter 7

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

broad categories: (1) project components (2) scope of the impacts analysis,
(3) alternatives analysis, and (4) miscellaneous.
Table 7.2-1
Category
Project Components
Project Components

Project Components

Project Components

Project Components

Project Components
Project Components
Project Components

Project Components
Project Components
Project Components
Project Components
Project Components
Alternatives Analysis

Alternatives Analysis

Alternatives Analysis
Alternatives Analysis

Comments Received During Public Scoping

Comment Summary
Are flood control measures being installed for the
Butterfield extension across Monterey Road?
Which reaches affect each community because the
population density is so high in Morgan Hill and less
in San Martin.
Why wasn’t the reach of the creek north of Reach 8
on Llagas Road part of the project? Why would it
start at Wright Ave?
Llagas Creek Road intersection has double culverts
and one is blocked, Llagas Road floods almost
every year. Is addressing that problem part of this
project?
In Reach 6, the freeboard of the channel is being
increased, but why is that not increasing our level of
flood protection?
How much are you going to widen the creek in
Morgan Hill?
What are the dimensions for widening the creek in
Reach 4?
The first project completed on the other side of
Buena Vista is the same width almost all the way
down, is this project going to be the same width?
What is going to be the required setback in Reach
7?
If Reach 7A is being completed in the first phase of
construction, when is Reach 7B being completed?
Before 7B is completed will the water continue to
back up on Watsonville Road?
If Reaches 4 and 7A are being completed during the
first phase, how will the construction be sequenced?
Will West Little Llagas Creek be disconnected when
Reach 7A is built?
Were the discarded alternatives decided with City
engineers and officials or was the decision
financial?
Quantify the land acquisition required under
Alternative B [Reach 6 Bypass Channel] which was
described as having the least amount of land
acquisition required.
Which alternative would have the least amount of
easements required?
How will Alternative D [Culvert/Channel Alternative]
double box culverts cross Britton Middle School and
how long will it take to cross the fields as it will be
an impact on the community?

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Date
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

December 2015

7-3

Chapter 7

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

Category
Scope of the Impacts
Analysis
Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous

7.3

Comment Summary
What is the potential for possible pollution with
equipment working in the creek?
If we weren’t trying to get money from the federal
government would we still need to have a federal
lead agency?
Under Alternative E [?], it was stated no homes or
structures would be taken, does this mean nothing
would be taken through eminent domain?
Does this mean the entire project through all
reaches nothing would be taken through eminent
domain?
With all the agencies consulted will the District be
using the Habitat Conservation Plan?
When this project is complete will it affect our FEMA
insurance will the District be handling the change in
flood protection with FEMA or is there something
each homeowner will need to do when the project is
complete?
How does the District coordinate with County Roads
& Airports so there is not any unnecessary flooding
around Columbet Avenue, and how do we get
assistance with the maintenance when we are in
County jurisdiction.
Where are the funds coming from to support this
project?
What is the District’s current plan for buying
easements?
What percentage of the 2000 bond is going toward
the project now?
If Measure B passes does that give the District
access to property through eminent domain?
What is the Benefit to Cost Ratio?
Comment Letter National Parks Service for
protection of historic trail alignment

Date
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012

October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 25, 2012
October 22, 2015

RESOURCE AGENCY CONSULTATIONS
Between 2010 and 2015, six Resource Agency Meetings were held with USACE,
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS),
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board (CCRWQCB), and California
Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) to actively engage the resource agencies in the
Project. Resource agency meetings are listed in Table 7.3-1. Comment letters received
from agencies are located in Appendix A. The following agencies and organizations
were contacted during development of the EIS:
Federal Agencies



NOAA Fisheries (National Marine Fisheries Service)
Natural Resource Conservation Service

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-4

Chapter 7



Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

State Agencies





California Department of Fish and Wildlife
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board
California Department of Conservation
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)

Regional and Local Agencies


Santa Clara County
o
o
o

Planning Department
Parks and Recreation Department, Environmental Resource Agency
Fire Department



Santa Clara Valley Water District



South County Airport



City of Morgan Hill
o
o
o
o



Department of Parks and Recreation
Department of Public Works
Planning Department
Department of Public Works

San Martin
o

San Martin County Water District

Local Utilities and Organizations




Charter Communications
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Streams for Tomorrow

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-5

Chapter 7

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

Table 7.3-1
Date
September 14, 2010

Agency Consultation Meeting Records

April 28, 2011

Topic
Project Update at Coyote Watershed
Integrated Working Group Meeting
Resource Agency Site Tour

January 13, 2012
August 2, 2012

Site Tour Lake Silveira USFWS
Resource Agency Deign Update

June 25, 2013

Resource Agency Design Update Meeting

June 28, 2013
November 18, 2013

Meeting at Lake Silveira
Resource Agency Mitigation Strategy Meeting

January 28, 2014
February 11, 2014
November 17, 2015

Hydraulic Modeling Meeting
Meeting to Discuss Design Parameters
Field tour and permit review CDFW

7.4

Agencies
USACE, CDFW, EPA,
NMFS
USACE, NMFS, EPA,
CCRWQCB
USACE, USFWS
USACE, EPA, NMFS,
USFWS , CCRWQCB,
CDFW
USFWS, NMFS, CCRWQB,
CDFW
NMFS, CDFW
USACE, EPA, NMFS,
USFWS, CCRWQCB,
CDFW
CCRWQCB
CCRWQCB
CDFW

STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE
The San Francisco District archaeologist conducted the cultural resources study in two
phases. Phase I consisted of research of archaeological records and literature on file with
the State of California and in the project files of the USACE office. Phase II consisted of an
archaeological survey to identify and, as necessary, evaluate cultural resources for their
eligibility for listing in the National Register of Historict Places.The records search and
survey was conducted to comply with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (PL89-665, as amended) to consider the effects upon historic properties and
historic properties eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
The USACE delineated the Area of Potential Effects (APE), defined as the geographical
area within which a project may cause changes, directly or indirectly, in the character or
use of historic properties located in the APE. The APE for this project is comprised of the
six reaches, totaling approximately 12.7 miles, situated on the main branch of Llagas
Creek, West Little Llagas Creek, and East Little Llagas Creek. It encompassed the stream
channels and strips of land running parallel on both sides of the streams.
Although the cultural resource reports identified five sites “along” the streams in the APE,
the USACE observed that no cultural materials from the sites extended in the narrow. Thus
it is reasonable to conclude that the APE does not contain prehistoric cultural resources,
and an evaluation of National Register eligibility of the sites is not necessary. The USACE
previously coordinated with the Native American Heritage Commission and Native
American Tribes and no and no additional information regarding cultural resources was
revealed. Concurrent with this EIS, the USACE is consulting with the State Historic
Preservation Officer (SHPO) to solicit and request comment on the findings and
conclusions of the identification and evaluation efforts.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-6

Chapter 7

7.5

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

RESOURCE AGENCY COORDINATION
The Applicant introduced the project to resource agency staff in 2010, and focused
project meetings began April 28, 2011. Meeting records includes summary notes with
questions, comments, and action items recorded during the meeting. The draft notes
were then disseminated to resource agency staff for corrections or additions. The
meeting records also include comment letters as well as an excel spreadsheet with
comments and responses on design plans and specifications for the 65% design.
Table 7.5-1 provides a description of the type of document available as well as the
meeting/correspondence dates. Full records of the resource agencies
questions/concerns with responses are available in Appendix D.
Table 7.5-2

Date of Meeting/
Correspondence
Joint Agency Field Tour
4/28/2011
Joint Agency Design
Update
8/2/2012
Comments and Response
to CCRWQCB
1/24/2013
Meeting with USFWS to
discuss mitigation
1/28/2013
Meeting with NMFS and
CDFW at Lake Silveira
6/27/2013
Comment Letter from
CCRWQCB
Resource Agency
Comments 65% Design
11/16/2013

Comment letter NMFS on
Lake Silveira Design
1/16/2014
Letter from USFWS
regarding mitigation
1/17/2014
Meeting Notes with
CCRWQCB
2/11/2014

Resource Agency Coordination

Document Type
Summary of questions and
responses from resource
agency staff during field tour
Summary of meeting
notes/questions/comments
during design update meeting
Comments and responses
from the CCRWQCB for 30%
design submittal
Summary of
questions/actions regarding
Lake Silveira for
Compensatory Mitigation
Summary of
questions/concerns raised for
development of Lake Silveira
Criteria for demonstrating
minimization of impacts to
waters of the US
Summary of
questions/responses from
resource agency staff on 65%
design plans and
specifications
Comments and
recommendation for
improving design for SCC
Steelhead at Lake Silveira
Concurrence that mitigation
measures from the CAR were
incorporated into design
Summary of
comments/question regarding
development of design

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

Agencies Providing
Comments/Questions
USACE, NMFS,
CDFW, CCRWQCB,
EPA
USACE, NMFS,
CDFW, CCRWQCB,
EPA, USFWS
CCRWQCB

Location of
Document
Appendix D

Appendix D

USACE, USFWS

Appendix D

NMFS, CDFW

Appendix D

CCRWQCB

Appendix D

USFWS, CDFW,
CCRWQCB

Appendix D

NMFS

Appendix D

USFWS

Appendix D

CCRWQCB

Appendix D

Appendix D

December 2015

7-7

Chapter 7

Agency Consultation and Public Outreach

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

7-8

CHAPTER 8
LIST OF AGENCIES, ORGANIZATIONS, AND
PERSONS TO WHOM COPIES OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
STATEMENT ARE SENT
The following is a list of agencies, organizations and persons to whom the copies of the Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) were sent.
8.1

PAPER COPY
The following libraries, agencies, organizations, and Native American Indian Tribes were
sent a paper copy of the Draft EIS:
Federal Agencies




U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9, San Francisco, CA
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento, CA
National Marine Fisheries Service, Santa Rosa, CA

Libraries




Santa Clara County Library District, Morgan Hill, CA
Santa Clara County Library District, Gilroy, CA
San Jose Public Library, San Jose, CA

Native American Indian Tribes








Amah Mutsun Tribal Band, Galt, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Linden, CA
Ohlone Indian Tribe, Patterson, CA
Amah Mutsun Tribal Band of Mission San Juan Bautista, Woodside, CA
Muwekma Ohlone Indian Tribe, Milpitas, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Union City, CA
The Ohlone Indian Tribe, Fremont, CA

State Agencies


8.2

California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Napa, CA
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Luis Obispo, CA

COMPACT DISC
The following agencies, organizations, persons, and Native American Indian Tribes were
provided a compact disc (CD) of the draft EIS:
Federal Agencies




U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9, San Francisco, CA
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento, CA
National Marine Fisheries Service, Santa Rosa, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-1

Chapter 8

Distribution List

Appointed Offices







Senator Dianne Feinstein, San Francisco, CA
Senator Barbara Boxer, Oakland, CA
Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, San Jose, CA
Congressman Sam Farr, Salinas, CA
California State Senator Bill Monning, Monterey, CA
California State Assemblyman Luis Alejo, Salinas, CA

Native American Indian Tribes








Amah Mutsun Tribal Band, Galt, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Linden, CA
Ohlone Indian Tribe, Patterson, CA
Amah Mutsun Tribal Band of Mission San Juan Bautista, Woodside, CA
Muwekma Ohlone Indian Tribe, Milpitas, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Union City, CA
The Ohlone Indian Tribe, Fremont, CA

State Agencies







California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Napa, CA
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Luis Obispo, CA
California Department of Transportation, Oakland, CA
State Clearinghouse, Sacramento, CA
State Office of Historic Preservation, Sacramento, CA
Native American Heritage Commission, Sacramento, CA

Local Agencies





8.3

City of Gilroy—Planning Department, Gilroy, CA
City of Morgan Hill—Community Development Department, Morgan Hill, CA
Loma Prieta Resource Conservation District, Gilroy, CA
Santa Clara County Department of Planning and Development, San Jose, CA
Santa Clara County Parks & Recreation Department, Los Gatos, CA

LETTER NOTIFICATION
The following agencies, organizations, and persons were notified by letter that the Draft
EIS is posted on the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) website.
Federal Agencies




U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9, San Francisco, CA
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento, CA
National Marine Fisheries Service, Santa Rosa, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-2

Chapter 8

Distribution List

Appointed Offices







Senator Dianne Feinstein, San Francisco
Senator Barbara Boxer, Oakland, CA
Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, San Jose, CA
Congressman Sam Farr, Salinas, CA
California State Senator Bill Monning, Monterey, CA
California State Assemblyman Luis Alejo, Salinas, CA

Native American Indian Tribes








Amah Mutsun Tribal Band, Galt, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Linden, CA
Ohlone Indian Tribe, Patterson, CA
Amah Mutsun Tribal Band of Mission San Juan Bautista, Woodside, CA
Muwekma Ohlone Indian Tribe, Milpitas, CA
Ohlone/Costanoan Indian Tribe, Union City, CA
The Ohlone Indian Tribe, Fremont, CA

State Agencies







California Department of Fish and Wildlife, Napa, CA
Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Luis Obispo, CA
California Department of Transportation, Oakland, CA
State Clearinghouse, Sacramento, CA
State Office of Historic Preservation, Sacramento, CA
Native American Heritage Commission, Sacramento, CA

Local Agencies and Entities




















City of Gilroy—Planning Department, Gilroy, CA
City of Morgan Hill—Community Development Department, Morgan Hill, CA
Loma Prieta Resource Conservation District, Gilroy, CA
Santa Clara County Department of Planning and Development, San Jose, CA
Santa Clara County Parks & Recreation Department, Los Gatos, CA
Clean South Bay, Palo Alto, CA
Committee for Green Foothills, Palo Alto, CA
County of Santa Clara, San Jose, CA
Downtown Association Residents Council and Morgan Hill Downtown
Association, Morgan Hill, CA
Downtown Business Association, Morgan Hill, CA
Business Assistance and Housing Services, Morgan Hill, CA
Morgan Hill Chamber of Commerce, Morgan Hill, CA
Morgan Hill Unified School District, Morgan Hill, CA
Santa Clara Audobon Society, Cupertino, CA
Santa Clara County Farm Bureau, Morgan Hill, CA
Santa Clara County Fire Department, Los Gatos, CA
Santa Clara County Office of Emergency Services, San Jose, CA
Santa Clara County Office of the Sheriff, San Jose, CA
South County Land Use Committee, Salinas, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-3

Chapter 8

Distribution List

Libraries




Santa Clara County Library District, Morgan Hill, CA
Santa Clara County Library District, Gilroy, CA
San Jose Public Library, San Jose, CA

Public












































John McKay, Morgan Hill, CA
Alfred Angelino, Gilroy, CA
Jerry DiSalvo, San Jose, CA
Dennis Kennedy, Morgan Hill, CA
Rocke Garcia, Morgan Hill, CA
John Panos, Gilroy, CA
Ray Alcini, San Jose, CA
Gayle Richter, Morgan HIll, CA
Del Fresh Produce, Gilroy, CA
Acacia Mobile Home Park, Morgan Hill, CA
Hill Haven Mobile Home Park, Morgan Hill, CA
Wanda Young, Palo Alto, CA
Royal Oaks Enterprises, Morgan Hill, CA
John and May-Jih Chu, San Jose, CA
Maple Leaf RV Park, Morgan Hill, CA
Uesegi Farms Incorporated, Gilroy, CA
Lucy Chang, Morgan Hill, CA
Raymond and Deborah Hernandez, San Martin, CA
Mary Vescerantale, San Jose, CA
Rod and Marcy Lake, San Jose, CA
Victor and Virginia Locarnini, Morgan Hill, CA
Paul and Becky Harris, San Martin, CA
Susan McElwaine, San Jose, CA
Mai and Son Nguyen, San Jose, CA
Mary McBride, Campbell, CA
Mark and Kisti Daniels, San Martin, CA
CAC Enterprises, San Leandro, CA
Roberty McBride et al, Campbell, CA
Harry Hiraki, San Martin, CA
Loraine and Raymond Caruso, San Martin, CA
Monterey Hills LLC, Milpitas, CA
Mary and Marion Cox, Morgan Hill, CA
Gary Teskey and Leon Youce, Morgan Hill, CA
Liang Rong Zhen, San Jose, CA
Kwong Yip, Mountain View, CA
Donald and Catherine Stansbury, Gilroy, CA
Santiago Aceves, Gilroy, CA
Paul and Kalin Weihs, Gilroy, CA
Edward and Nancy Meyer, Gilroy, CA
Duane and Pama Thompson, Gilroy, CA
Felix and Gail Dominguez, Gilory, CA
Angelo and Andriana Robba, San Martin, CA
Leonam Reif, San Martin, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-4

Chapter 8




















































Distribution List

Phuong Chu, San Martin, CA
Ray and Mary Alvarez, San Martin, CA
Richard Palmisano, San Martin, CA
Amy Mok, Milpitas, CA
Rocky and Hui Tam, Morgan Hill, CA
Virginia Perkins, San Martin, CA
Tracy Templeton-Smith and Craig Smith, San Martin, CA
Martha and Estanislao Haro, San Martin, CA
Lucia and Tomas Yanez, San Martin, CA
Aurora Munoz, San Martin, CA
David and Joyce Fontana, San Martin, CA
Joseph and Tiffany Della Maggiore, San Martin, CA
Gaylord and Elouise Hartman, San Martin, CA
Steve Aguilar, San Martin, CA
Hilda Andrade, San Martin, CA
Robert Russell, Bristol, IN
Hugo Sencion, San Martin, CA
Gary and Nancy McDowell, San Martin, CA
Carol Clevett, San Martin, CA
Laura Rojas, San Martin, CA
Kristine and Thomas Friebel, San Martin, CA
Kimthoa Tran, San Martin, CA
Timothy Gray, San Martin, CA
Honorio and Maria Lamas, San Martin, CA
Nemo and Andrea Ganoza, San Martin, CA
Louis and Carol Trinkchero, San Martin, CA
Robert and Sandra Cerruti, San Martin, CA
Antonia and Teresa Pereira, San Martin, CA
Vincent and Sarah Roman, San Martin, CA
John Powell, San Jose, CA
Marguerite Kroff, San Martin, CA
Efrain Romero, San Martin, CA
Frank Delgado, San Martin, CA
Wayne and Lana Foletta, San Martin, CA
Fernando Ortiz, San Martin, CA
John and Maxine Demaria, San Martin, CA
Margaret Ann Sartin, San Martin, CA
Jocob and Senaida Villalba, San Martin, CA
Bruno and Eugenia Martino, Morgan Hill, CA
Arthur and Lupe Duffy, Morgan Hill, CA
Llagas Hale Investors LLC, Morgan Hill, CA
Tansy Michael, Santa Barbara, CA
Ruth Kyles, Morgan Hill, CA
Manana Investors LLC, Morgan Hill, CA
Brad and Susan Rentfrow, Morgan Hill, CA
Normal Stiawalt, San Martin, CA
Edith Aochi, Morgan Hill, CA
Grisetti trustee, Morgan Hill, CA
Robeson, Morgan Hill, CA
Nance Trustee, Morgan Hill, CA
McAndress, Morgan Hill, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-5

Chapter 8




















































Distribution List

Winter, Morgan Hill, CA
Ramey, Morgan Hill, CA
Luther, Morgan Hill, CA
Nelson Trustee, Morgan Hill, CA
Leonard Trustee, Saint Marys, CA
Ulm Trustee, Morgan Hill, CA
Kyle and Kami Haynes, Morgan Hill, CA
John A Giancola & Sons, Gilroy, CA
John and Heidi Crouch, Morgan Hill, CA
Mark and Nancy Willis, Morgan Hill, CA
Rita Trubell, Apache Junction, AZ
Dennis Montero and Fattima Contreras, Morgan Hill, CA
Stacy Barrett, Morgan Hill, CA
Mark Apton, Santa Clara, CA
David and Debra Graves, Morgan Hill, CA
William and Susan Woo, San Mateo, CA
George and Mary Chiala, Morgan Hill, CA
Roger and Carlay Ames, Morgan Hill, CA
Catherine Snively, Orinda, CA
Eric Williams, Morgan Hill, CA
Rafael and Susana Paredes, Morgan Hill, CA
Sergio and Sylvia Topete, Morgan Hill, CA
Matthew and Jenifer Leopow, Morgan Hill, CA
Eddie and Mary Esther Archuleta, San Jose, CA
Robert Hammond, Morgan Hill, CA
Roy Greathouse, Morgan Hill, CA
William Olive, Morgan Hill, CA
Arthur Silva, Gilroy, CA
General Telephone Co., Morgan Hill, CA
Mina Echols, Morgan Hill, CA
Gerald and Phyllis Disalvo, San Jose, CA
Eric and Carolyn Wallace, Morgan Hill, CA
Gary and Nadine Wright, Rocklin, CA
Virginia Peterson, Gilroy, CA
Luis and Nenita Tan, Morgan Hill, CA
Methodist Church, Morgan Hill, CA
Gayle Richter, Morgan Hill, CA
Garrott and Diane Carrol, Morgan Hill, CA
Joan Walley, Morgan Hill, CA
RDW Properties, Morgan Hill, CA
Telfer Enterprises, Morgan Hill, CA
Gary and Jean Walton, Morgan Hill, CA
S & G Builders LLC, Sunnyvale, CA
Pacific Gas & Electric, Morgan Hill, CA
Linda Ahern, Pleasanton, CA
David and Jennifer Chan, Morgan Hill, CA
Morgan Hill Plaza, Los Angeles, CA
PS Development LLC, San Jose, CA
Villa Ciolino Associates, Gilroy, CA
Mario Herrera, Morgan Hill, CA
Corwin and Maria Shrophsire, Morgan Hill, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-6

Chapter 8




















































Distribution List

Paul Davis, Gilroy, CA
Nancy Pierce, Morgan Hill, CA
Baraba Doubrava, Morgan Hill, CA
Jess Sanchez, Bakersfield, CA
Thomas and Kathleen Tomasello, Morgan Hill, CA
Ferial Seoud, Morgan Hill, CA
Jesse Hernandez, Morgan Hill, CA
Raymond and Mary Trimble, Morgan Hill, CA
Li Chen, Cupertino, CA
Don Avante Associates, San Rafael, CA
Monterey Dynasty LLC, Cupertino, CA
Pepper Lane-Cosmo, Los Gatos, CA
Sormeh Real Estate LLC, Los Gatos, CA
Westcoast Cycles LLC, Gilroy, CA
John and Heather Panos, San Martin, CA
JMB Properties LLC, Santa Clara, CA
Esquivel Family Ltd Parternship, Morgan Hill, CA
Khang Sieu and Fung Ka Ly, Saratoga, CA
David Maruyama, Los Altos, CA
Diamond Creek Villa LLC, Cupertino, CA
Tzwu-Chwan and Mei-Tsu Wu, Cupertino, CA
James and Priscilla Warinner, San Jose, CA
Siu and Gee Chiu, San Martin, CA
Timothy Woodward, San Jose, CA
Wei-Lung Leung, San Martin, CA
Tom Iwanaga, San Martin, CA
Darrell and Patricia Roger, San Martin, CA
Henriette Polhaupessy, San Martin, CA
Grady and Lavadam Taylor, San Martin, CA
John and Alicia Dellamano, San Martin, CA
Jesus and Elizabeth Mendoza, San Martin, CA
Raul and Delia Moreno, San Martin, CA
Omar Hindiyeh, Discovery Bay, CA
Conception Rodriguez, San Martin, CA
Cheryla McLaughlin, San Martin, CA
Laurantina Dempsey, San Martin, CA
James and Donal Byrom, San Martin, CA
Leo and Alice Doyle, San Martin, CA
Amy Lawrence, San Martin, CA
Joyce and Howard Honerlah, San Martin, CA
Ying-Tsong and Fu-Mei Loh, Saratoga, CA
Johnny Estrada, San Jose, CA
Ken and Monica Churchill, Monterey, CA
Shellie Lewis, Santa Clara, CA
Stanley Heick, Morgan Hill, CA
Richard and Annam Llewellyn, San Martin, CA
Patrick and Mary Simpson, San Martin, CA
Robin and Jeff Parsons, San Martin, CA
Cameron Lee, Milpitas, CA
Feliz and Stella Chuo, Thermal, CA
Nathan and Marta Price, Morgan Hill, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-7

Chapter 8









































Distribution List

Esteban Garibay, San Martin, CA
Ariana Gallegos and Juan Chavarria, San Martin, CA
Gera Family Partnerhsip, Saratoga, CA
Raymond Levy, San Francisco, CA
MH Sterling Group, Los Gatos, CA
Sunset Properties Inc, San Francisco, CA
Francisco Arriaga, San Jose, CA
Nature Quality, San Martin, CA
Oralia Maciel, San Jose, CA
Union Pacific Railroad, San Francisco, CA
Shun and Liang Kuang, San Martin, CA
Ernest Burroughs, Denair, CA
Macario and Lupe Salas, Gilroy, CA
Zhang Liang, Gilory, CA
Kenneth Fredenburg, Gilory, CA
Lawandaj Duarte, Gilroy, CA
Alexander and Frances Posada, Gilroy, CA
Sondra Serenka, Gilroy, CA
David and Cheryl Ariki, Gilroy, CA
Surendran and Minaxi Mody, Gilroy, CA
John and Janet Hyland, Gilroy, CA
Yum In Sook, Gilroy, CA
Trevor and Linda Hayes, Gilroy, CA
Elaine Jelsemdale, Gilroy, CA
Imre and Kinga Kabai, Gilroy, CA
Michael and Jacqueline Delmonico, Gilroy, CA
Chauncey Russo, Gilroy, CA
Norma Kay Ota, Gilroy, CA
Jerry and Gina Stanley, Gilroy, CA
Emilia De La Torre, San Jose, CA
Kong-Chen Chen, San Jose, CA
Gary Pollack, Redwood City, CA
Vernon Schofield, Gilroy, CA
Boping Chen, San Jose, CA
Kessler Trustee, San Martin, CA
Robert Malech, Gilroy, CA
Joe and Honoria Rosa, Gilroy, CA
Mahmood and Marian Hassan, Hollister, CA
Steven and Dena Malech, Gilroy, CA
Rober and Kristen Morton, Gilroy, CA

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

8-8

CHAPTER 9

REFERENCES

Advisory Council on Historic Preservation. 1999. 36 CFR Part 800. Protection of Historic
Properties (with Recommended Approach for Consultation on Recovery of Significant
Information from Archaeological Sites). Final Rule and Notice. Federal Register 5/18,
64 FR 27071-87. Available online at: http://www.achp.gov/archguide.html.
Air Nav. 2013. South County Airport of Santa Clara County. Available online at:
http://www.airnav.com/airport/E16. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Alta Planning and Design. 2013. Transportation Study: Llagas Creek Flood Control
Improvements Project. Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District under subcontract
to Cardno ENTRIX. May 9, 2013.
American Meteorological Society (AMS). 2012. Glossary of Meteorology. Available online at:
http://amsglossary.allenpress.com/glossary/search?id=climate-change1. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
Arcement, G.J. and V.R. Schneider. 1989. Guide for selecting Manning’s roughness coefficients
for natural channels and flood plains. U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2339.
Association of Bay Area Governments and Metropolitan Transportation Commission (2013).
Selected Census Data from the San Francisco Bay Area. Available online at:
http://www.bayareacensus.ca.gov/index.html. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
ATS Consulting. 2013. Final Construction Noise and Vibration Report, SR 520, West
Connection Bridge Project. Prepared for Washington State Department of
Transportation. Website: http://www.wsdot.wa.gov/NR/rdonlyres/2EE44011-6783-4D44B5B9-566CD71049C7/0/SR520_FBL_WCB_NoiseVibrationRprt_FINAL.pdf. Accessed
on October 25, 2013.
Balance Hydrologics. 2013. Field Assessment of Hydrogeologic Conditions Near Lake Silveira
and Identification of Potential Effects of Proposed Reach 7A of the Upper Llagas Creek
Flood Protection Project. Prepared for SCVWD. November 8.
Balance Hydrologics. 2012. Recommended bankfull geometries for flood protection channel
design, upper Llagas Creek. Prepared for RMC Water and Environment. February.
Balance Hydrologics, Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD), and Condor Country
Consulting, Inc. 2012. Hydrography, Hydrology, Water Quality, and Plant Communities
of Lake Silveira, Morgan Hill area, Santa Clara County. Prepared for Cardno ENTRIX.
July 23.
Bank of America Corporation. 2013. Mortgage Payment Calculator. Available online at:
https://www.bankofamerica.com/home-loans/mortgage/mortgage-calculators.go.
Accessed on June 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-1

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Barnhart, R. A. 1986. Species Profiles: Life Histories and Environment Requirements of Coastal
Fishes and Invertebrates (Pacific Southwest: Steelhead. Performed for the Coastal
Ecology Group, Waterways Experiment Station, United States Army Corps of Engineers,
Vicksburg, MS, and National Coastal Ecosystems Team, Research and Development,
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States Department of the Interior. Biological Report 82
(11.60) TR EL-82-4.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2013. Annual Bay Area Air Quality
Summaries (2009, 2010, 2011). Available online at:
http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Communications-and-Outreach/Air-Quality-in-the-BayArea/Air-Quality-Summaries.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2012a. Air Quality Plans—Planning for
the Future. Available online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Planning-andResearch/Plans.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2012b. Updated CEQA Guidelines.
Available online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Planning-and-Research/CEQAGUIDELINES/Updated-CEQA-Guidelines.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2010a. Updated Guidelines Effective
January 1, 2011. Available online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Planning-andResearch/CEQA-GUIDELINES/Updated-CEQA-Guidelines.aspx. Accessed on
August 25, 2010.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2010b. Bay Area Climatology. Available
online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Communications-and-Outreach/Air-Qualityin-the-Bay-Area/Bay-Area-Climatology.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2010c. Updated CEQA Guidelines.
Available online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Planning-and-Research/CEQAGUIDELINES/Updated-CEQA-Guidelines.aspx. Accessed on October 31, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2010d. Source Inventory of Bay Area
Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Available online at:
http://www.baaqmd.gov/~/media/Files/Planning%20and%20Research/Emission%20Inve
ntory/reg ionalinventory2007_2_10.ashx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2006. Asbestos Airborne Toxic Control
Measure (ATCM) for Construction and Grading Projects. Compliance and Enforcement
Division. Compliance Advisory. August 8.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 2004. Toxic Air Contaminants Inventory.
Available online at: http://www.baaqmd.gov/Divisions/Engineering/Air-Toxics/Toxic-AirContaminant-Control-Program-Annual-Report.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 1999. BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines—
Assessing the Air Quality Impacts of Projects and Plans. Available online at:
http://www.baaqmd.gov/~/media/Files/Planning%20and%20Research/Plans/CEQA%20
Guide/ce qa_guide.ashx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-2

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Bay-Delta Conservation Plan (BDCP). 2013. Chapter 2- Existing Ecological Conditions.
March 14. Available online at:
http://baydeltaconservationplan.com/Libraries/Dynamic_Document_Library/BDCP_Chapt
er_2_%e2%80%93_Existing_Ecological_Conditions_3-14-13.sflb.ashx. Accessed on
November 26, 2013.
Beck, Warren and Ynez D. Haase. 1974. Historical Atlas of California. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman, Oklahoma.
Beedy, E.C. and W.J. Hamilton III. 1999. Tricolored Blackbird (Agelaius tricolor). In: The Birds of
North America, No. 423 (A. Poole and F. Gill [eds.]). The Birds of North America, Inc.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Bin, O., & Polasky, S. 2004. Effects of Flood Hazards on Property Values: Evidence Before and
after Hurricane Floyd. Land Economics 80: 490-500.City of Morgan Hill, 2009. Morgan
Hill Downtown Specific Plan. City of Morgan Hill, California. November.
Bjornn, T.C. and D.W. Reiser. 1991. Habitat Requirements of Salmonids in Stream. In:
Influences of Forest and Rangeland Management on Salmonid Fishes and Their
Habitats. W.R. Meehan, Ed. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 19: 83-138.
Bogan, M.A., E.W. Valdez and K.W. Navo. 2005. Yuma myotis (Myotis yummanensis) species
account. Prepared for the Western Bat Working Group (WBWG). Available online at
http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/vespertilonidae/myyu.pdf.
Bolster, C. 2005. Western red bat (Lasiurus blossevillii) species account. Prepared for the
Western Bat Working Group (WBWG). Available online at:
http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/species_accounts.html.
Breschini, G. S. and T. Haversat. 1992. Baseline Archaeological Studies at Rancho San Carlos,
Carmel Valley, Monterey County, California. Archives of California Prehistory 36. Coyote
Press, Salinas.
Breschini, G. S. 1983. Models of Population Movements in Central California Prehistory. Coyote
Press, Salinas.
Broadbent, S.M. 1972. The Rumsen of Monterey: an Ethnography from Historical Sources.
University of California Archaeological Research Facility Contributions 14.
Broadbent, S.M. 1951a. Field Notes from Site CA-Mnt-101. Manuscript on file at the Pacific
Grove Museum, Pacific Grove, California.
Broadbent, S.M. 1951b. Field Notes from Mnt-107, Berwick Park, Pacific Grove. University of
California Archaeological Survey Manuscripts 125.
Cal Recycle. 2013. Facility Information Toolbox Remaining Lifetime Landfill Capacity Data Sheet
Santa Clara County. Available online at:
http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/FacIT/Facility/DisposalGap.aspx. Accessed on
December 24, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-3

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Cal Recycle. 2011. Five-Year CIWMP/RAIWMP Review Report for Santa Clara County.
Sacramento, California.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2012a. California Ambient Air Quality Standards
(CAAQS). Available online at: http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/aaqs/aaqs2.pdf. Accessed
on February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2012b. Area Designations Maps / State and National.
Available online at: http://www.arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/adm.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2012c. Statewide Portable Equipment Registration
Program. Available online at: http://www.arb.ca.gov/portable/portable.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2012d. Mobile and Stationary Source Airborne Toxic
Control Measures (ATCMs). Available online at:
http://www.arb.ca.gov/toxics/atcm/atcm.htm. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2011a. Trends in California Greenhouse Gas
Emissions for 2000 to 2009 by Category as Defined in the Air Resources Board’s 2008
Scoping Plan. Available online at: http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/data.htm.
Accessed on February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2011b. California Greenhouse Gas Inventory for
2000-2009 by Category as Defined in the [Air Resources Board’s 2008] Scoping Plan.
Available online at: http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/data/data.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2008. Climate Change Scoping Plan - A Framework for
Change. Available online at:
http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/document/scopingplandocument.htm. Accessed
on February 15, 2013.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2005. Characterization of Ambient PM10 and PM2.5 in
California. Available online at:
http://www.arb.ca.gov/pm/pmmeasures/pmch05/stateover05.pdf. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Natural Resources, Division 6. Resources Agency,
Chapter 3. Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act,
Article 20. Definitions, Appendix G Environmental Checklist Form. Available online at:
http://ceres.ca.gov/ceqa/guidelines/Appendix_G.html. Accessed on February 11, 2013.
California Department of Conservation. 2010. Santa Clara County Important Farmland (Map).
Sacramento, California.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2012a. Staff Report on Burrowing Owl
Mitigation. State of California Natural Resources Agency, Department of Fish and Game.
March 7.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-4

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2012b. Fully Protected Animals. Available
online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/wildlife/nongame/t_e_spp/fully_pro.html. Accessed on
October 10, 2012.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2011. Special Animals. State of California
Department of Fish and Gam Habitat Conservation Division. January. Available online at:
http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cnddb/pdfs/SPAnimals.pdf. Accessed on April 2013.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2010. List of Vegetation Alliances and
Associations. Vegetation Classification and Mapping Program, California Department of
Fish and Game. Sacramento, California. September 2010. Available online at:
http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/vegcamp/pdfs/natcomlist.pdf.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2009. Protocols for Surveying and Evaluating
Impacts to Special Status Native Plant Populations and Natural Communities.
November 24.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2008a. California Wildlife Habitat
Relationships System, Version 8.2. Available online at:
http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/wildlife_habitats.asp. Accessed on January 19,
2012.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2008b. CWHR Version 8.0 Personal
computer program. California Interagency Wildlife Task Group Division, Sacramento,
California. Available online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/morecwhr.asp.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2005. Species Account- Yellow Warbler.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System. California Interagency Wildlife Task
Group. Available online at:
https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=2109&inline=1. Accessed on
February 17, 2013.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 1990. California Wildlife Habitat Relationship
System, Yuma myotis. California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency
Wildlife Task Group. Available online at:
https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=2319&inline=1. Accessed on
November 18, 2012.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW). 2013. CalFish, A California Cooperative
Anadromous Fish and Habitat Data Program. Electronic database accessed April 5,
2013.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW). 2012. California Natural Diversity Database,
Rarefind3. 7.5 minute quadrangle search: Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, and Gilroy,
Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Loma Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe,
Santa Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West; and records within 5 miles
of the Project area. December 30.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-5

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE). 2008. Very High Fire Hazard
Severity Zones in LRA. Fire and Rescue Assessment Program. Available online at:
http://www.fire.ca.gov/fire_prevention/fire_prevention_wildland_zones.php. Accessed on
February 7, 2013.
California Department of Forestry. 2012. Wildlife Hazard Real Estate Disclosure. Available
online at: http://frap.cdf.ca.gov/projects/hazard/hazard.html#SRAdef. Accessed on
February 1, 2013.
California Department of Health Services. 2005. Vector-Borne Disease Section. Overview of
Mosquito Control Practices in California. August. Available online at:
http://westnile.ca.gov/website/mosq_control/Overview_Mosquito_Control_Practices_CA.
pdf. Accessed on January 29, 2013.
California Department of Public Health. 2013. 2012 WNV Activity by County. Available online at:
http://westnile.ca.gov/case_counts.php?year=2012&option=print. Accessed on January
29, 2013.
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 2013. Officially Designated State Highways.
Available online at: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/LandArch/scenic_highways/index.htm.
Accessed on February 14, 2013.
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 2004. Transportation and ConstructionInduced Vibration Guidance Manual. Available online at:
http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/env/noise/pub/vibrationmanFINAL.pdf. Accessed on February
13, 2013.
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 1986. Historic Bridge Inventory. Updated
2010. Available online at: http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/structur/strmaint/historic.htm.
California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 2004. California’s Ground Water—
Bulletin 118, Gilroy-Hollister Ground Water basin, Llagas Subbasin. Februrary.
California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 1981. Evaluation of Groundwater Resources
South San Francisco Bay Volume IV South Santa Clara County Area: Bulletin 118-1.
May.
California Department of Water Resources (DWR) and U.S. Army Corp of Engineers (USACE).
2013.
California’s Flood Future: Recommendations for Managing the State’s Flood Risk (Public
Review Draft). Sacramento, California.
California Energy Commission. 2010. Climate Action Team Report to the Governor and
Legislature. Available online at: http://www.energy.ca.gov/2010publications/CAT-10002010-005/CAT-1000-2010-005.PDF. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
California Energy Commission. 2007. California Electric Utility Systems Areas (Map).
Sacramento, California.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-6

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA), Office of Environmental Health Hazard
Assessment (OEHHA), Air Toxicology and Epidemiology Branch. 2009. Technical
Support Document for Cancer Potency Factors: Methodologies for derivation, listing of
available values, and adjustments to allow for early life stage exposures. Appendix A:
Hot Spots Unit Risk and Cancer Potency Values. Available online at:
http://www.oehha.ca.gov/air/hot_spots/tsd052909.html. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA). 2010. Proposition 65 in Plain Language.
Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment. February. Available online at:
http://www.oehha.org/prop65/background/p65plain.html. Accessed on February 5, 2013.
California Geological Survey (CGS). 2010a. 2010 Geologic Map of California, Geologic Data
Map No. 2. Available online at:
http://www.quake.ca.gov/gmaps/GMC/stategeologicmap.html. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
California Geological Survey (CGS). 2010b. Historical California Earthquakes. Available online
at:
http://redirect.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/rghm/quakes/historical/degreemap.asp?Map=122
37#Map. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
California Invasive Plant Council (Cal-IPC). 2006. California Invasive Plant Inventory.
February 2006. Available online at: http://www.cal-ipc.org/ip/inventory/index.php.
California Native Plant Society (CNPS). 2012. Inventory of Rare, Threatened, and Endangered
Plants of California. online database. Available online at: http://www.rareplants.cnps.org/.
7.5 minute quadrangle search: Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, and Gilroy, Chittenden,
Gilroy Hot Springs, Loma Prieta, Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa
Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and Watsonville West.
California Native Plant Society (CNPS). 2001. Inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants of
California (sixth edition). Rare Plant Scientific Advisory Committee, David P. Tibor,
Convening Editor. CNPS, Sacramento, California. Available online at:
http://www.rareplants.cnps.org/.
California Public Utilities Commission. 2007. Telephone Exchange Areas of California (map).
Sacramento, California.
California Regional Water Quality Control Board Central Coast Region (CRWQCB). 2011. Water
Quality Control Plan for the Central Coastal Basin. June.
California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 2010. Integrated Report-statewide:
Clean Water Act Section 303(d) List /305(b) Report. Available online at:
http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/tmdl/integrated2010.shtml.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System (CWHR). 2006. Mule Deer (Odocoileus
hemionus).
California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. February.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-7

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2005. Species Account- Yellow Warbler.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System. California Interagency Wildlife Task
Group. Available online at:
https://nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx?DocumentID=2109&inline=1. Accessed on
February 17, 2013.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System (CWHR). 1988a. Cropland (CRP). California
Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available
online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/pdfs/MCH.pdf. Accessed on
February 18, 2013.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System (CWHR). 1988b. Barren (BAR). California
Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available
online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/pdfs/BAR.pdf. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System (CWHR). 1988c. Eucalyptus (EUC). California
Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group. Available
online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/pdfs/EUC.pdf. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
California Wildlife Habitat Relationships System (CWHR). 1988d. Mixed Chaparral (MCH).
California Department of Fish and Game, California Interagency Wildlife Task Group.
Available online at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/pdfs/MCH.pdf. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
Cardno ENTRIX. 2012a. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Site Characterization
Report. Unpublished report prepared for the Santa Clara Valley Water District. June.
Cardno ENTRIX. 2012b. Final Upper Llagas Creek Project Baseline Biological Resources
Report. Prepared for the Santa Clara Valley Water District. December.
Carraway, L. N. and B. J. Verts. 1991. Neotoma fuscipes. Mammalian Species 386:1-10.
Cartier, R. 1993. The Saunders Site: MNT-391. A Littoral Site of the Early Period. Scotts Valley
Historical Society, Scotts Valley, California.
Casagrande, J. 2012. Uvas and Llagas Creek juvenile steelhead distribution and abundance,
2011. Prepared for the California Department of Fish and Game. 49 pp.
Casagrande, J. 2011. Uvas Creek steelhead distribution, density, growth, and habitat use, 2010.
Prepared for the California Department of Fish and Game. 30 pp.
CBS—San Francisco Bay Area. 2013. Morgan Hill Is First City To Sign Fire Service Pact With
Cal Fire. January 5. Available online at:
http://sanfrancisco.cbslocal.com/2013/01/05/morgan-hill-is-first- city-to-sign-fire-servicepact-with-cal-fire/. Accessed on February 12, 2013.
City of Gilroy. 2013. South County Regional Wastewater Authority. Available online at:
http://www.cityofgilroy.org/cityofgilroy/city_hall/community_development/bles/industrial_w
aste/def ault.aspx. Accessed on February 16, 2013.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-8

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

City of Gilroy. 2011. 2007–2014 Housing Element (Public Review Draft). Gilroy, California.
City of Gilroy. 2002. City of Gilroy General Plan 2002 to 2020. Adopted June 2010. Gilroy,
California. Available online at:
http://www.cityofgilroy.org/cityofgilroy/city_hall/community_development/planning/general
_plan/default.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
City of Gilroy Water Department. 2011. Annual Water Quality Report—2011. Gilroy, California.
City of Gilroy, City of Morgan Hill, and Santa Clara County. 2010. Regional Storm Water
Management Plan. February.
City of Gilroy, City of Morgan Hill, Santa Clara County. 2009. Revised Regional Storm Water
Management Plan. Santa Clara County, California. September 1.
City of Morgan Hill. 2013a. Sewer Division. Available online at: http://www.morganhill.ca.gov/index.aspx?NID=589. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
City of Morgan Hill. 2013b. Map: Downtown Morgan Hill. City of Morgan Hill, California.
Available online at: http://www.morgan-hill.ca.gov/DocumentCenter/View/10656.
Accessed on May 29, 2013.
City of Morgan Hill. 2012. Cochrane-Borello Residential Development Project Environmental
Impact Report. August. Available online at: http://www.morganhill.ca.gov/documentcenter/view/5951.
City of Morgan Hill. 2011. Addendum to an Environmental Impact Report Butterfield Boulevard
and Channel Extension Project (Second Addendum to the Sutter Boulevard Extension &
Flood Protection Facilities Final EIR). Available online at: http://www.morganhill.ca.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/4930.
City of Morgan Hill. 2010a. Morgan Hill General Plan—Revised 2010. Morgan Hill, California.
Available online at: http://www.morgan-hill.ca.gov/index.aspx?NID=75. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
City of Morgan Hill. 2010b. City Council Policy Briefing: Solid Waste Management and
Recycling. Morgan Hill, California.
City of Morgan Hill. 2010c. Draft Housing Element. Morgan Hill, California.
City of Morgan Hill. 2010d. Butterfield Boulevard South Extension Mitigated Negative
Declaration. June.
City of Morgan Hill. 2009. City of Morgan Hill Downtown Specific Plan and Master EIR. Morgan
Hill, California. November.
City of Morgan Hill. 2008. Morgan Hill Bikeways and Trails Master Plan. Morgan Hill, California.
May.
City of Morgan Hill. 2006. City of Morgan Hill Parks, Facilities, and Recreation Programming
Master Plan.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-9

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

City of Morgan Hill. Available online at: http://www.morgan-hill.ca.gov/index.aspx?NID=371.
Accessed on February 24, 2013.
City of Morgan Hill. 2005. Initial Study, Wright-Mañana Residential Development. December.
City of Morgan Hill. 2003. Citywide Burrowing Owl Habitat Mitigation Plan. June.
Coder, Kim D. 2010. Tree conservation during site development. University of Georgia Warnell
School of Forestry & Natural Resources, Outreach Monograph WSFNR 10-24, page 28.
Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012a. Baseline Biological Resources/Habitat Mapping—
Verification and updated habitat map of the 2006 Tetra Tech habitat map and updated
California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) query of the Upper Llagas Creek Flood
Protection Project. Prepared for Cardno ENTRIX. July 3.
Condor Country Consulting, Inc. 2012b. Wetland Delineation and Preliminary Jurisdictional
Determination Santa Clara Valley Water District Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection
Project Santa Clara County, California. Prepared for Cardno ENTRIX. August 1.
Conservation Biology Institute (CBI). 2006. Report of Independent Science Advisors for Santa
Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan. Dated
December 2006.
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ). 1997. Environmental Justice Guidance Under the
National Environmental Policy Act. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/compliance/ej/resources/policy/ej_guidance_nepa_ceq1297.pdf.
Accessed on February 15, 2013.
County of Santa Clara, City of San José, City of Morgan Hill, City of Gilroy, Santa Clara Valley
Water District, and Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority. 2012. Final Santa Clara
Valley Habitat Plan. August. Available online at: http://scvhabitatplan.org/www/site/alias__default/346/final_habitat_plan.aspx.
Court of Appeal of the State of California, First Appellate District, Division Five (CA). 2013.
California Building Industry Association v. Bay Area Air Quality Management District
(A135335 & A136212). Available online at:
http://www.courts.ca.gov/opinions/documents/A135335.PDF. Accessed on October 31,
2013.
Cranford, J.A. 1982. The effect of woodrat houses on population density of Peromyscus.
J. Mammal. 63:663-666.
Dietz, S. A., W. Hildebrandt, and T. L. Jones. 1988. Archaeological Investigations at Elkhorn
Slough: CA- MNT-229, a Middle Period Site on the Central California Coast. Papers in
Northern California Anthropology. Northern California Archaeology Group. Berkeley.
Dietz, S. A. 1985. Archaeological Reconnaissance for Pacific Bell Projects NE1841T and
NE1843T Located from Olmsted Road to Torero Drive on Highway 68 and from Jackson
Street to Del Monte Avenue and Castroville to Boronda Road on Highway 183, Monterey
County, California. Report on file Northwest Information Center, Sonoma State
University, Rohnert Park, California.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-10

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Dunk, J. R. 1995. White-tailed Kite (Elanus leucurus).In The Birds of North America, No. 178 (A.
Poole and F. Gill, eds.). The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, and The
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. Available online at:
http://bna.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species/178/articles/introduction.
E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. 1971. Condensed Laboratory Handbook.
Elssaser, A.E. 1986. Part I: Review of the Prehistory of the Santa Clara Valley Region,
California. Coyote Press Archives of California Prehistory, Number 7. Available online at:
http://www.coyotepress.com/page07.html#anchor5.
Environmental Laboratory, Department of the Army. 1987. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Wetland Delineation Manual (Technical Report Y-87-1). January. U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. Waterways Experimental Station. Vicksburg, Mississippi, USA.
Federal Communications Commission. 2013. Home Broadband Coverage Map (interactive).
Available online at: http://www.fcc.gov/maps/connect-compete-home-broadbandcoverage-map. Accessed on February 12, 2013.
Federal Highways Administration. 1988. Visual Impact Assessment for Highway Projects.
Available online at:
http://www.dot.ca.gov/ser/vol1/sec3/community/ch27via/chap27via.htm#via. Accessed
on February 12, 2013.
Federal Register (FR). 1994. Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants; designation of
critical habitat for the least Bell’s vireo. 50 CFR Part 17, Page 4845-4867. February 2.
(Volume 59, Number 22).
Federal Register (FR). 1986. Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants: determination of
endangered status for the least Bell’s vireo. 50 CFR Part 17 Page 16474-16481. May 2,
1986 (Volume 51, Number 85).
Gillies, E.L.1998. Effects of regulated streamflows on the Sycamore Alluvial Woodland riparian
community. Master’s Theses, San Jose State University. Available online at:
http://scholarworks.sjsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2626&context=etd_theses&seiredir=1&referer=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj%26
q%3Dsy
camore%2520alluvial%2520woodland%26source%3Dweb%26cd%3D2%26ved%3D0C
DMQFjA
B%26url%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fscholarworks.sjsu.edu%252Fcgi%252Fviewconte
nt.cgi%253Farticle%253D2626%2526context%253Detd_theses%26ei%3DuqihUO3uCo
Xo2QWQ6YGwA
g%26usg%3DAFQjCNF3hQEaEWl2BtjhjlBZ6f1BfVN20w#search=%22sycamore%20allu
vial%20 woodland%22.
Gilroy Unified School District. 2013. Gilroy Unified School District website. Available online at:
http://www.gusd.k12.ca.us/. Accessed on February 7, 2013.
Golomshtok, E. A. 1921. Monterey, Pacific Grove, and Salinas Mounds. University of California
Archaeological Survey Manuscripts 374.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-11

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Greengo, R.E. 1951. Molluscan Species in California Shell Middens. University of California
Archaeological Survey Reports 13:1-29.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013a. Lake Silveira Restoration Project Design Development
Report (Project # 3161-02). Prepared for RMC Water and Environment. October 18.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013b. Upper Llagas Creek Stormwater Improvements Project
Preliminary Delineation of Wetlands and Other Waters, Santa Clara County, California.
July 5.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013c. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project 65% Design
Habitat Impact Analysis Technical Memorandum (Project # 3270-21). Prepared for
SCVWD. June 17.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013d. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project – Revegetation
Acreage and Planting Polygon Refinement Technical Memorandum. April 5, Revised
June 6.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013e. Upper Llagas Creek Bridge and Culvert Surveys for Bat
Habitat (HTH Project #3270-18). Prepared for SCVWD. January 28.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013f. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Burrowing Owl
Survey and Impact Assessment (Project # 3270-22). Prepared for SCVWD. July 5.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2013g. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project West Little
Llagas Creek Wildlife Habitat Assessment Technical Memorandum (Project # 3270-21).
Prepared for SCVWD. September 13.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2012a. Upper Llagas Creek Tunnel Bat Exclusion Design (HTH
Project 33270-17). Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District. December 21.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2012b. California Tiger Salamander Surveys and Site Assessments
at Selected Santa Clara County Locations. August 29.H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2011.
Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Least Bell’s vireo Assessment. Prepared
for SCVWD. September 26.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2010. Lower Llagas Creek Least Bell’s Vireo Surveys. Prepared for
SCVWD. August 19.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 2004. California Bat Mitigation Techniques, Solutions, and
Effectiveness. Prepared for California Department of Transportation. December 29.
H.T. Harvey & Associates. 1997. California Red-legged frog distribution and status—1997.
Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District.
Harrington, J.P. 1942. Culture Element Distributions, XIX: Central California Coast. University of
California Anthropological Records 7(1):1-46.
Harrington, J.P. 1933. Report of Fieldwork on Indians of Monterey and San Bernardino
Counties. 49th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology for the Years 19311932 Washington.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-12

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Harvey and Stanley Associates. 1988. Biotic Resources Report for Silveira Lake Park Master
Plan. Morgan Hill, California. Prepared for Ms. Kerry Daane Loux, Amphion
Environmental, Inc.
Hildebrandt, W.R. and P. Mikkelsen. 1993. Archaeological Test Excavations at Fourteen Sites
Along Highways 101 and 152, Santa Clara and San Benito Counties, California, Volume
1. Submitted to Caltrans District 4, Contract No. 0E633-EP. Report S-15442. Report on
file Northwest Information Center, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, California.
Hill, W. W. 1929. Monterey County Sites, General. University of California Archaeological
Survey Manuscripts 38.
Holland, R. F. 1986. Preliminary Descriptions of the Terrestrial Natural Communities of
California. California Department of Fish and Game. October.
Hoover, M. B., H. E. Rensch, E. G. Rensch, and W. N. Abeloe. 1990. Historic Spots in
California. Stanford University Press, Stanford, California.
Howell, C.A., Wood, J.K., Dettling, M.D., Griggs, K., Otte, C.C., Lina, L., Gardali, T. 2010 Least
Bell’s vireo breeding records in the Central Valley following decades of extirpation. pp.
105-113.
Hunter, B. 1980. Letter dated 8 October 1980 from Brian Hunter to D.W. Patterson of the Soil
Conservation Service, Red Bluff, California regarding proposed Llagas Creek Flood
Control Project. California Department of Fish and Game, Yountville, California.
Hylkema, M. 1991. Prehistoric Native American Adaptations Along the Central California Coast
of San Mateo and Santa Cruz Counties. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of
Social Science, San Jose State University.
ICF International. 2012a. Final Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan, Appendix D
Species Accounts. August 2012. Available online at: http://scvhabitatplan.org/www/site/alias__default/346/final_habitat_plan.aspx.
ICF International. 2012b. Covered Species Accounts Bay-Delta Conservation Plan.
Appendix 2.A. Administrative Draft. February (ICF 00610.10). Available online at:
http://baydeltaconservationplan.com/Library/DocumentsLandingPage/BDCPPlanDocume
nts.aspx Accessed on February 8, 2012.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Control (IPCC). 1990–2007. IPCC Assessment Reports,
Climate Change 1990, 1995, 2001, 2007 (Reports 1-4). Available online at:
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.htm. Accessed
on February 15, 2013.
Jennings, B.H. 1970. Environmental Engineering—Analysis and Practice. International Textbook
Company.
Jennings, M.R. and M.P. Hayes. 1994. Amphibian and reptile species of special concern in
California. Report prepared for the California Department of Fish and Game, Inland
Fisheries Division, Rancho Cordova, California. 255 pp.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-13

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Jensen, L.S. 1988. Mineral Land Classification of the San Bruno Canyon Greenstone Deposits,
Morgan Hill [7.5'] Quadrangle, Santa Clara County, California—for Aggregate Materials
California Geological Survey (CGS). CGS Open File Report 88-19.
Jones, T. L. 1993. Big Sur: A Keystone In Central California Culture History. Pacific Coast
Archaeological Society Quarterly 10:163-186.
Jones, T. L. and D.A. Jones. 1992. Elkhorn Slough Revisited: Reassessing the Chronology of
CA-MNT-229. Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology 14:159-179.
Jones, T. L., T. Van Bueren, S. Grantham, J. Huddleson, and T. Fung. 1992. Phase II
Archaeological Investigations for the Castroville Bypass Project, Monterey County,
California. Report on file California Department of Transportation, District 5, San Luis
Obispo.
Kleinfelder, Inc. 1997. Upper Llagas Creek Project – PLL 566 Summary Level 1 Hazardous
Material Investigation. Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District. December.
Kohler, S. 1999. Update of Mineral Land Classification: Aggregate Materials in the Monterey
Bay Production-Consumption Region. CGS Open File Report 99-01.
Kohler-Antablin, S. 1996. Update of Mineral Land Classification: Aggregate Materials in the
South San Francisco Bay Production-Consumption Region. CGS Open File Report
96-03.
Kondolf, G.M. 2000. Assessing salmonid spawning gravel quality. Transactions of the American
Fisheries Society. 129: 262-281.
Kondolf, G. M., and M. G. Wolman. 1993. The sizes of salmonid spawning gravels. Water
Resources Research 29:2275–2285.
Kroeber, A. L. 1915. Monterey Bay Mounds, General. University of California Archaeological
Survey Manuscripts 27.
Langsdorff, G. H. von. 1968. Voyages and Travels in Various Parts of the World during the
Years 1803, 1804, 1805, 1806, and 1807 [1813-1814]. 2 vols. (Biblioteca Australiana
41). New York: De Capo Press.
Levy, R. 1978. Costanoan. In California, edited by R.F. Heizer, pp. 485-495. Handbook of North
American Indians Vol. 8, W.C. Strurtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institute,
Washington, D.C.
MacDonald, D., J. Murdoch, and H. White. 1987. Uncertain Hazards, Insurance and Consumer
Choice: Evidence from Housing Markets. Land Economics 63: 361-371.
Martin, Michael. Santa Clara Valley Water District. 2013. Personal communication to Mitchell
Katzel via email on December 20, 2013.
Maxey, Steve. City of Morgan Hill Planning Department. 2013a. Personal Communication to
Christie Robinson via email on February 15, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-14

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Maxey, Steve. City of Morgan Hill Planning Department. 2013b. Personal Communication to
Christie Robinson via telephone on June 5, 2013.
Mayer, K.E. and W.F. Laudenslayer Jr. 1988. A Guide to Wildlife Habitats of California. State of
California, Resource Agency, Department of Fish and Game Sacramento, CA. 166 pp.
Available at: http://www.dfg.ca.gov/biogeodata/cwhr/wildlife_habitats.asp. Accessed on
February 6, 2013.
McCabe, Michael. 1999. Flood Control for Morgan Hill Moves a Step Closer / Army engineers to
study solutions. Hearst Communications, Inc. Available online at:
http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Flood-Control-for-Morgan-Hill-Moves-a-StepCloser-2952844.php. Accessed November 6, 2013.
MH Engineering. Undated. Upper West Branch of Little Llagas Creek Drainage Study for City of
Morgan Hill.
Milliken, R. T., J. G. Costello, C. Johnson, G. A. Laffey, A. Sayers, and P. Orozco. 1993.
Archaeological Test Excavations at Fourteen Sites Along Highways 101 and 152, Santa
Clara and San Benito Counties, California, Volume 2: History, Ethnohistory, and Historic
Archaeology. Report S-15442. Report on file Northwest Information Center, Sonoma
State University, Rohnert Park, California.
Minnesota IMPLAN Group, Inc. 2013. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic
Analysis: Total Output by Industry, Santa Clara County, CA, 2010. Database accessed
on February 20, 2013.
Morgan Hill Downtown Association. 2013. Morgan Hill Downtown Business Directory. Available
online at: http://morganhilldowntown.com/Business_Directory.html. Accessed on
February 22, 2013.
Morgan Hill Unified School District. 2013. Morgan Hill Unified School District website. Available
online at: http://www.mhu.k12.ca.us/About-MHUSD/index.html. Accessed on February 7,
2013.
Moyle, P. B. 2002. Inland Fishes of California (second edition). May. University of California
Press.
NAICS Association. 2013. Six-Digit NAICS Codes & Titles: Manufacturing. Available online at:
http://www.naics.com/free-code-search/sixdigitnaics.html?code=3133. Accessed on
February 22, 2013.
National Institute on Deafness and Communication Disorder (NIDCD). 2008. Noise-Induced
Hearing Loss, NIH Pub. No. 97-4233, updated October 2008. Available online at:
http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/hearing/pages/noise.aspx. Accessed on February 11,
2013.
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2008. Anadromous Salmonid Passage Facility
Design. National Marine Fisheries Service Northwest Region, February 2008.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-15

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2006. Endangered and threatened species; final
listing determination for 10 Distinct Population Segments of west coast steelhead.
Federal Register 71:834-862.
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2005a. Endangered and threatened species;
designation of critical habitat for seven evolutionarily significant units of Pacific salmon
and steelhead in California. Federal Register 70: 524888-52627.
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 2005b. Final Assessment of the National Marine
Fisheries Service’s Critical Habitat Annual Review Teams (CHARTs) for Seven Salmon
and Steelhead Evolutionarily Significant Units (ESUs) in California. NOAA Fisheries
Protected Resources Division, Long Beach, California. July.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2008. Average Wind Data. Available
online at: http://lwf.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/online/ccd/avgwind.html. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
Newland, Michael. 1999. Archaeological Resources Records Search for the Llagas Creek
Watershed Project, Morgan Hill, Santa Clara County, California (letter report). Report on
file Northwest Information Center, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, California.
Noble Consultants Inc. and Northwest Hydraulics. 2008. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Control
Project: Stable Channel Design and Sediment Impact Assessment, Final Report.
Prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, San Francisco District. January.
Pacific Geotechnical Engineering (PGE). 2013. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Control Ground
Water Report. Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District. January.
Page, Benjamin M., Thompson, G.A. and R.G. Coleman. 1998. Late Cenozoic Tectonics of
central and southern Coast Ranges California: Geological Society of America Bulletin.
vol. 110, p. 846-876.
Patch, D. and T. L. Jones. 1984. Paleoenvironmental Change at Elkhorn Slough: Implications
for Human Adaptive Strategies. Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology
6(1):19-43.
Pilling, A. R. 1948. Archaeological Survey of Northern Monterey Bay County. University of
California Archaeological Survey Manuscripts 106.
Plog, B. A., Ed. 1988. Fundamentals of Industrial Hygiene―3rd Edition. National Safety Council,
Table 9-b, Page 168.
Purdue. N.D. Noise Sources and Their Effects. Available online at:
http://www.chem.purdue.edu/chemsafety/training/ppetrain/dblevels.htm. Accessed on
July 8, 2013.
Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). 2011. Water Quality Control Plan for the
Central Coast Basin. State Water Resources Control Board and California Environmental
Protection Agency. June.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-16

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

RMC Water and Environment (RMC). 2013. Map and Construction Plan for Upper Llagas Creek
Flood Protection Project. Phase 1, Vol. 1 and Vol. 2 and Phase 2, Vol. 1 and Vol. 2.
Prepared for Santa Clara Valley Water District.
RMC Water and Environment (RMC). 2003. Phase 2 Pajaro River Watershed Study. Final. April.
Safford, H. D., J. H. Viers, and S. P. Harrison. 2005. Serpentine Endemism in the California
Flora: A Database of Serpentine Affinity. Madroño, Vol. 52, No. 4, pp. 222-257.
San Francisco Estuary Institute (SFEI). 2008. Final Report: South Santa Clara Valley Historical
Ecology Study. Prepared for the Santa Clara Valley Water District and the Nature
Conservancy. May.
Santa Clara County Parks. 2013. Santa Clara County Parks Website. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/parks/Pages/Welcome-to-Santa-Clara-County-Parks.aspx.
Accessed on February 17, 2013.
Santa Clara County Vector Control District (SCVCD). 2011. Santa Clara County Mosquito-Borne
Virus Response & Operations Plan. In cooperation with: California Department of Public
Health Mosquito & Vector Control Association of California, University of California.
February.
Santa Clara County. 2013. Williamson Act. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/bos/Legislation/Williamson-Act/Pages/default.aspx.
Accessed on February 17, 2013.
Santa Clara County. 2012a. County Geologic Hazard Zones. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/GIS/GeoHazardZones/Pages/SCCGeoHazardZone
Maps.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2013. December 5.
Santa Clara County. 2012b. Ordinance Code 2012, Chapter VIII Control of Noise and Vibration.
Available online at: http://library.municode.com/index.aspx?clientId=13790. Accessed on
February 12, 2013.
Santa Clara County. 2012c. Integrated Pest Management. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/ipm/Pages/Integrated-Pest-Management-Site-HomePage.aspx. Accessed on February 5, 2013.
Santa Clara County. 2011. Williamson Act Program: Guidelines for Commercial Agricultural
Use. Approved October 18, 2011. San Jose, California. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/PlansPrograms/Williamson/Documents/Guidelinefor-Commercial-Agricultural-Use-Approved-10-18-11.pdf.
Santa Clara County. 2010. County of Santa Clara Housing Element Update 2009–2014.
Adopted by the Board of Supervisors. August 2. San Jose, California.
Santa Clara County. 2008. Santa Clara County Operational Area Emergency Operations Plan.
March.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-17

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Santa Clara County. 2006. Chapter IV Geologic Provisions. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/PermitsDevelopment/GeoHazards/Documents/Geol
ogic_Or d_031902.pdf. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
Santa Clara County. 2003. Comprehensive County Expressway Planning Study South County
Working Paper. March 12. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/rda/expressways2/southcountywp.pdf.
Santa Clara County. 1994. Santa Clara County General Plan, 1995–2010. Adopted December
20. County of Santa Clara, California. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/planning/Plans%20%20Programs/General%20Plan/Pages/General-Plan.aspx. Accessed on February 15,
2103.
Santa Clara County, Department of Agriculture. 2013. 2013 Growers Data (GIS and Excel
Files). Provided in emails from Santa Clara County Department of Agriculture. San
Jose, California.
Santa Clara County, Department of Agriculture. 2012. 2011 Santa Clara Crop Report. Santa
Clara County, California. Available online at:
http://www.sccgov.org/sites/ag/Crop%20Report/Documents/2011_crop_report.pdf.
Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2011. Santa Clara Countywide
Water Service Review Final. Adopted December 7. Prepared by Baracco and
Associates, The Shibatani Group, Inc., Policy Consulting Associates, LLC.
Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2010. LAFCO of Santa Clara
County 2010 Countywide Fire Service Review. Revised Draft. December 8. Prepared by
Management Partners Incorporated.
Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2006. Santa Clara LAFCO Service
Reviews and Sphere of Influence Recommendations for the South Central Santa Clara
County Area. San Jose, California.
Santa Clara Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). 2003. Sphere of Influence Policies.
San Jose, California.
Santa Clara Open Space Authority. 2013. Santa Clara County Open Space Authority website.
Available online at: http://www.openspaceauthority.org/. Accessed on February 17, 2013.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2013a. Best Management Practices Handbook,
Santa Clara Valley Water District Comprehensive List. Document No W751M01. August.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2013b. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection
Project – Reach 7A Detention Basin Analysis Using 2006 Hydrograph Data.
Supplemental Memorandum to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. September 26, 2013.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2013c. Annual Groundwater Condition Report for
the Calendar Year 2012. July.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-18

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2013d. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection
Project: Inclusion of Bat Evaluations into Environmental Documents. Technical
Memorandum from Melissa Moore to Mitchell Katzel—Cardno ENTRIX. February 6.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012a. Groundwater Levels. February.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012b. Groundwater Condition Report, Santa Clara
County. August.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012c. Stream Maintenance Program Update
2012–2022. January 1, 2012. Available online at:
http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/rwqcb2/board_info/agendas/2012/December/SCVWD/SMP_Ma
nual.pdf.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2012d. Where does our water come from? South
County. San Jose, California.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2011a. Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact
Report for Stream Maintenance Program Update 2012-2022. August.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2011b. Santa Clara Valley Water District Stream
Maintenance Program Update Final Subsequent Environmental Impact Report.
December 2011. Available online at: http://www.valleywater.org/SMPSEIR2011-V2.aspx.
Accessed on April 2, 2013.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2010a. Flood Protection and Stream Stewardship
Master Plan Preliminary Review Draft. June 15.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2010b. SCVWD website:
http://cf.valleywater.org/Water/Watersheds__streams_and_floods/Watershed_info_&_projects/UvasLlagas/Upper_Llagas/index.shtm. Accessed on August 25, 2010.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2010c. 2010 Urban Water Management Plan: April.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2010d. Status Report: Federal Projects for Santa
Clara County, California, Fiscal Year 2010.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2008. Best Management Practices (BMP)
Handbook, Revision A. May 22.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 2001. Santa Clara Valley Water District
Groundwater Management Plan: July.
Santa Clara Valley Water District (SCVWD). 1997. West Little Llagas Creek Detention Pond
Study (Study) and Flood Protection Measure analysis and report. May.
Sawyer, J. O., T. Keeler-Wolf, and J. M. Evens. 2009. A manual of California vegetation.
Second edition. California Native Plant Society Press, Sacramento, USA.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-19

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Saxe, W. E. 1875. Observations at a Shellmound at Laguna Creek, 6 Miles North of Santa Cruz.
Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences 5:157.
Schaaf & Wheeler. 2012. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project 30% Design Hydraulic
Report. Prepared for the USACE, San Francisco District, and SCVWD. July 31.
Sherwin, R. and D. A. Rimbaldini. 2005. Pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus) species account.
Prepared for the Western Bat Working Group (WBWG). Available online at:
http://www.wbwg.org/speciesinfo/species_accounts/species_accounts.html.
Shuford, W.D., and Gardali, T., editors. 2008. Studies of Western Birds 1. Species Account—
Yellow Warbler. California Bird Species of Special Concern.
Simon Malls. 2012. Property Fact Sheet: Gilroy Premium Outlets. Gilroy, California. Updated
May 2012. Available online at:
http://www.simon.com/Mall/LeasingSheet/7857_GilroyPremiumOutlets_PropFactSheet.p
df. Accessed on May 29, 2013.
Smith, J. J. 2007. Steelhead distribution and ecology in the upper Pajaro River system and
mainstem Pajaro River (and stream descriptions, habitat quality ratings and limiting
factors by reach for the Pajaro River and for the upper Pajaro River tributaries).
Unpublished Report, Department of Biology, San José State University, November 7.
38pp.
South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). 1993 (updates 2008). CEQA Air
Quality Handbook. Available online at: http://www.aqmd.gov/ceqa/hdbk.html. Accessed
on February 15, 2013. No longer available online pending development of new Air
Quality Analysis Guidance Handbook. Emission factors from this reference are included
in Appendices 3.11-l, -m, -n, -o.
State of California Board of Equalization. 2013a. California City and County Sales and Use Tax
Rates, 2013. Available online at: http://www.boe.ca.gov/cgi-bin/rates.cgi.
State of California Board of Equalization. 2013b. Detailed Description of the Sales & Use Tax
Rate, 2013. Available online at: http://www.boe.ca.gov/news/sp111500att.htm.
State of California Board of Equalization. 2011a. 2010-11 Annual Report, Statistical Appendix,
Table 11. Available online at: http://www.boe.ca.gov/annual/pdf/2011/table11_11.pdf.
State of California Board of Equalization. 2011b. 2010-11 Annual Report, Statistical Appendix,
Table 14. Available online at: http://www.boe.ca.gov/annual/pdf/2011/table14_11.pdf.
State of California Board of Equalization. 2011c. 2010-11 Annual Report, Statistical Appendix,
Table 21A. Available online at: http://www.boe.ca.gov/annual/pdf/2011/table21a_11.pdf.
State of California Employment Development Department. 2010. Labor Market Information
Division: 2010-2020 Industry Employment Projections San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara
Metropolitan Statistical Area (San Benito and Santa Clara Counties). Available online at:
http://www.labormarketinfo.edd.ca.gov/Content.asp?pageid=145. Accessed on
February 22, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-20

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

State of California Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 2013. GeoTracker Database.
Available online at: http://geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov/. Accessed on February 19,
2013.
State of California, Department of Finance. 2013. Report P-1 (County): State and County Total
Population Projections, 2010–2060. Sacramento, California.
The Tricolored Blackbird Working Group (TBWG). 2007. Conservation Plan for the Tricolored
Blackbird (Agelaius tricolor). September.
Transportation Research Board. 2000. High Capacity Manual. Available online at:
http://www.co.monterey.ca.us/planning/major/Pebble%20Beach%20Company/Pebble_B
each_DE
IR_Nov_2011/Pebble_Beach_DEIR_Admin_Records_Nov_2011/TRB/TRB_2000Hghwy
CapMan_IntersectionLOSCriteria.pdf.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). 2010a. Memorandum for Record, Upper Llagas Creek
Project Alternative and Design History. February 5.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). 2010b. Upper Llagas Creek Flood Control Project with
Project Hydraulic Analysis Final Report. Prepared for Santa Clara County, California.
April.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). 2008. Regional supplement to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers wetland delineation manual: arid west region, version 2.0. ERDC/EL TR-0828. U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center, Vicksburg, Mississippi,
USA.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2011. California County Agricultural Commissioners’
Data, Total Value of Production: Santa Clara County, 2011. Available online at:
http://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/California/Publications/AgComm/Detail/ind
ex.asp. Accessed on February 21, 2013.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2007. Census of Agriculture, Data Item: Operators,
Principal- Number of Operators, Domain Category: Primary Occupation (Farming), 2007.
Available online at:
http://quickstats.nass.usda.gov/?agg_level_desc=ZIP%20CODE#28EC1F47-489F-3767A48D-705CA3B03EBD. Accessed on February 22, 2013.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1982. Soil Conservation Service. Llagas Creek
Watershed Environmental Impact Statement/Report Final. Santa Clara County
California. May.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1981. Finding of No Significant Impact/Negative
Declaration and Environmental Impact Assessment. Prepared for Santa Clara County,
California. September.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2011a. American Community Survey 5-Year
Estimates, 2007–2011. Selected Economic Characteristics. Available online at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/community_facts.xhtml. Accessed on
February 21, 2013.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-21

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2011b. American Community Survey 5-Year
Estimates, 2007–2011. Selected Housing Characteristics. Available online at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/community_facts.xhtml. Accessed on
February 21, 2013.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2011c. The 2012 Statistical Abstract National
Data Book. Table 728. Cost of Living Index--Selected Urban Areas: Annual Average
2010. Council for Community and Economic Research. Arlington, Virginia.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2010a. ZIP Code Business Patterns (ZBP),
2010. Available online at: http://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/index.html. Accessed on
February 21, 2013.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2010b. DP-1—Profile of General Population
and Housing Characteristics: 2010. Available online at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/community_facts.xhtml.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2009. American Community Survey 1-Year
Estimates, 2009. Selected Housing Characteristics. Available online at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t.
Accessed on February 22, 2013.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 2000. DP-3 Median Value (Dollars) For All
Owner- Occupied Housing Units, 2000. Available online at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t.
Accessed on February 22, 2013.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Census. 1992. 1990 Census of Population: General
Population Characteristics - California. Section 3 of 3. Washington D.C.
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2010. Regional Economic
Information Systems, Table CA05N Personal Income and Detailed Earnings by Industry,
2010. Available online at:
http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=70&step=1&isuri=1&acrdn=3#reqid=70&ste
p=1&isuri=1. Accessed on February 22, 2013.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011a. Consumer Price Index- All Urban
Consumers: Original Value Data, 2000–2011. San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose,
California. Available online at: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/data.htm. Accessed on
February 21, 2013.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011b. Occupational Employment
Statistics (OES) Survey, May 2011. Available online at: http:/stat.bls.gov/oes/home.htm.
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal Highway Administration (FHA). 2006a.
Roadway Construction Noise Model User’s Guide. Available online at:
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/noise/construction_noise/rcnm/rcnm.pdf. Accessed
on February 14, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-22

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal Transit Administration (FTA). 2006b. Transit
Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment (FTA-VA-90-1003-06). Available online at:
http://www.fta.dot.gov/documents/FTA_Noise_and_Vibration_Manual.pdf. Accessed on
February 12, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012a. The Green Book Nonattainment Areas
for Criteria Pollutants. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/greenbk/index.html. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012b. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2011. Available online at:
http://epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html. Accessed on February
15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012c. Nonroad [Off-road] Standards.
Available online at: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards/nonroad/index.htm;
40 CFR 89.112 [Tier 2 diesels]. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards/nonroad/nonroadci.htm; 40 CFR 1051.101-115
[ATVs]. Available online at: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards/nonroad/rec-exhaust.htm;
40 CFR 90.103 [small engines, 2-stroke, 4-stroke]. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards/nonroad/smallsi-exhaust.htm; 40 CFR 91.104
[personal watercrafts & outboards]. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards/nonroad/marinesi-exhaust.htm. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012d. Plain-Language Format of Emission
Regulations for Nonroad Engines. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/nonroad/420f12054.pdf. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012e. Climate Change Basics. Available
online at: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/basics/. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012f. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Available
online at: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2012g. Cap and Trade Programs. Available
online at: http://www.epa.gov/captrade/index.html Accessed on February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2011a. National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS). Available online at: http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2011b. Compilation of Air Pollution Emission
Factors (AP-42), Fifth Edition (1995-2011). Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/. Accessed February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2011c. AERSCREEN User’s Guide
(USEPA-454/B-11-001). Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/scram/dispersion_screening.htm. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-23

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2010a. Endangered Species Facts: San
Joaquin Kit Fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica). February. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/espp/factsheets/san- joaquin-kitfox.pdf. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2010b. Endangered Species Facts: Bay
Checkspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha bayensis). February. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/espp/factsheets/bay-checkerspot-butterfly.pdf. Accessed on
February 13, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2004. Toolkit for Assessing Potential
Allegations of Environmental Injustice. Available online at:
http://www.epa.gov/compliance/ej/resources/policy/ej-toolkit.pdf. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 1992. Screening Procedures for Estimating
the Air Quality Impact of Stationary Sources, Revised (USEPA 454/R-92-019). Available
online at:
http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/exposure/presentations/efast/usepa_1992b_sp_for_estim_a
qi_of_ss.pdf. Accessed on February 15, 2013.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 1974. Information on Levels of Environmental
Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety.
(USEPA550/9-74-004). Available online at:
http://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyNET.exe/2000L3LN.TXT?ZyActionD=ZyDocument&Client=E
PA&Inde
x=Prior+to+1976&Docs=&Query=&Time=&EndTime=&SearchMethod=1&TocRestrict=n
&Toc=&T
ocEntry=&QField=&QFieldYear=&QFieldMonth=&QFieldDay=&IntQFieldOp=0&ExtQFiel
dOp=0&
XmlQuery=&File=D%3A%5Czyfiles%5CIndex%20Data%5C70thru75%5CTxt%5C00000
001%5C2000L3LN.txt&User=ANONYMOUS&Password=anonymous&SortMethod=h%7
C&MaximumDocuments=1&FuzzyDegree=0&ImageQuality=r75g8/r75g8/x150y150g16/i4
25&Displ
ay=p%7Cf&DefSeekPage=x&SearchBack=ZyActionL&Back=ZyActionS&BackDesc=Res
ults%20 page&MaximumPages=1&ZyEntry=1&SeekPage=x&ZyPURL. Accessed on
February 11, 2013.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2013. Critical Habitat Portal. Available online at:
http://criticalhabitat.fws.gov/crithab/. Accessed on March 29, 2013.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2012. Online List Generator for federally-listed
species. Sacramento Endangered Species Office. 77.5 minute quadrangle search:
Morgan Hill, Mount Madonna, and Gilroy, Chittenden, Gilroy Hot Springs, Loma Prieta,
Mississippi Creek, Mount Sizer, San Felipe, Santa Teresa Hills, Watsonville East, and
Watsonville West. Available online at:
http://www.fws.gov/sacramento/es_species/Lists/es_species_lists-form.cfm.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-24

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2008a. Birds of Conservation Concern. U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Division of Migratory Bird Management, Arlington, Virginia. December.
Available online at:
http://www.fws.gov/migratorybirds/NewReportsPublications/SpecialTopics/BCC2008/BC
C2008.pdf.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2008b. Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants:
Final determination of critical habitat for the Bay checkerspot butterfly (Euphydryas
editha bayensis); Final rule. Federal Register 73 No. 166. August 26. pp. 50406-50452.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2003. Revised Draft Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act
Report for the Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project, Santa Clara County, California.
Prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, San Francisco District Office. Prepared
by Richard W. Dehaven. October 2002, revised May 2003.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2002. Recovery Plan for the California Red-legged
Frog (Rana aurora draytonii). May 28.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1998a. Final Recovery Plan for Upland Species of the
San Joaquin Valley, California. Available online at:
http://ecos.fws.gov/docs/recovery_plans/1998/980930a.pdf. Accessed on November 27,
2013.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1998b. Draft Recovery Plan for the Least Bell’s Vireo
(Vireo bellii pusillus). March.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1998c. Recovery Plan for Serpentine Soils Species of
the San Francisco Bay Area.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1987. Federal Register 52 No. 181. September 18. pp.
35366-35378.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 1967. Endangered Species List. 32 FR 4001. Available
online at: http://ecos.fws.gov/docs/federal_register/fr18.pdf. Accessed on November 18,
2012.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 2012. USGS Water Quality Information: Conversion Factors.
Available online at: http://water.usgs.gov/owq/FieldManual/Chapter6/conversion.html.
Accessed on March 1, 2013.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 1957. Gemstones of the United States; Geological Survey
Bulletin 1042-G.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 2009. Glossary of
Climate Change Acronyms. Available online at:
http://unfccc.int/essential_background/glossary/items/3666.php#G. Accessed on
February 15, 2013.
Universal Industrial Gases, Inc. (UIG). 2008. Air: Its Composition and Properties. Available
online at: http://www.uigi.com/air.html. Accessed on February 15, 2013.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-25

December 2015

Chapter 9

References

Ventura County Air Pollution Control District (VCAPCD). 2003. Ventura County Air Quality
Assessment Guidelines. Available online at:
http://www.vcapcd.org/pubs/Planning/VCAQGuidelines.pdf. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
Vestal, E. H. 1938. Biotic relations of the wood rat (Neotoma fuscipes) in the Berkeley Hills.
Journal of Mammalogy 19:1-36.
Weiss Associates. 2011. Draft Memorandum Presenting Findings of Hazardous Materials
Assessment Reports Review for Upper Llagas Creek Flood Protection Project Llagas
Creek Santa Clara County, California. Prepared for RMC Water and Environment.
November 15.
Wetlands Research Associates (WRA), Inc. 2010. Butterfield Boulevard Extension Biological
Resources Assessment. Prepared for the City of Morgan Hill. May.
Wetlands Research Associates (WRA), Inc. 2003. Glenwood Open Space Management Plan.
San Rafael, California.
Williams, D.F. 1986. Mammalian species of concern in California. California Department of Fish
and Game Report 86-1. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Fish and Game.
Wood, A. 1930. Monterey Bay Mounds. University of California Archaeological Research Facility
Manuscript Nos. 380.
World Climate (WC). 2013. Climate Data for 37°N 121°W. Available online at:
http://www.worldclimate.com/cgi-bin/grid.pl?gr=N37W121. Accessed on February 15,
2013.
Zeiner, D.C., W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., K.E. Mayer, and M. White. 1990a. California’s wildlife:
Volume III, Mammals. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Fish and Game.
Zeiner, D.C., W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., K.E. Mayer, and M. White. 1990b. California’s Wildlife:
Volume II, Birds. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Fish and Game.
Zeiner, D.C., W.F. Laudenslayer, Jr., K.E. Mayer, and M. White. 1988. California’s wildlife:
Volume I, Amphibians and Reptiles. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Fish and
Game.

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

9-26

December 2015

CHAPTER 10

LIST OF PREPARERS

The following personnel were directly involved in preparation of this EIS:
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS—SAN FRANCISCO DISTRICT
James Mazza, Regulatory Project Manager




M.E.S.M. Environmental Science and Management, University of California at
Santa Barbara
B.S. Biology with specilization in Ecology, University of California at Irvine
18 years experience

Christopher Eng, Environmental Planner & NEPA assistant



B.S. Environmental Sciences, San José State University, California
23 years experience

Kathleen Ungvarsky, Archeologist






R.P.A. Registered Professional Archaeologist
M. A. Master of Arts Cultural Resources Management, Sonoma State University
B.S. Anthropology specialization Archaeology, University California Berkeley
A.A. Associate of Arts Anthropology, San Francisco City College
20 years experience

Tori White, Chief, Regulatory Division & Supervisory Review





Coastal Engineering Program Certificate, Old Dominion University, Norforlk
M.S. Marine Biology, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
B.S. Marine Science, University of South Carolina at Conway
23 years experience

Jeneya Fertel, DA Intern


B.S. Molecular Environmental Biology, Ecology concentration, University of
California at Berkeley

Roselyn Wang, Assistant District Counsel




Dual Degree: B.A. Integrated Biology and Political Science, University of
California at Berkeley
Juris Doctor, University of Chicago, the Law School
3 years experience

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

10-1

Chapter 10

List of Preparers

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Upper Llagas Creek Project Draft EIS
R13269.docx

December 2015

10-2

