United States
Department of
Agriculture
Forest
Service

Draft Environmental Impact
Statement

June 2013

East Reservoir
Libby Ranger District, Kootenai National Forest
Lincoln County, Montana

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the
basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status,
parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or
part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply
to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600
(voice and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence
Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD).
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

East Reservoir Project
Draft
Environmental Impact Statement
Lincoln County, Montana

Lead Agency:

USDA Forest Service

Responsible Official:

Paul Bradford, Forest Supervisor
31374 Hwy. 2 West
Libby, Montana 59923

For Information Contact:

Denise Beck, Team Leader
12557 Hwy 37
Libby, MT 59923
(406)293-7773

Abstract: The East Reservoir Project considers land management activities, including timber
harvest, fuel reduction in areas adjacent to private property, wildlife habitat enhancement, road
storage and decommissioning, commercial thinning and precommercial thinning within the East
Reservoir Project Area (see maps). Two action alternatives and a no-action alternative are analyzed
in detail.
It is important that reviewers provide their comments at such times and in such a way that they are
useful to the Agency’s preparation of the EIS. Therefore, comments should be provided prior to the
close of the comment period and should clearly articulate the reviewer’s concerns and contentions.
The submission of timely and specific comments can affect a reviewer’s ability to participate in
subsequent administrative review or judicial review.
Comments received in response to this solicitation, including names and addresses of those who
comment, will become part of the public record for this proposed action. Comments submitted
anonymously will be accepted and considered; however, anonymous comments will not provide the
respondent with standing to participate in subsequent administrative review or judicial review.
Send Comments to:

Malcolm Edwards, Libby District Ranger
12557 Hwy 37,
Libby, MT 59923

Date Comments Must Be Received: Comments are due 45 days after notice of availability in the Federal
Register, which is anticipated to be June 7, 2013. The publication date is the official start of the comment
period.

Table of Contents
Summary ………………………………………………………………………………………..... S-1
Chapter 1: Purpose and Need for Action………………………………………………………..1-1
Chapter2: Alternatives…………………………………………………………………………... 2-1
Chapter 3: Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences
Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions………………………………………….. 3-1
Forest Vegetation………………………………………………………………………………. 3-8
Soils Resource………………………………………………………………………………… 3-61
Fisheries/Aquatic Species…………………………………………………………………….. 3-103
Water Resource………………………………………………………………………………… 3-132
Fire/Fuels………………………………………………………………………………………. 3-170
Proposed, Threatened, Endangered, and Sensitive Plants………………………………….. 3-185
Wildlife Resource………………………………………………………………………………. 3-200
Noxious Weeds…………………………………………………………………………………. 3-324
Air Quality……………………………………………………………………………………… 3-348
Range Resource………………………………………………………………………………. 3-359
Scenic Resource……………………………………………………………………………….... 3-362
Cultural Resource……………………………………………………………………………… 3-382
Recreation Resource…………………………………………………………………………… 3-386
Transportation…………………………………………………………………………………. 3-394
Economics………………………………………………………………………………………. 3-404
Chapter 4: Consultation and Coordination……………………………………………………. 4-1

MAPS
(1) East Reservoir Vicinity
(2) East Reservoir Project Alternative 2
(3) East Reservoir Project Alternative 3
(4) COE Lands Alternative 2 and 3
(5) East Reservoir Project Management Areas
(6) East Reservoir Project VRU
(7) East Reservoir Project Landtypes
(8) East Reservoir Watershed – Streams
(9) East Reservoir Project Cumulative Effect

(10) Cripple PSU Old Growth
(11) East Reservoir Project Lynx Bound
(12) Proposed Road Changes Alternative 2
(13) Proposed Road Changes Alternative 3
(14) Fuels and Wildlife Units
(15) Precommercial Thinning Alternative 2
(16) Precommercial Thinning Alternative 3
(17) Past Fire and Fuels Activity

APPENDICES
(A) East Reservoir Water Resources Management Requirements and Design Criteria
(B) Standard RHCA Widths
(C) East Reservoir Best Management Practices (BMPs)
(D) Kootenai National Forest BMP Monitoring Summary
(E) Soil Rehabilitation Plans and Mitigations for East Reservoir Project
(F) Literature Cited
(H) Kootenai National Forest Plan Standards and Guidelines
(I) East Reservoir Monitoring Plan
(J) Dunn Creek Sediment Investigation Report
(K) Airshed Map and Description

EAST RESERVIOR PROJECT

SUMMARY

SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
The Forest Service has prepared this draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) to disclose potential
effects of the proposed action and the alternatives to the proposed action within and surrounding the East
Reservoir project area (hereafter called analysis area) in compliance with the National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA) and other relevant Federal and State laws and regulations. The project area is located
within the Libby Ranger District on Kootenai National Forest in Montana. This DEIS discloses direct,
indirect and cumulative environmental impacts and irreversible or irretrievable commitments of resources
that would result from implementation of the proposed action and alternatives.
Two action alternatives are analyzed in detail in the DEIS along with the no-action alternative. This general
summary briefly describes the analysis area, purpose and need, issues and alternatives analyzed in detail.
This information and additional analysis are described in more detail in the remainder of this document and
in the project file (located at Canoe Gulch Ranger Station, Libby, Montana). Analysis area maps are found
in the map section of this DEIS as well as the project file.
The East Reservoir project area (analysis area) is equivalent to the Cripple Planning Subunit (PSU) which
lies east of the Koocanusa Reservoir. The East Reservoir analysis area is approximately 92,407 acres.
National Forest System (NFS) lands are publically owned lands that are managed by the Forest Service
(FS). They will be referred to as NFS lands. In the project scope, in addition to NFS lands, which consist of
78,546 acres, are 4,032 acres owned by the State of Montana Department of Natural Resource and
Conservation (DNRC), 7,672 acres owned by Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC), 802 acres owned by
the US Army Corps of Engineers (COE) and 1,355 acres in private ownership.

PURPOSE AND NEED
As the primary land management agency within the East Reservoir analysis area, and in cooperation with
the other land management agencies, the FS identified treatments that would address the following purpose
and need:
• Re-establish, restore and retain landscapes that are more resistant and resilient to disturbance (insect
and disease infestations, fire) and uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change;
• Create a heterogeneous landscape that provides a variety of habitats to sustain populations of terrestrial
and aquatic species;
• Provide amenities, jobs and products to the communities;
• Reduce hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across the landscape while re-introducing fire
to the ecosystem;
• Enhance recreation settings and facilities with the goal of providing high quality experiences.

PROPOSED ACTION
Alternative 2 was developed to respond to the purpose and need for the East Reservoir Project. Placement
of harvest, stand improvement and fuel treatment locations were designed with consideration to stand
treatment needs, fuel treatment need and location, stand resilience to potential climate change, connectivity,
fragmentation and other resource needs. Activities included in Alternative 2 are as follows:
 Commercial timber harvest on approximately 8,845 acres;
 Natural fuel reduction/stand improvement through hand slashing, grapple piling, chipping, mastication,
or mechanical product removal on 1,378 acres;
 Construction of 9.2 miles of new permanent road to access harvest units, cost-share and/or dispersed
campsite access;
 Construction of approximately 4 miles of temporary road to access proposed harvest units;
 Road reconstruction and implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to reduce road impacts
to streams on approximately 176 miles of road;
 Long-term road storage for watershed rehabilitation and wildlife security on approximately 16 miles of
road, including restoration of an estimated 49 stream crossings;

EAST RESERVIOR PROJECT

SUMMARY

 Conversion of ~37 miles of motorized trails to non-motorized for increase wildlife security;

ISSUES
Issues were identified through public scoping of the Proposed Action (Alternative 2) and by review from
other agencies and FS personnel. The scoping process is used not only to identify important environmental
issues, but also to identify and eliminate issues that do not pertain to the Proposed Action, thus narrowing
the scope of the environmental documentation process. The following issues were identified to address
concerns about, and develop alternatives to, the proposed action.
1. Regeneration Harvest Units over 40 Acres: Alternative 2 would remove hiding cover and movement
corridors that result in openings greater than 40 acres in MA12 (see Chapter 3 Wildlife Section for
more information on hiding cover and openings). The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) standard
for opening sizes in MA 12 is to maintain movement corridors of at least two site distances between
openings, and generally not exceed openings over 40 acres (KNFP, p. III-49, Wildlife and Fish
standards #7). Alternative 2 would create an opening that does not meet this standard. Unit 362 results
in a 192 acre opening on MA12.
Regional Forester’s Approval - Alternative 2 would require Regional Forester approval for exceeding
NFMA opening requirements and 36 CFR Part 219.27(d)(2) which states the maximum regeneration
harvest treatment for Montana is 40 acres. Past management within the analysis area has interspersed
the forest with a series of 20-to-40 acre openings with very distinct (hard) edges between harvested and
unharvested areas. This disturbance regime provides suitable habitat for species that are adapted to the
edges between forested and non-forested areas. However, species that require larger blocks of habitat
are at a disadvantage under such a disturbance regime. The analysis presented in the DEIS found the
effects of larger openings would not result in adverse effects for big game, however treatments could
result in openings that may not be fully utilized by elk as foraging areas, at least diurnally. The need
and rationale for this opening are described in Chapter 3 and the Vegetation Section in the project file.
See Table 2.13 for more information.
2. Motorized versus Non-Motorized Trails: There is a concern that the motorized trails that lie within
the analysis area reduce big game security. Issue indicators include open road density (ORD) expressed
in miles/miles2, miles of new and temporary road construction, cover/forage ratio, and security habitat
during fall hunting season expressed as percentage of the total analysis area during and after activity.
3. Treatment in Old Growth (OG) Forest: The original proposed action scoped in 2010 was developed
based on preliminary assessments of stand conditions. Further evaluation of OG stands proposed for
commercial product removal identified that harvesting in these stands would not enhance nor preserve
the OG qualities of the stands. As a result, all proposed harvest in OG stands has been dropped from the
proposed action.

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED IN DETAIL
ALTERNATIVE 1 – No Action
This alternative represents the existing condition in the East Reservoir analysis area. Under this alternative,
none of the proposed Forest Service activities, such as timber harvest, precommercial thinning and fuel
reduction would occur. Other on-going activities, such as weed treatment, recreation, the DNRC harvest,
PCTC harvest and firewood gathering would continue. Activities identified in Chapter 3 as current and
reasonably foreseeable actions would occur.
ALTERNATIVE 2 – Action Alternative 2 is the proposed action scoped on December 21, 2010 and was
greatly influenced by Stakeholder collaboration (e.g. lynx direction, stand treatments, fuels treatments, over
40 acre units, product removal). It actively manages (see specifics in Ch.2 , Range of Alternatives) the
landscape to help trend the existing condition to the desired future condition as described later in this
chapter. Briefly, it proposes to treat approximately 8,845 acres with a variety of prescriptions (Table 2.0)
including regeneration to improve species resiliency and retention. Harvest methods include tractor and
skyline. Alternative 2 precommercially thins approximately 5,775 acres including 212 acres of white pine
S-2

EAST RESERVIOR PROJECT

SUMMARY

daylighting; commercial thinning comprises approximately 2,256 acres. It includes 1,378 acres of fuels
reduction units and prescribe burns approximately 10,049 acre for fuels reductions and wildlife habitat
improvement. Approximately 9 miles of new road construction would occur along with 4.3 miles of
temporary road. Sixteen miles of road would be placed into intermittent storage and 37 miles of motorized
trails would be closed to increase secure habitat for wildlife during the hunting season. Additional access
changes are listed in the tables for Alternative 2 in Chapter 2 of this DEIS.
ALTERNATIVE 3
Alternative 3 was designed to meet all KNFP standards and guidelines, and to address many of the issues
raised internally(regeneration units over 40 acres, treatments in old growth, availability of motorized trails),
by public stakeholders in scoping comments and as a result of further reconnaissance of the analysis area
regarding the Proposed Action (Alternative 2). This alternative reduces the amount of treatment in the
analysis area. Briefly, it proposes to treat approximately 7,782 acres with a variety of prescriptions (Table
2.15) including regeneration to improve species resiliency and retention. Harvest methods include tractor
and skyline. Alternative 3 precommercially thins approximately 5,563 acres (no white pine daylighting). It
includes 1,309 acres of fuels reduction and prescribe burns approximately 10,049 acre for fuels reductions
and wildlife habitat improvement. Approximately 8 miles of new road construction would occur along with
4.1 miles of temporary road. Approximately 18 miles of road would be placed into intermittent storage and
27 miles of motorized trails would be closed motorized travel to increase secure habitat for wildlife.
Additional access changes are listed in the tables for Alternative 3 (Chapter 2).

COMPARISON OF ALTERNATIVES
This section provides a comparison of the alternatives in terms of:
• How the alternatives compare to one another;
• How the alternatives meet the Purpose and Need for the proposal;
• How the alternatives respond to the key issues;
• The potential environmental consequences associated with the implementation of the alternatives.
Table S.1 - Comparison of Purpose and Need Objectives by Alternative
RE-ESTABLISH, RESTORE and RETAIN LANDSCAPES that are MORE
RESISTANT and RESILIENT to DISTURBANCE (INSECT and DISEASE
INFESTATIONS, FIRE) and UNCERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
such as CLIMATE CHANGE

Commercial Timber Harvest (acres)
Precommercial Thinning (acres)
White Pine Precommercial Thinning (20% of stand acres)

ALT 1

0
0
0

ALT 2

8,845
5,563
212

ALT 3

7,782
5,563
0

CREATE a HETEROGENEOUS LANDSCAPE that PROVIDES a VARIETY of
HABITATS to SUSTAIN POPULATIONS of TERRESTRIAL and AQUATIC
SPECIES

Motorized Trails Changed to Non-Motorized (miles)
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment (acres)

0
0

36.56
10,049

26.89
10,049

0
0

78,761
629

0

1,378

1,309

0

10,049

10,049

0
0
No

6.28
1.79
Yes

6.28
1.79
Yes

PROVIDE AMENITIES, JOBS AND PRODUCTS TO THE COMMUNITIES

Timber Harvest Volume, Estimated, CCF
Total Employment (persons)

7,782
560

REDUCE HAZARDOUS FUELS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY AND
ACROSS THE LANDSCAPE WHILE RE-INTRODUCING FIRE TO THE
ECOSYSTEM

Natural Fuel Reduction/Stand IMP through Hand Slashing, Grapple
Piling, Chipping, Mastication or Mechanical Product Removal (acres)
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment (acres)
ENHANCE RECREATION SETTINGS AND FACILITIES WITH THE GOAL OF
PROVIDING HIGH QUALITY EXPERIENCES

Construction and Improvement of Recreation Access Roads (miles)
Road Access Changed to Yearlong Access (miles)
Native Rock Ring Fire Pits, Vault Toilets and Signage Proposed
S-3

EAST RESERVIOR PROJECT

SUMMARY

Table S.2 - Comparison of Issue Indicators by Alternative
ISSUE #1 – REGENERATION HARVESTS OVER 40 ACRES

Number of Units Over 40 acres in MA12
Number of Units Over 40 acres in MA 15, 16

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0

1
12

0
0

25
N/A
158,400
136
1,744
7,518
N/A
11.2

137
43
+666
+28
+250
7,268
1,326
11.2

0
0
+666
+23
+241
7,277
0
11.2

ISSUE #2 - IMPACT to OLD GROWTH FOREST STANDS

Vertical Structure Removed in Designated OG/ROG (acres)
Vertical Structure Removed in Undesignated OG (acres)
Road Length Existing/Built Adjacent/Through Designated OG/ROG (ft.)
Number of Existing or Proposed Regeneration Units Adjacent to OG
Edge Influence in OG (acres)
Interior Habitat Remaining in Old Growth (acres)
Treated to Maintain OG or Trend Stand Toward OG (Burning) (acres)
Percent of Designated Old Growth in the PSU
ISSUE #3 - MOTORIZED vs. NON-MOTORIZED TRAILS

Motorized Trails Changed to Non-Motorized (miles)
Security Cover (Standard 30%)

0
28.1

36.56 26.89
35 33.4

DECISIONS TO BE MADE
1. Whether to implement vegetation management activities (silvicultural prescriptions, logging methods,
slash treatment, reforestation, fuel reduction, precommercial thinning, and management measures and
design features to protect resources and the site-specific location of these activities and practices would
occur.
2. Whether to construct temporary roads to access proposed timber harvest units.
3. Whether to implement road storage and decommission activities to improve watershed condition and, if
so, where.
4. Whether to construct new permanent roads to harvest units and recreation sites.
5. Whether to make improvements to recreation sites.
6. Whether to change motorized trails to non-motorized trails.
7. Whether to cost-share roads with DNRC and/or PCTC.
8. What, if any, specific project monitoring requirements are needed to assure management measures and
design features are implemented and effective, or to evaluate success of project objectives.
9. Whether to request Regional Forester approval for regeneration units over 40 acres.

S-4

East Reservoir Project DEIS
Chapter 1
Purpose and Need for Action

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

INTRODUCTION
The Forest Service (FS) has prepared this Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) in accordance
with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other relevant federal and state laws and
regulations.
This chapter identifies the implementation area, the proposed action, the purpose and need for action, the
relationship to the Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP), the scope of the analysis, and the decisions to be
made. All referenced maps are located in the map section of this document.
The proposals in this project were developed from a broad scale assessment of the East Reservoir analysis
area (East Reservoir Landscape Assessment, September 2010). The district prioritized the recommendations
that were made in that assessment to formulate this project. A copy of the East Reservoir Landscape
Assessment is located in the project file.
The East Reservoir Landscape Assessment area is equivalent to the Cripple Planning Subunit (PSU) area
which lies within the Koocanusa Physiographic Area. All past, current and proposed future activities (5 –
10 years) were considered in the effects analyses in Chapter 3.

PROJECT AREA DESCRIPTION
The East Reservoir project area (from now on referred to as analysis area) lies approximately 15 miles east
of Libby, Montana in Lincoln County, along the east side of Lake Koocanusa Reservoir. The analysis area
is approximately 92,407 acres. The National Forest System (NFS) manages 78,546 acres, Montana State
Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) manages 4,032 acres, 1,322 acres are in
private ownership, Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC) owns 7,672 acres and the Corp of Engineers
(COE) manages 802 acres.
The legal description of the analysis area includes all or portions of T30N, R28W, Sections 2 to 11, 13 to 30
and 32 to 36; T30N, R29W, Sections 1 to 4, 9 to 16 and 24; T31N, R327W, Sections 3 to 10, 15 to 18, 20 to
22, 28 and 29; T31N, R28W, Sections 1 thru 36; T31N, R29W, Sections 1, 2, 10 to 15, 22, 23, 26 to 36;
T32N, R27W, Sections 7 to 9, 14 to 23 and 26 to 33; T32N, R28W, Sections 2 to 5 and 8 to 36; and T32N,
R29W, Sections 24 to 26, 35 and 36. The East Reservoir analysis area makes up the analysis boundary for
most resources. The analysis area for the wildlife resource varies with species and is described in the
Wildlife Section in Chapter 3 of this document
The East Reservoir analysis area consists of five major drainages: Fivemile Creek, Warland Creek, Cripple
Horse Creek, Canyon Creek and Dunn Creek. These drainages flow from east to west. These drainages are
deeply incised by their streams and the ridgelines have fairly gentle slopes. Side slopes between these two
features are generally steep.
The Reservoir East analysis area is a diverse landscape that ranges in elevation from a low of about 2,200
feet along the Kootenai River to 6,051 feet at the top of Davis Mountain. The south and west aspects of the
analysis area have numerous small natural openings in a ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir canopy. The north
and east aspects have a nearly continuous canopy of Douglas-fir, larch and lodgepole pine. This tree canopy
is broken sharply by drainages.
The East Reservoir analysis area provides a variety of recreation opportunities. Recreation activities are
varied and occur year-round. Activities include snowmobiling, hunting, fishing, off-highway vehicle (OHV)
use, hiking, scenic viewing, wildlife viewing, camping and gathering forest products such as berries and
firewood. There are several major rock forms visible in this analysis area, especially along Lake Koocanusa
Reservoir.

Page 1 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

DESIRED CONDITION
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) includes a statement of the Desired Condition (DC) for the
Forest, Volume 1- Chapter II. The KNFP discussion of the DC is broad in nature and addresses conditions
for multiple resources. More detailed, site oriented DCs are disclosed under Management Area (MA)
descriptions, Volume 1- Chapter III and expressed by Vegetation Response Units (VRUs). Vegetation
Response Units are one of the currently accepted systems of expressing DCs in ecological terms. These
DCs are based or derived from historic conditions modified to consider current resource capabilities such as
watershed, wildlife and scenic resources. The management proposals of this project assist in moving
existing resource conditions of the analysis area or Cripple PSU, toward the desired future conditions
introduced in the 1987 KNFP (KNFP II-17) and supported by VRU descriptions.
Historic conditions serve as a reference or target for the desired future condition while taking into
consideration current resource capabilities such as watershed, wildlife and scenic resources as well as the
anticipated growth of human demands. The challenge for forest managers is to provide for these demands
while managing for sustainability.
Briefly, the desired future condition for the East Reservoir project and Cripple PSU is an ecologically
functional, forested landscape providing clean water, wildlife habitat, forest products, amenities and
recreation settings. The Interdisciplinary Team’s (IDTs) strategy to move the existing condition of the East
Reservoir analysis area or Cripple PSU toward the DC includes a variety of activities such as: managing
insect and disease incidence; reducing shade tolerant tree species; managing high forest stand density;
wildlife habitat management; fuels reduction in the wildland urban interface (WUI); improving recreation
settings, and facilities, especially adjacent to the Koocanusa Reservoir; maintaining a suitable transportation
network, and providing community amenities.
Specifically, the DCs for the East Reservoir analysis area include:
1. A forested landscape pattern with a broad spectrum of native vegetation species, composition and
successional stages where insects and disease are present at endemic levels.
2. Diverse ecosystems that provide a full range of habitats necessary for self-sustaining populations of
native wildlife species, both terrestrial and aquatic. These ecosystems are more resilient to insects and
disease, climate change and wildfires.
3. A sustainable supply of forest products is available to the local economy while remaining compatible
with other forest resources and MA direction.
4. The spread of noxious weeds is minimized and established weed populations are contained or reduced.
5. Prescribed fire is used to simulate natural ecological processes, prevent excessive natural and activity
fuel levels, manage habitat for wildlife, reduce suppression costs, and maintain ecosystems.
6. Vigorous, diversified streamside vegetation contributes to stable soil conditions, good bank stability,
stable channel conditions and stable water temperatures. Water quality is high and sedimentation
associated with human activities is within acceptable limits and reflective of healthy riparian habitats.
7. Recreation settings that yield high quality experiences are enhanced by management activities.
Facilities, largely found along Koocanusa Reservoir, are maintained to health and safety standards and
accommodate an expanding visiting public. Pleasing views are readily available along State and Federal
scenic byway, Highway 37.
8. A suitable balance of open and closed roads is present for motorized and non-motorized access, is
compatible with wildlife and fish habitat needs, and results in lower road maintenance costs.
The IDT identified specific actions that could be taken in those situations where existing conditions either
are not meeting desired future conditions or are not moving toward desired future conditions. Collectively,
these items form the Purpose and Need for Action, which would help move the area toward the conditions
described previously. The following summarizes the ecological and social factors that have contributed to
the changed conditions and form the basis for the Purpose and Need for Action.
Page 2 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION
As the primary land management agency within the East Reservoir analysis area, and in cooperation with
the other land management agencies (COE), the FS identified treatments in order to meet the following

objectives or purpose:

• Re-establish, restore and retain landscapes that are more resistant and resilient to disturbance (insect
and disease infestations, fire) and uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change;
• Create a heterogeneous landscape that provides a variety of habitats to sustain populations of terrestrial
and aquatic species;
• Provide amenities, jobs and products to the communities;
• Reduce hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across the landscape while re-introducing fire
to the ecosystem;
• Enhance recreation settings and facilities with the goal of providing high quality experiences.

By implementing the East Reservoir Project, the Libby Ranger District can address several resources that
have deviated from reference conditions, maintain those that are necessary for species diversity and
viability, and improve those where public demand is expected to increase, such as recreation settings, job
opportunities and forest access. Specifically, the following discloses how current conditions are not meeting
desired future conditions and why they need to be addressed:
Re-establish, restore and retain landscapes that are more resistant and resilient to
disturbance (insect and disease infestations, fire) and uncertain environmental
conditions such as climate change.
Vegetation management strategies to create resistance and resiliency to natural disturbances such as fire,
insect and disease and climatic variations include:
• Control of invasive species (e.g. weeds on winter range, Mountain Pine Beetle);
• Thinning conifer stands to decrease competition and stress,
• Forest type conversions to shade intolerant, and insect and disease resistant species such as western
larch, western white pine and ponderosa pine;
• Developing mixed tree species plantations with shade intolerant species;
• Increasing forest age and composition diversity across the landscape through variable stand
compositions, ages and structure;
• Maintaining or developing patch and gap sizes that are ecologically sustainable;
• Reducing hazardous fuels;
• Creating fuel breaks;
• Increasing stream buffers.
Alternative 2 best meets this purpose and need. Please see descriptions of alternatives for more information.
The KNFP (p. II-1) includes a goal to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable populations of
all existing, native vertebrate wildlife species, including old growth timber in sufficient quality and quantity
to maintain viable populations of old growth dependent species and to maintain habitat diversity
representative of existing conditions”. Alterations of the lower elevation, warm and dry forest types have
occurred over the past 100 years due to historic logging and fire suppression. Historic logging focused on
riparian areas and removing the shade intolerant species (western larch and ponderosa pine) and fire
suppression has disrupted historic fire cycles. Absence of non-lethal, low-severity fires and mixed-severity
fires across these drier sites have likely contributed to an increase in insect and disease incidence, increased
stand density, and favored more shade tolerant and less disease resistant species such as Douglas-fir and
grand fir. Disruption of historic fire cycles combined with the predicted climate change may also contribute
to accelerated insect and disease infestations and increased fire behavior. Climate change will likely result
in stress to at least a portion of the current forest and stressed trees are more likely to succumb to insect and
Page 3 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

disease attacks.
There is a need to implement vegetation treatments that trend the forest landscape towards the historic
reference conditions for the warm and dry forest sites. Treatments including regeneration and improvement
harvests, pre-commercial thinning and commercial thinning, and tree planting are needed to trend species
composition and stand densities towards the historic reference conditions that are more resilient in health
and resistant to the potential impacts of insects and disease, specifically of mountain pine beetle and
Douglas-fir beetle that currently exist at endemic levels.
Likewise, there is also a need to trend the higher elevation, cool and moist forest types towards the
historical reference conditions to improve overall forest resiliency to climate change and resistance to
potential disturbance.. There is a need to restore species compositions, stocking levels, and successional
stages in these forest types back towards the historic conditions; particularly within stands of stagnated and
stressed lodgepole pine. Regeneration and improvement harvests, thinning, and planting are needed to trend
towards the historic conditions.
Create a heterogeneous landscape that provides a variety of
habitats to sustain populations of terrestrial and aquatic species.
Management strategies to create a heterogeneous landscape that provides a variety of habitats to sustain
populations of terrestrial and aquatic species include:
• Establishing or maintaining ecologically sensitive areas (meadows, wallows, fens, old growth, etc.);
• Establishing or maintaining forest cover and landscape connectivity (via old growth and mature lynx
habitat);
• Increasing forest age and composition diversity across the landscape through variable stand
composition, ages and structure; responding to the need of the appropriate amount and juxtaposition of
foraging, denning (rearing) and cover (secure) habitats for a wide variety of wildlife species resident in
the Cripple PSU and Kootenai National Forest (KNF);
• Responding to Canada lynx habitat needs by treating sparsely-used mature forest stands with little or no
evergreen understory to increase snowshoe hare habitat;
• Responding to bighorn sheep needs by treating noxious weeds on winter range and thinning
encroaching conifers on escape habitat via precr4ibed burning;
• Maintaining ungulate forage areas with vegetation treatments (timber harvest, prescribed burning)
benefiting herd health and vigor, which in turn benefits predators such as mountain lions and wolves;
• Increasing general wildlife security in the form of increasing size of, or condition of, non-motorized
cover areas, which benefits both grizzly and black bears, elk, moose and furbearers including fisher,
wolverine, bobcat as well as many other species.
Alternative 2 best meets this purpose and need. Please see descriptions of alternatives for more information.
With past harvest activities, forage patches have become more uniform in size (30-40 acres) and shape.
While the Dry Fork Fire of 1988 burned 3,400 acres within the analysis area most existing forage areas fall
within the range described above. The existing condition, for the most part, is not representative of
reference conditions. Past timber harvests have noticeably influenced the juxtaposition of wildlife cover and
forage. Harvests have unnaturally affected “edge” habitats as well as interior habitats, the greatest impacts
likely being on those species associated with large expanses of interior habitats. This condition is especially
true in the cool and moist habitats (VRUs 5, 7, 9) where there was much lodgepole pine salvaging as a
result of the MPB infestation of the late 1970s to early 80s.
There are 12,975 acres of ungulate winter range, MAs 10 and 11, which are being overtaken by less
desirable tree species and noxious weeds, suppressing native species like blue-bunch wheatgrass and
bitterbrush, important ungulate staples. Understory mechanical thinning and prescribed burning can be used
to improve conditions. Likewise, herbicide and biological treatments can remove and slow down the
Page 4 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

progression of noxious weeds known to the area. Forest Plan goal (p. II-2) emphasizes the “attempt to stop
the spread and suppress existing levels of noxious weeds”.
Provide amenities, jobs and products to the communities.
Management strategies to provide amenities, jobs and products to the communities include:
• Vegetation treatments including timber harvest and associated fuels treatments (8,845to 7,782) and
precommercial thinning (5,775 to 5,563). These treatments will help maintain ecosystem function and
vegetative health as well as reduce fuels and provide timber products;
• Fuel treatments (1,378 to 1,309 acres) are proposed to reduce hazardous fuels by utilizing a
combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatments. Almost all of these units are immediately
adjacent to private property and are intended to reduce hazardous fuels. Prescribed burning could
include underburning, jackpot burning or pile burning. Mechanical treatment may include a
combination of hand slashing, grapple piling, chipping, mastication or mechanical product removal;
• New permanent road construction (9.25 to 8.06 miles) to access proposed harvest units;
• Temporary road construction (4.26 to 4.05 miles) to access proposed harvest units;
• Road reconstruction and best management practice (BMP) on haul routes (176 to 168 miles) to provide
access while reducing the impact of the road system on water quality;
• Trail access changes from motorized to non-motorized (37 to 27 miles) to improve big game security
habitat. Maintains 10 miles open for motorized recreation to be used in concert with open roads
providing a motorized loop for recreationists;
• Road storage activities (16 to 18 miles) as identified in the East Reservoir Travel Analysis Process
(TAP) within the Cripple PSU. These treatments will help improve water quality in the project area by
removing chronic sources of sediment. A copy of the East reservoir TAP is included in the project file;
• Undetermined roads (13.5miles) are proposed to be added to the National Forest System (NFS) of
roads. Undetermined roads are roads that exist on the ground but are not officially part of the road
system that includes maintenance;
• Cost-share of roads within the project area include the Forest Service investing in roads on State land
(5.06 miles) and the DNRC investing in roads (24.66 miles) on NFS lands;
• Improvements of dispersed campsites and reconstruction of access roads to dispersed campsites along
the Kootenai Reservoir.
Both action alternatives contain attributes that best meet different aspects of this purpose and need. Please
see descriptions of alternatives for more information.
There are also social factors that affect the resources and management of the Project Area. One of the
purposes identified by Congress for the establishment of National Forest System (NFS) lands is to “furnish
a continuous supply of timber for the use and necessities of the citizens of the United States" (Organic Act
16 USC 475). One of the goals of the Kootenai National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan, pg.
II-1, is to “Provide a sustained yield of timber volume responsive to national and regional needs, scheduled
to encourage a stable base of economic growth in the dependent geographical area.” Other social needs
include natural resource related jobs, forest products for home heating, building and decorating, and special
uses (e.g. land access, utility right-of-ways, water etc.) but also for places that provide solitude, scenery, and
recreation.
As residential and visiting populations grow so do anticipated demands for these types of resources–a
stimulus for continual resource management. Predicting the demand for these resources is extremely
challenging, therefore management strategies require frequent evaluation and need to remain adaptable in
order to adequately address this desired condition of the KNFP.
Timber harvest would not only meet wildlife habitat, fuels reduction and landscape resiliency goals but also
provide timber products. Many of the regeneration harvest in MA 12 and MA 15 are in stands that have
Page 5 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

reached the culmination of mean annual increment and are not adding growth and not fully occupying the
sites. Additionally, Timber Objectives (page 11-4) include “Insects and disease will be controlled to historic
endemic levels, and lodgepole pine will be harvested prior to future outbreaks of mountain pine beetle.
Reduce hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across
the landscape while re-introducing fire to the ecosystem.
Management strategies to reduce hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across the landscape
while re-introducing fire to the ecosystem include:
• Reducing fuel loading throughout the analysis area;
• Reducing basal area on overstocked stands;
• Restoring fire tolerant species such as ponderosa pine and western larch.
Alternative 2 best meets this purpose and need. Please see descriptions of alternatives for more information.
Aggressive wildfire suppression and natural stand succession has resulted in uncharacteristically high fuel
loads around private properties (wildland urban interface 1) and the general forest. This build-up of fuels can
result in high severity, stand replacing fires where they would typically not occur and can result in damage
or loss of personal property and human life. There are approximately 8,500 acres of WUI in the Project
Area. 2,800 acres need hazardous fuel reduction treatments because the expected fire behavior (e.g. crown
fire or flame lengths greater than 4 feet) would pose a risk to public and firefighter safety;
Enhance recreation settings and facilities with the goal of
providing high quality experiences.
Management strategies to enhance recreation settings and facilities with the goal of providing high quality
experiences include:
• Improving camping site access with new road construction and reconstruction of access roads;
• Installing native rock fire ring pits in suitable areas;
• Installing vault toilets to improve sanitation and promote public health;
• Improving signage for area attractions and amenities (e.g. Koocanusa Marina, Yarnell Campground);
• Determining and maintaining 9.2 miles of motorized trails in concert with open roads within the
analysis area to create a recreation loop.
• Determining and maintaining 2.75 miles of walking/bicycling/horse riding trail in concert with cultural
interests within the analysis area to create a recreation loop.
Alternative 3 best meets this purpose and need. Please see descriptions of alternatives for more information.
District specialists have noted the increased use of adjacent Lake Koocanusa in recent years. User created
dispersed camp sites, ATV trails, and fire rings are some of the obvious signs in the adjacent land area
mostly made up of MA 6 (Developed Recreation). Likewise, the existing Koocanusa Marina Special Use
permitted area is receiving increased use and is expanding to accommodate this need. These actions need to
include management of motorized recreational vehicles and open routes (roads and trails). Additionally,
Lake Koocanusa is known for its scenic attributes as seen from Montana State Highway 37 (Montana and
Federal Scenic Byway). Limited vegetation treatments over the last few decades have resulted in the lack of
viewing opportunities from the designated scenic byway. Therefore, there is the need to maintain pleasing
views along the portion of Highway 37 within the boundaries of the Project Area to accommodate this use.
1

“The Wildland Urban Interface is commonly described as the zone where structures and other human development meet and
intermingle with undeveloped wildland and vegetative fuels. The WUI zone poses tremendous risks to life, property, and
infrastructure in associated communities and is one of the most dangerous and complicated situations firefighters face” (Lincoln
County, Montana – Community Wildfire Protection Plan, p.6).

Page 6 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

These improvements would move recreational settings and facilities toward the desired condition as
described in the KNFP.
PROPOSED ACTION
To meet the purpose and need for action, the Proposed Action (Alternative 2) would implement the
following activities (see Chapter 2, Alternatives Considered in Detail section for detailed information on the
proposed activities):
• Vegetation treatments including timber harvest and associated fuels treatments (8,845 acres), and
precommercial thinning (5,775 acres). These treatments will help maintain ecosystem function and
vegetative health as well as reduce fuels and provide timber products.
• Fuel treatments (1,378 acres) are proposed to reduce hazardous fuels by utilizing a combination of
prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatments. Almost all of these units are immediately adjacent to
private property and are intended to reduce hazardous fuels. Prescribed burning could include
underburning, jackpot burning, or pile burning. Mechanical treatments may include a combination
of hand slashing, grapple piling, chipping, mastication, or mechanical product removal.
• Fuel and Wildlife treatments (10,049 acres) are proposed to be burned and/or slashed over the next
ten years. The purpose of these treatments is to enhance the wildlife habitat and browse in the area,
to reduce hazardous fuels and to reintroduce fire to the ecosystem.
• New permanent road construction (9.3 miles) to access proposed harvest units, cost-share roads and
access to dispersed camp sites.
• Temporary road construction (4.3 miles) to access proposed harvest units.
• Road reconstruction and best management practice (BMP) implementation on haul routes (176
miles) to provide access while reducing the impact of the road system on water quality.
• Trail access changes from motorized to non-motorized (37 miles) to improve big game security
habitat.
• Road storage activities (16 miles) as identified in the East Reservoir Travel Analysis Process (TAP)
within the Cripple Planning Subunit. These treatments would help improve water quality in the
analysis area by removing chronic sources of sediment. A copy of the East Reservoir TAP is
included in the project file.
• Undetermined roads are roads that exist on the ground but are not officially part of the road system
that includes maintenance. Undetermined roads are proposed to be either added to the National
Forest System (NFS) of roads (13.5 miles) or decommissioned (3.24 miles).
• Cost-share of roads within the analysis area includes the Forest Service investing in roads on State
lands (5miles) and the DNRC investing in roads (22 miles) on National Forest Service lands.
• Improvements of dispersed campsites and reconstruction of access roads to dispersed campsites
along the Koocanusa Reservoir.
LAWS and POLICY
Development of this DEIS follows the National Forest Management Act (NFMA), 16 U.S. Code 1604; Title
36, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 220 (36 CFR 220); and Council of Environmental Quality, Title 40;
CFR, Parts 1500-1508, National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Many federal and state laws, including the Endangered Species Act, Clean Air Act, and Clean Water Act
also guide this analysis. Following is a brief description of the laws and policies applicable to this analysis:
American Antiquities Act of 1906: This Act makes it illegal to appropriate, excavate, injure, or destroy
any historical, prehistoric ruin or monument, or any object of antiquity, situated on lands owned by the
Government of the United States, without permission of the Secretary of the Department of the Agency
having jurisdiction over the lands on which said antiquities are situated.
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended: This Act requires Federal agencies to consult
with American Indian Tribes, State and local groups before nonrenewable cultural resources, such as
archaeological and historic structures, are damaged or destroyed. Section 106 of this Act requires Federal
Page 7 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

agencies to review the effect project proposals may have on cultural resources in the project area.
Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended: The purposes of this Act are to “provide a means whereby
the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved, to
provide a program for the conservation of such endangered species and threatened species, and to take
such tests as may be appropriate to achieve the purpose of the treaties and conventions set forth in
subsection (a) of this section.” The Act also states “It is further declared to be the policy of congress that
all Federal departments and agencies shall seek to conserve endangered species and threatened species
and shall utilize their authorities in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.”
Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918: This Act is to establish an international framework for the protection
and conservation of migratory birds. The Act makes it illegal, unless permitted by regulation, to pursue,
hunt, take, capture, deliver for shipment, ship, cause to be carried by any means whatever, receive for
shipment, transportation or carriage, or export, at any time, or in any manner, any migratory bird,
including in this Convention…for the protection of migratory birds…or any part, nest, or egg of any such
bird” (16 USC 703). The original 1918 statue implemented the 1916 Convention between the United States
and Great Britain (for Canada). Later amendments implemented treaties between the United States and
Mexico, Japan, and the Soviet Union (now Russia).
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 as amended: Purposes of this Act are “To declare a
national policy which will encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between man and his environment,
to promote efforts which will prevent or eliminate damage to the environment and biosphere and stimulate
the health and welfare of man; to enrich the understanding of the ecological systems and natural resources
important to the Nations; and to establish a Council on Environmental Quality” (42 USC Sec. 4321). The
law further states “it is the continuing policy of the Federal Government, in cooperation, to use all practical
means and measures, including financial and technical assistance, in a manner calculated to foster and
promote the general welfare, to create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in
productive harmony, and fulfill the social, economic, and other requirements of the present and future
generation of Americans.” This law essentially pertains to public disclosure and participation,
environmental analysis, and documentation.
Clean Water Act, as amended in 1977 and 1982: Primary objective of this Act is to restore and maintain
the integrity of the Nation’s waters. This objective translates into two fundamental national goals: 1)
Eliminate the discharge of pollutants into the nation’s waters; and 2) Achieve water quality levels that are
fishable and swimmable. This Act established a non-degradation policy for all federally proposed projects.
Under Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act, the State has identified water quality-limited water bodies in
Washington.
Clean Air Act, as amended in 1990: Purposes of this Act are “to protect and enhance the quality of the
Nation’s air resources so as to promote the public health and welfare and the productive capacity of its
population; to initiate and accelerate a national research and development program to achieve the
prevention and control of air pollution; to provide technical and financial assistance to state and local
governments in connection with the development and execution of their air pollution prevention and control
programs; and to encourage and assist the development and operation of regional air pollution prevention
and control programs.”
Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960: This Act requires the FS to manage NFS lands for multiple
uses (including timber, recreation, fish and wildlife, range and watershed). All renewable resources are to
be managed in such a way that they are available for future generations. The harvesting and use of standing
timber can be considered a short-term use of a renewable resource. As a renewable resource, trees can be
re-established and grown again if the productivity of the land is not impaired.
Migratory Bird Executive Order (EO) 13186: On January 10, 2001, President Clinton signed an
Executive Order (EO 13186) titled “Responsibilities of Federal Agencies to Protect Migratory Birds.” This
EO required the “environmental analysis of Federal actions, required by NEPA or other established
Page 8 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

environmental review processes, evaluated the effects of actions and agency plans on migratory birds, with
emphasis on species of concern.”
Floodplains and Wetlands (EO 11988 and 11990): These 1977 orders are to “…avoid to the extent
possible the long and short term adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and modification of
floodplains and to avoid direct and indirect support of floodplain development…” and similarly “…avoid to
the extent possible the long and short-term adverse impact associated with the destruction or modification
of wetlands.”
Executive Order 13112 (invasive species): This 1999 order requires Federal agencies whose actions may
affect the status of invasive species to identify those actions and within budgetary limits, “(i) prevent the
introduction of invasive species; (ii) detect and respond rapidly to and control populations of such
species…, (iii) monitor invasive species populations…, (iv) provide for restoration of native species and
habitat conditions in ecosystems that have been invaded, … (v) promote public education on invasive
species…and not authorize, fund, or carry out actions that it believes are likely to cause or promote the
introduction or spread of invasive species… unless, pursuant to guidelines that it has prescribed, the
agency had determined and made public… that the benefits of such actions clearly outweigh the potential
harm caused by invasive species; and that all feasible and prudent measures to minimize risk of harm will
be taken in conjunction with the actions.”
Executive Order 13287 (preserve America): This 2003 order’s intent is to preserve America’s heritage
though “actively advancing the protection, enhancement, and contemporary use of the historic properties
owned by the Federal Government… The Federal Government shall recognize and manage the historic
properties in its ownership as assets that can support department and agency missions while contributing to
the vitality and economic well-being of the Nation’s communities and fostering a broader appreciation for
the development of the United States and its underlying values…”
Environmental Justice (EO 12898): On February 11, 1994, President Clinton signed Executive Order
12898. This order directs each Federal agency to make achieving environmental justice part of its mission
by identifying and addressing, as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse human health or
environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority populations and low-income
populations. On the same day the President also signed a memorandum emphasizing the need to consider
these types of effects during NEPA analysis. On March 24, 1995, the Department of Agriculture completed
an implementation strategy for the executive order. Where Forest Service proposals have the potential to
disproportionately and adversely affect minority or low-income populations these effects must be
considered and disclosed (and mitigated to the degree possible) through the NEPA analysis and
documented.
Prime Farmland, Rangeland, and Forestland Memorandum: All alternatives are in accordance with the
Secretary of Agriculture’s Memorandum 1827 for prime farmland, rangeland, and forestland. “Prime”
forestland is a term used only for non-Federal land.
National Forest Management Act (NFMA) of 1976: This act guides development and revision of
National Forest Land Management Plans and has several sections to it ranging from required reporting that
the Secretary must submit annually to Congress to preparation requirements for timber sale contracts. There
are several important sections within the act. The National Forest Management Act of 1976 (NFMA), as
implemented by the Code of Federal Regulations, states that “when trees are cut to achieve timber
production objectives, the cuttings shall be made in such a way as to assure that the technology and
knowledge exists to adequately restock the lands within 5 years after final harvest.”
Roadless Area Conservation Rule (2001): The Roadless Area Conservation Rule was adopted by the U.S.
Forest Service on January 12, 2001, after extensive public involvement as part of federal rulemaking. It
generally prohibited road construction and timber cutting in 58.5 million acres of inventoried roadless areas,
covering about 30 percent of the National Forest System. Court rulings make special exceptions for portions
of the Tongass NF and NFS lands in Idaho. Thus, the Forest Service may not undertake activities that
Page 9 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

violate the Roadless Rule on 40 million out of the 58.5 million total acres of inventoried roadless areas.

RELATIONSHIP TO THE FOREST PLAN
National forest planning takes place at several levels, including: national, regional, forest, landscape,
watershed and project levels. The East Reservoir EIS is a project-level analysis; its scope is confined to
addressing the significant issues and possible environmental consequences of the project. It does not
attempt to address decisions made at higher levels. It does, however, implement direction provided at those
higher levels.
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (1987), as amended by the Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS) details
the direction for managing the land and resources of the Kootenai National Forest. The KNFP embodies the
provisions of the NFMA, its implementing regulations and other guiding documents.
The 1987 Kootenai National Forest Land Management Plan (Forest Plan) specifies Forest-wide goals
regarding timber harvest and vegetation management (Forest Plan, Volume I, Chapter II, pages 1-2):
“Provide a sustained yield of timber volume responsive to National and Regional needs,
scheduled to encourage a stable base of economic growth in the dependent geographic
area.”
“Use prescribed fire to simulate natural ecological processes, prevent excessive natural
and activity fuel buildups, create habitat diversity for wildlife, reduce suppression costs,
and maintain ecosystems.”
The Forest Plan also specifies (Forest Plan, Volume I, Chapter II-4, 5):
“Insect and disease will be controlled to historic endemic levels, and lodgepole pine will
be harvested prior to future outbreaks of mountain pine beetle. Other problems such as
root rot, mistletoe, blister rust, and spruce budworm will be addressed in silvicultural
prescriptions utilizing integrated pest management strategies and treatments.”
“Roads, including capital investment roads, will be built to access harvest areas on
schedule.”
“The visual resource will be inventoried, evaluated, and managed throughout all
management activities. Consideration of the visual resource will guide all activities seen
from major travel corridors and local communities.”
Regarding soil and water, the Forest Plan states (Forest Plan, Volume I, Chapter II-7):
“Ground-disturbing activities such as road construction, road reconstruction and timber
harvest will be accompanied by mitigating measures to prevent or reduce increases in
sedimentation and stream channel erosion. The amount of harvest allowed will depend on
the rate of hydrologic recovery after timber has been removed.”
“Each project plan for which use of heavy equipment is required shall evaluate the effect
of operating that equipment on soil productivity.”
Management Areas provide for a unique combination of activities, practices, and uses. Chapter III
of the Forest Plan contains a detailed description of each MA. Table 1 displays a summary of the
applicable MAs and standards for this project. This project is consistent with applicable Forest Plan
standards and goals.
The Forest Plan is one of many documents that provided guidance and contributed to the development of
this project. Other documents include:
• USDA Forest Service Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2007-2012
Page 10 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

• Integrated Restoration and Protection Strategy in the Northern Region
• Northern Region Overview Detailed Report (1998)
• 2001 National Fire Plan (PF Doc. CR-033); Collaborative Approach for Reducing Wildland Fire Risks
to Communities and the Environment 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy, 2006
• Interior Columbia Basin Strategy
FOREST PLAN MANAGEMENT AREAS
The KNFP uses management areas (MAs) to guide management of the NFS lands within the KNF. Each
MA provides for a specific combination of activities, practices and uses. Treatments including timber
harvest, precommercial thinning and fuel reduction are proposed in fourteen MAs, which are described in
Table 1. There are no activities proposed to occur in wilderness or roadless areas within the analysis
boundary. Goals, objectives and desired conditions of each are summarized, and their locations are shown
on the Management Areas map in the map section of this document. Chapter III of the KNFP contains a
detailed description of each MA.
Table 1- Management Area Descriptions
MA

DESCRIPTION

2

Semi-primitive Non-motorized Recreation (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA is
characterized by a natural appearing environment offering roadless recreation opportunities.
The goal is to provide for the protection and enhancement of areas for roadless recreation use
and to provide for wildlife management where specific wildlife values are high.
Recreation (Unsuitable): This MA consists of lands with a natural-appearing environment
and a minimal number of adjacent or internal roads offering roaded recreation opportunities.
The goal is to provide opportunities for dispersed recreation activities in a natural appearing
environment using trails and primitive roads for access.
Viewing Areas (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA contains the often-viewed foreground
and mid-ground areas in highly sensitive viewsheds. The goal is to maintain or enhance the
landscape to provide a pleasing view, provide forage for domestic livestock and big game and
provide old growth timber and cavity habitat for dependent wildlife species.
Developed Recreation Sites (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA includes developed
campgrounds, picnic areas, boat ramps and other developed recreation sites. The goal is to
provide safe and sanitary developed recreation in a setting that is pleasant and visually
attractive.
Big Game Winter Range (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA is found alongside drainages
of the major river valleys and contains mostly steep ground of low timber productivity. The
goal is to maintain or enhance the winter habitat effectiveness for big game.
Big Game Winter Range (Suitable Timberland): Used by most species of big game for
winter range. Found at lower elevations in most major drainages and the topography ranges
from steep to moderate and rolling topography. Timber productivity is moderate to high. The
goal is to maintain or enhance winter-range habitat effectiveness for big-game species while
producing a programmed yield of timber and maintaining the viewing resource in areas of
high visual significance
Big-Game Summer Range (Suitable Timberland): This MA is generally located at or
above 4,000 feet. It is characterized by suitable timber producing sites and moderate to rolling
topography. The goal is to maintain or enhance non-winter big game habitat and produce a
programmed yield of timber.
Designated Old Growth Timber (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA consists of parcels of
existing old growth or mature timber stands which contain components of old growth. The
goal is to provide the special habitat necessary for old growth dependent species on a
minimum of 10% of each major drainage on the Forest, and in units that represent the major
habitat types and tree species of each drainage.
Timber Production (Suitable Timberland): This MA is found at medium elevations on
moderate topography and is characterized by its ability to produce timber using standard
silvicultural systems and conventional harvest methods. The goal focuses on timber

3

5

6

10

11

12

13

15

Page 11 of 14

ACRES

1,683

1,533

1,316

149

4,136

8,526

21,393

7,850

20,432

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

MA

16

17

18

19

24

N/A

DESCRIPTION

production while providing other resource values.
Timber with Viewing (Suitable Timberland): Characterized by productive forest land that
has moderate viewing sensitivity. This MA is usually in the mid-ground or background as
viewed from major travel corridors or the foreground to mid-ground of well-traveled, but
secondary travel corridors. This MA is not critical to wildlife existence or population goals.
The goal is to produce timber while providing for a pleasing view. Wildlife habitat will be
managed for viable populations of existing native species.
Viewing with Timber (Suitable Timberland): Characterized by productive forest land with
high viewing sensitivity in the foreground or mid-ground of major travel corridors. This MA
is not critical to wildlife existence or population goals. The goal is to maintain or enhance a
natural appearing landscape to provide a pleasing view, produce a programmed volume of
timber and manage the habitat to provide for viable populations of existing native wildlife
species.
Regeneration Problem Areas (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA is distinguished by the
difficulty in establishing coniferous regeneration after timber harvest. It occurs on slopes in
excess of 40%. The goal is to maintain existing vegetation until it is insured that timber can be
harvested and the area regenerated within 5 years of harvest.
Steep Lands (Unsuitable Timberland): This MA occurs on steep slopes and breaklands
over 60%. The goal is to insure soil stability and water quality by maintaining the vegetation
in a healthy condition and by minimizing surface disturbance.
Low Productivity Areas (Unsuitable Timberlands): This MA usually occurs in small
parcels at mid to high elevations and has relatively little productive capacity. It is moderate to
steep, usually rocky with thin soils, and often occurs on glacially-scoured ridgetops, walls, or
talus slopes. The goal is to manage for site protection and for any wildlife resources that may
be inherent.
Water

ACRES

2,649

2,669

2,562

2,544

1,035

69

TIERING and INCORPORATING by REFERENCE
In order to eliminate repetition and focus on site-specific analysis, this DEIS is tiered to the following
documents as permitted by 40 CFR 1502.20.
♦ The Kootenai National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (KNFP) FEIS and Record of
Decision (ROD), 1987 and all subsequent NEPA analysis for amendments, and the accompanying Land
and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) as amended (Forest Plan). The KNFP guides all natural
resource management activities and establishes management standards and guidelines for the KNF. It
describes resource management practices, levels of resource production and management, and the
availability and suitability of lands for resource management.
This DEIS also incorporates by reference the following documents:
♦ The Biological Opinion for the Implementation of Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS) from National
Marine Fisheries Service dated January 23, 1995. INFS sets in place certain riparian management goals
and management direction with the intent of arresting the degradation and beginning the restoration of
riparian and stream habitats.
♦ The Biological Opinion for the Effects to Bull Trout from Continued Implementation of Land and
Resource Management Plans and Resource Management Plans as Amended by the Interim Strategy
for Managing Fish-producing Watersheds in Eastern Oregon and Washington, Idaho, Western
Montana, and Portions of Nevada (INFIS) from National Marine Fisheries Service, dated August 14,
1998. This BO addresses the effects of continued implementation of LRMPs as amended by INFS
standards and guidelines where listed distinct population segments of bull trout occur in Idaho,
Montana, Oregon, and Washington.
♦ The Record of Decision and Biological Opinion for the Northern Rockies Lynx Management
Direction (March 2007), from the U.S. Forest Service. This decision amended into all Forest Plans in
Page 12 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

the planning area, which includes the Kootenai National Forest. The BO addresses the effects of
continued implementation of the Kootenai’s LRMP as amended by the associated lynx management
standards and guidelines.
♦ The annual Forest Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Reports from 2000 through 2011. The main focus of
the Kootenai’s monitoring strategy is to ensure consistency in implementing the KNFP.
♦ The Record of Decision and EIS for the Kootenai National Forest Invasive Plant Management,
Kootenai National Forest, April 2007, which Implements a long-term integrated weed management
program for projects beginning in 2007.
♦ The Integrated Scientific Assessment for Ecosystem Management in the Interior Columbia Basin
released 1996. Links landscape, aquatic, terrestrial, social, and economic characterizations to described
biophysical and social systems.
♦ The Record of Decision and EIS for the Forest Plan Amendments for Motorized Access within the
Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak Grizzly Bear Recovery Zones (for Kootenai, Lolo, and Idaho Panhandle
National Forests) released in November 2011. This is a programmatic decision to change the Forest
Plans for these Forests by amending the objectives, standards and guidelines that address grizzly bear
management within the Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak recovery zones.

PROJECT RECORD
This DEIS hereby incorporates by reference the entire project record [40 CFR 1502.21]. The project record
contains resource specialist reports and other technical documentation used to support the analysis and
conclusions in this DEIS. Other sources of information, documents, published studies and books referred to
in the project record and this document are also included.
Relying on specialists reports and the project record helps implement the CEQ's regulation provision that
agencies should reduce NEPA paperwork (40 CFR 1500.4), that environmental documents shall be analytic
rather than encyclopedic, and that EISs/EAs shall be kept concise and no longer than absolutely necessary
(40 CFR 1502.2). The objective is to furnish enough site-specific information to demonstrate a reasoned
consideration of the environmental effects of the alternatives and how these effects can be mitigated,
without repeating detailed analysis and background information available elsewhere. Additional
documentation and more detailed analyses of project area resources are located in the East Reservoir project
record located at the Libby Ranger District, Libby, Montana.

PROJECT SCOPE
Section 40 CFR 1508.25 of the NEPA implementing regulations provides guidance in determining the
proper scope of an EIS.
Geographic Scope
The Libby Ranger District is preparing this EIS to document the analysis and disclose the environmental
effects of a proposed project on NFS lands in the East Reservoir analysis area.
Temporal Scope
The action alternatives would result in timber sales that would be planned for bid for ten years (2013 –
2023). The sale activities would likely be completed within four years from the start of the sale, with slash
disposal and reforestation activities completed within four years of the sale activities being complete.
Construction and storage of specified roads would occur within the timeframes identified for the timber
sale. Typically, BMP work on haul roads would be accomplished prior to haul of timber products.
Precommercial thinning activities would likely be accomplished by 2023. Road storage activities are also
likely to be completed by 2023. These dates are tentative, based upon anticipated budgets, work force,
weather, the timber market and other considerations. Actual dates and timing of implementation and
accomplishment could vary.
Page 13 of 14

CHAPTER 1

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PURPOSE and NEED for ACTION

Administrative Scope
Alternatives to the proposed action were developed to address issues identified both by the public and the
interdisciplinary team. The no-action alternative (Alternative 1) was also analyzed, and reflects the current
status and administrative activities within the analysis area.
The proposed action, Alternative 2, includes those activities necessary to fulfill the identified purpose and
need, as well as all connected actions as described in Chapter 2. Actions necessary to meet the purpose
and need include vegetation treatments such as timber harvest, precommercial thinning and fuel
reduction; road storage and temporary road construction. Connected actions include road work on existing
roads, best management practices (BMPs), design features and management measures, and activities on
U.S. Army Corps of Engineer lands described in Chapter 2.
Three types of effects are considered in the analysis, pursuant to 40 CFR 1508.7 and 40 CFR 1508.8:
direct, indirect and cumulative effects. These effects are disclosed in Chapter 3.

DECISIONS TO BE MADE
1. Whether to implement vegetation management activities (silvicultural prescriptions, logging methods,
slash treatment, reforestation, fuel reduction, precommercial thinning, and management measures and
design features to protect resources and the site-specific location of these activities and practices
would occur.
2. Whether to construct temporary roads to access proposed timber harvest units.
3. Whether to implement road storage and decommission activities to improve watershed condition and,
if so, where.
4. Whether to construct new permanent roads to harvest units and recreation sites.
5. Whether to make improvements to recreation sites.
6. Whether to change motorized trails to non-motorized trails.
7. Whether to cost-share roads with DNRC and/or PCTC.
8. What, if any, specific project monitoring requirements are needed to assure management measures
and design features are implemented and effective, or to evaluate success of project objectives.
9. Whether to request Regional Forester approval for regeneration units over 40 acres.

Page 14 of 14

East Reservoir Project DEIS
Chapter 2
Alternatives

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ALTERNATIVES

INTRODUCTION
Section 102 (2)(E) of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires the Forest Service (FS) to
study, develop, and describe appropriate alternatives to recommended courses of action in any proposal
which involves unresolved conflicts concerning alternative uses of available resources. This chapter
introduces and describes the alternative development process, including how public comments helped
formulate the alternatives; the alternatives considered but eliminated from detailed study; and the
alternatives considered in detail. Two action alternatives are carried forward and analyzed in detail in
Chapter 3, along with the no-action alternative.
The no action alternative (Alternative 1) is used as a baseline condition to help understand potential impacts
that would be associated with implementation of the proposed action (Alternative 2) and the action
alternative to the proposed action (Alternative 3). This chapter provides a comparison of these alternatives
and how they address the purpose and need for action and potential issues, providing a clear comparison for
the decision maker and the public.
Design features were developed to anticipate and reduce the effects from the proposed action on the
environment and address and resolve the issues described in this chapter. Maps showing alternatives
considered in detail are located in the Map Section of this document. Tables 2.35 and 2.36 at the end of this
chapter display a comparison of how well the alternatives meet the objectives of the purpose and need and
significant issues.
The scoping process required by the NEPA (40 CFR 1501.7) to have an early and open process for
determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for identifying the significant issues related to a
proposed action was followed. The Kootenai National Forest (KNF) invited participation from federal and
state agencies, local Tribes, environmental groups and individuals interested in, or affected by, the proposed
action.
The Interdisciplinary Team (IDT) developed the proposed action in response to the project purpose and
need, KNFP objectives, goals and standards, and public and agency concerns as directed by NEPA. The
IDT consisted of FS personnel who have expertise in different natural resource fields in order to provide a
diverse, interdisciplinary approach to the project. The final proposed action was developed and refined
through a series of resource evaluations, field visits, IDT meetings, and public interactions, and was crafted
specifically to avoid adverse impacts to the environment.

ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
Proposed Action Development
Public involvement was initiated for this project on December 21, 2010, with the scoping letter, which was
mailed to approximately 80 entities. A display ad soliciting information and comments on the project was
published in The Western News and a legal ad published in the Kalispell Daily Inter Lake on December 24,
2010. A notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement (NOI) was also filed in the Federal
Register on November 15, 2010. The district received 14 written responses. All comments are located in the
project file at the district and have been considered in the NEPA process.
ISSUE IDENTIFICATION
The scoping comments were reviewed by the IDT and Decision Maker and categorized. Some comments
were determined to be outside the scope of this project or are addressed in the Forest Planning process.
Other comments are addressed through law, regulation and policy, management measures and design
features described in this chapter, or by displaying the effects of the no-action versus the action alternatives.
Concerns representing an unresolved conflict with the Proposed Action have been brought forward as

Page 1 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

"Significant Issues" and were used to help formulate alternatives to the Proposed Action. Documentation of
the issue identification process is contained in the project file.
One federal agency, eight individuals, one State and four organized groups submitted questions seeking
clarification, suggested specific analyses, or raised concerns during the scoping process about potential
environmental effects of the proposed action. Based on public input, the IDT recommended and the
Responsible Official approved the issue topics listed below for detailed study. Each topic is briefly
described in this section along with units of measure (indicators) used in the analysis process for each issue.
Significant Issues
Internal and external comments revealed issues representing unresolved conflict with the Proposed Action
(Alternative 2). The following issues were significant in developing alternatives to the Proposed Action.
• Regeneration Units over 40 acres: Regeneration units that are over 40 acres in size do not meet
Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) standards for MAs 11, 12 and 15. Forest Service policy (FSM
2471) states that the size of harvest openings created by even-aged silviculture in the Northern Region
will be normally 40 acres or less. Creation of larger openings will require 60-day public review and
Regional Forester approval.
The National Forest Management Act of 1976 [USC 1604 (g) (3) (F) (IV)], establishes opening size limits
according to geographic areas, forest types or other suitable classifications. Regulations establish the size
limit for our geographic area at 40 acres, with exceptions for larger openings when they will produce a
more desirable combination of net public benefits.
Resolution: Concerns of regenerations units exceeding 40 acres can be addressed by altering the shape of
the unit and or leaving leave islands within the interior of the unit. These strategies address distance to
cover, making the unit more available to wildlife species during daylight hours. Alternative 3 best
addresses this issue by either re-shaping units to meet 600 feet to cover or reducing units down to 40 acres
or less in size.
• Impact to Old Growth Forest Stands: There is a concern that there is not enough old growth in the East
Reservoir analysis area and that treatments are prescribed in old growth. Issue indicators include acres of
vertical structure removed (acres of direct harvest/burning) in designated old growth, acres of harvest in
undesignated effective OG, acres of harvest in undesignated replacement old growth, road length built
adjacent or through designated old growth (in feet), number of proposed units adjacent to old growth,
acres of edge effect in old growth, acres of interior habitat remaining in old growth and percent of
designated old growth (OG/ROG) in the Cripple Planning Subunit (PSU).
Resolution: Remove vegetation treatments in old growth. Alternative 3 best addresses this issue by
avoiding all treatments in old growth including fuels treatments and prescribed burns. Alternative 2
maintains fuel treatments (~173 ac) in some old growth such as in VRU 2.
• Closing of approximately 36.6 miles of motorized trails in project area would limit motorized user
access.
Resolution: Leaving some of the 36.6 miles of currently open motorized trails open to the public as
motorized. Alternative 3 best addresses this issue by proposing a 21.3 mile ATV loop, created by leaving
approximately 7.1 miles of motorized trail open in the Boundary Mountain area.
Other Issues
The issues discussed previously have been addressed through the development and analysis of alternatives
to the proposed action. Other issues were not considered key issues because they were resolved through
project design or management measures and, therefore, were not used to develop alternatives analyzed in
detail. Other issues include effects of the proposed action on biodiversity, cultural resources, threatened,
endangered and sensitive species, and soils. Analysis of these issues is found in the applicable resource
ALTERNATIVES
Page 2 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

sections in Chapter 3 and in the project file. Criteria used to determine lack of significance include:
• Issue is beyond the scope of the proposed action.
• Issue already decided by law, regulation, KNFP, or other higher-level decision.
• Issue is not supported by scientific evidence.
• Issue has limited distribution, duration, and intensity.
• Issue can be addressed in the proposed action and other alternatives through design criteria or
management measures.

RANGE OF ALTERNATIVES
Section 102(2)(e) of National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) states that all Federal agencies shall
"study, develop, and describe appropriate alternatives to recommended courses of action in any proposal
which involves unresolved conflict concerning alternative uses of available resources".
An Environmental Assessment of resources must also "rigorously explore and objectively evaluate all
reasonable alternatives" [40 CFR 1502.14(a)]. The courts have established that this direction does not mean
that every conceivable alternative must be considered, but that selection and discussion of alternatives must
permit a reasoned choice and foster informed decision making and informed public participation.
The range of alternatives may extend beyond the limits set by the KNFP goals and objectives under the
NEPA; however, the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) requires that the selected alternative fully
comply with the KNFP unless the plan is amended. The proposed action, Alternative 2, proposes timber
harvest activities resulting in regeneration harvest larger than 40 acres. This alternative would require a
KNFP amendment for removing hiding cover and movement corridors that result in openings greater than
40 acres in MA12 (see Chapter 3, Wildlife Section for more information on hiding cover and openings).
The KNFP standard for opening sizes in MA 12 is to maintain movement corridors of at least two site
distances (400 feet) between openings, and generally not to exceed openings over 40 acres (KNFP p. III-49,
Wildlife and Fish standards #7). Table 2.13 displays the units involved in opening greater then 40 acres.
Alternative 2 also proposes units that do not meet visual quality objectives (VQOs) prescribed in the KNFP
and will need Forest amendments. VQOS are used to estimate the effects of human caused changes to the
scenic resource. It is a comparison of the visual appearance of a proposed action to the landscape character
and existing condition of the surrounding area. KNFP amendments will be needed for management areas
(MAs) 12 (Unit 362), 15 (Units 36, 40, 62, 75, 80, 147, 148, 149, 150, 170, 188) and 16 (Units 73T, 80,
188). See Table 2.13. For more information, refer to pg. 20 for explanations of the amendments needed.
The range of alternatives presented in this chapter was determined by evaluating public and internal
comments and the Purpose and Need for the project. This project is intended to re-establish, restore and
retain landscapes that are more resistant and resilient to disturbance (insect and disease infestations, fire)
and uncertain environmental conditions (climate change) by enhancing species diversity and managing
density; Create a heterogeneous landscape that provides a variety of habitats to sustain populations of
terrestrial and aquatic species; provide forest amenities, jobs and products; reduce hazardous fuels adjacent
to private property and across the landscape while re-introducing fire to the ecosystem; and enhance
recreation settings and facilities with the goal of providing high quality experiences. Other factors include
KNFP goals, objectives, desired condition, standards and guidelines; federal laws, regulations, and policies,
and timber sale feasibility. The alternatives developed by the IDT and Decision Maker display a reasonable
range of outputs, treatments, costs, management requirements, management measures, and effects on
resources.
In addition to the alternatives considered in detail, the IDT and Decision Maker examined another
alternative during the analysis process. Although this alternative contributed to the reasonable range, it was
eliminated from further consideration for the reasons listed below.
ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT ELIMINATED FROM DETAILED STUDY
Alternative 5 addressed public comments concerning no road storage and no change in motorized trail
ALTERNATIVES
Page 3 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

access. Some of the public was concerned that road storage would limit access for public recreation and
forest management. Some public felt that changing motorized trails to non-motorized trails would decrease
access for public recreation. Alternative 5 was not analyzed in detail for several reasons. First, road storage
(intermittent stored service) is a category to manage existing roads that have adverse impacts on watershed
quality. The roads would be closed to traffic and left in a condition that there is little resource risk if
maintenance is not performed. Second, road storage would not measurably impede future forest
management. Roads that are not needed in the short-term (10 to 20 years), but would likely be needed at
some time in the future would be stored. Storage may include surface ripping, seeding and/or cross ditching
and may include some sections of partial road recontouring as needed on a site-specific basis, but the
majority of the road prism would be retained for future access needs. The majority of road prisms would be
left in place based on the Travel Analysis Process (TAP), most of these roads are not needed for short-term
(10 to20 yrs.) access for commercial timber management. The TAP can be found in the Project File.
Action Alternative 4 was also developed to address public concerns on regeneration treatment units over 40
acres, treatments in old growth, treatments in lynx habitat, and motorized trail access. However, subsequent
to the application of design measures for both Alternatives 2 and 3, Alternative 4 did not measurably add to
the range of alternatives and was dropped as all public and internal concerns were addressed fully in Action
Alternatives 2 and 3.

PROJECT COLLABORATION
Project designs and activities of Alternatives 2 and 3 reflect a number of meetings and field visits to the
analysis area with the Kootenai Forest Stakeholder Coalition (KFSC). The Stakeholders’ mission is to
include “…a diverse group…to define common ground by implementing projects on natural resource
issues.” Issues such as landscape connectivity (long- and short-term), lynx habitat, economics, job and
product opportunities, fuel management, access and overall ecosystem health were major topics of
discussion amongst the participants.
Much of the Stakeholders’ efforts, interest and concerns were incorporated into the development and
shaping of the alternatives. The KFSC ultimately “…were looking at this project as a model of how our
coalition might reach consensus on forest management”. The KFSC web page is available at:
http://www.kootenaistakeholders.org.

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED IN DETAIL
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires that an EIS include a "no-action" alternative to
serve as a baseline to compare action alternatives. The no-action alternative is based on the premise that
ecosystems change, even in the absence of active management. It is essentially a "status quo" strategy that
allows current activities and policies, such as recreation administration, road maintenance and fire
suppression to continue. It proposes no actions that are contained in the action alternatives. This alternative
provides a baseline for comparison of environmental consequences of the other alternatives to the existing
condition (36 CFR 1502.14) and is a management option that could be selected by the Responsible Official.
The no-action alternative and the effects analysis are based on the following assumptions:
• Species diversity, stocking density and successional stages consistent with reference conditions is better
adapted and therefore more resistant and resilient to disturbances. Without disturbance this landscape
would continue to trend away from reference conditions for species diversity. There would be no
prescribed fire, regeneration harvest and planting western white pine, western larch and ponderosa pine
in the no action alternative.
• Restoring tree stocking densities through commercial thinning, precommercial thinning, regeneration
harvest and planting would not occur. These stands would not trend towards reference density
conditions. The risk of tree mortality from insect and disease infestations, primarily mountain pine
beetle, would likely increase on the dry land sites and in lodgepole pine (LPP) stands. Wildfire potential
and intensity would also remain higher than reference conditions
ALTERNATIVES
Page 4 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

• Trending successional stages toward reference condition levels through improvement harvests and
regeneration harvests would not occur. Restoring successional diversity across the landscape that is
better adapted to disturbances would not occur.
• In concert with continued wildfire suppression, encroachment of Douglas-fir would continue in the dry
ponderosa pine habitat types creating an increased fire risk in the wildland-urban interface (WUI).
• Existing motorized trails would not be closed which would maintain security habitat at less than desired
secure habitat by seven percent within the analysis area for large mammals including moose, elk, deer,
sheep and wolves.
• Without weed treatment and burning activities, shrub and grass species in the natural openings would
continue to decline in value as browse for big game. Weed treatment would continue consistent with
Weed EIS and funding, but would not be increased and may not keep up with the expansion of noxious
weeds.
• With continued fire suppression, conifer encroachment on bighorn sheep escape habitat would result in
higher risk of mortality from predators because increased cover would be provided for stalking
predators.
• Lack of forest regeneration in concert with fire suppression would result in less early successional
forest which provides snowshoe hare foraging habitat, thus likely reducing prey numbers for the
threatened Canada lynx.
• Natural regeneration of seral species such as ponderosa pine and western larch would be minimal.
These species are better adapted to disturbance such as fire and were present in larger numbers
historically.
• Precommercial thinning would not occur, allowing overstocked sapling-size stands to become stagnant
and allowing shade-tolerant species to dominate.
• Improperly installed or undersized culverts would continue to impede aquatic organism passage and
have a higher likelihood for plugging and failing than properly-sized culverts.
• There would be no management for visuals along Scenic Byway 37.
• There would be no a jobs or labor income associated with timber harvest and other resource activities.
ALTERNATIVE 2 (Proposed Action)
Alternative Design: The proposed action was designed to meet the purpose and need and address issues and
concerns identified internally and from the public and with collaboration with the KFSC.
The following treatments are specific to the proposed action (Alternative 2) and include vegetative
treatments including: timber harvest, slash treatment, site preparation, prescribed burning, tree planting, and
precommercial thinning that move the landscape toward desired conditions. Other activities of this action
alternative are access management changes, construction of new roads, road storage and decommissioning
activities, temporary road construction, implementation of BMPs, wildlife habitat enhancement and
improvement of recreation settings, opportunities and experiences.
Vegetation Treatments Including Timber Harvest:
The timber harvest, prescribed fire and precommercial thinning proposed in this alternative are designed to
meet the purpose and need. A total of approximately 15, 988 acres of vegetation treatment are proposed
using a variety of methods (timber harvest, precommercial thinning, commercial thinning, prescribed fire).
Timber harvest would meet one or more of the following objectives for vegetation management. See Table
2.0 for a detailed description of proposal.
• Enhance species diversity trending toward reference conditions (Vegetation Section, Chapter 3) which
are better adapted and more resistant and resilient to disturbances. This would occur through
regeneration harvest and planting western white pine, western larch and ponderosa pine.
• Move timber stand towards tree stocking densities through commercial thinning, regeneration harvest
and planting trending the stands towards reference density conditions. The risk of tree mortality from
ALTERNATIVES
Page 5 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

insect and disease infestations, primarily mountain pine beetle, would decrease with density reduction
especially on the dry land sites and in LPP stands.
• Restoration toward reference condition levels of successional stages through improvement harvests and
regeneration harvests. This alternative would restore successional stage diversity across the landscape
that is better adapted to disturbances and will provide foraging areas for various wildlife species
including Canada lynx, grizzly bears, large ungulates, and various small mammals.
• Encroachment of Douglas-fir would be reduced on the dry ponderosa pine habitat types, in turn
reducing the fire risk in the wildland-urban interface (WUI).
Various harvest methods are prescribed depending on individual stand conditions. These include group
select/improvement cuts that reduce stand density, sanitation salvage, shelterwood with reserves, seedtree
with reserves and clearcut with reserves harvests.
The harvest acres would be approximately 8,845. Approximately 88% of the proposed harvest units would
be implemented utilizing ground-based systems (tractor yarding) and 12% with a skyline system due to steep
slopes.
Table 2.0 displays the proposed units along with acres, silvicultural treatment and management area (MA)
(Map 2). The shaded units are units that would require winter logging to avoid excess detrimental soil
disturbance, excessive weed spread or protection of a cultural site.
Table 2.0 – Alternative 2 Proposed Harvest Units
UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

LOGGING SYSTEM

1
1A
2
2B
2C
2D
3
3A
3B
3C
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
14A
15
16
17
18
18A
19
20
21

50
11
13
48
9
67
27
26
37
13
46
5
11
19
13
151
160
102
119
22
40
26
22
29
68
40
20
32
41
76

IMP/S/GP
SW/S/GP
ST/S/UB/PLT
IMP/S/GP
IMP/S/GP
IMP/S/GP
ST/S/UB/PLT
IMP/S/GP
IMP/S/GP
ST/S/GP/PLT
IMP/S/GP/PLT
IMP/S
ST/S/GP/PLT
ST/S/GP/PLT
ST/S/GP/PLT
IMP-SW/S/UB/PLT
IMP-SW/S/UB/PLT
IMP-SW/S/UB/PLT
IMP-SW/S/GP/PLT
ST/S/GP/PLT
ST/S/GP/PLT
SW/S/GP
IMP/S/GP/PLT
Irregular SW/S/GP/PLT
IMP/GP
Irregular SW/GP/PLT
IMP/S/GP
IMP-SW/S/GP/PLT
IMP-SW/S/GP/PLT
IMP-SW/S/GP/PLT

11, 16
11, 16
11, 16
11
11, 12, 24
11
11, 16
11
11
11
11
16, 17
16, 17
16, 17
16
10, 11
10, 11
11
15, 17
15
15
15
17
17
17
15, 16, 17
16, 24
11
11
11

Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

ALTERNATIVES
Page 6 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
36
39
40
41
42
43
44
45A
45B
46
47
49
51
52A
53
54
55
56
59
61
62
62A
62B
64
64A
64B
68
69
70
70T
71
72
73T
75
80
81
82
135
141
142
143A

83
146
40
139
29
45
31
54
62
698
75
85
144
41
40
156
40
31
26
28
105
39
37
40
64
7
24
40
9
40
207
39
19
77
11
20
8
28
10
25
16
14
9
18
12
31
36
110
36
25
16
24
9
18

TREATMENT

MA

IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
15, 17
IMP/S/GP
15
IMP/S/UB
15
IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
5, 17
IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
11, 16
IMP/S/GP
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
11, 12, 18, 24
IMP/S/GP
12
San-Salvage/GP
15, 17
San-Salvage/GP
17
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
CCR/S/GP/PLT
15
IMP/S/GP
11, 12
IMP/S/GP
11, 12
SW/S/GP/PLT
11
IMP-SW/S/GP/PLT
11, 12
ST/S/UB/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
IMP/S/GP
11, 12, 19
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
11, 12
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
11
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
CCR/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
San-Salvage/GP
15
San-Salvage/GP
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
CCR/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
SW/S/UB/PLT
15
ST-SW/S/GP/PLT
15, 16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST-SW/S/GP/PLT
16
IMP/S/UB
16
SW/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
SW/S/GP/PLT
16
ALTERNATIVES
Page 7 of 38

LOGGING SYSTEM

Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Skyline
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Skyline
Tractor

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

144S
144T
147
148
149
150
151
157
158
159A
170
173
174
176
179
182
183
185
185N
188
190
190A
192
193
194S
194T
195
196
197
203
205
207
208
209
214
219
219A
305
306
307
311
317
318
319
327
328
330
331
332
333
334
335
337
339

22
18
93
77
65
103
40
54
143
18
97
18
29
15
76
50
68
27
22
40
43
44
40
17
36
31
28
14
24
59
34
40
40
24
6
38
26
43
57
305
9
63
131
17
46
31
9
16
10
14
22
20
272
89

TREATMENT

MA

ST/S/UB/PLT
15, 16
ST/S/UB/PLT
15, 16, 19
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
11, 15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP-SW/S/GP
10, 11
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
SW/S/UB/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
5, 19
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/GP
11
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/GP
6, 16, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15, 16
IMP/S/GP
15, 17
San-Salvage/S/GP
15, 17
IMP/S/UB
17
SW/GP/PLT
11
IMP/S/UB
11, 18
IMP/S/GP
10, 11, 18
San-Salvage/S/GP
16
IMP/S/GP
11
IMP/S/GP
11, 18
IMP/S/GP
12
IMP/S/GP
12, 19
SW/S/GP/PLT
15, 16, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
15, 16, 17
IMP/S/GP
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
11, 15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
11, 12, 15
CT/YT
15
ALTERNATIVES
Page 8 of 38

LOGGING SYSTEM

Skyline
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Skyline
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Skyline
Skyline
Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

340
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
362
363
364
365
366
367
367A
368A
368B
368C
369

266
100
73
45
11
520
14
21
26
192
40
33
25
6
38
40
10
6
7
40

TREATMENT

MA

CT/YT
15, 16
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
11, 12
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
15
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
CCR/S/UB/PLT
12
CCR/S/UB/PLT
12
CCR/S/UB/PLT
12
CCR/S/UB/PLT
12
CCR/S/UB/PLT
12
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
CCR/S/GP/PLT
12
TOTAL = 8,845acres

LOGGING SYSTEM

Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

Key: GS/IMP = Group Select/Improvement IMP = Improvement Cut ST = Seed Tree w/Reserves
CC = Clearcut CCR = Clearcut w/Reserves SW = Shelterwood w/Reserves PLT = Plant
S = Slashing
UB = Underburning GP = Grapple Pile San-Salvage = Sanitation-Salvage

Regeneration Harvest Treatment is intended to replace a forest stand when modification treatments (i.e.:
intermediate harvest) are not feasible due to poor quality trees for retention; stand is under stocked due past
insect and disease mortality; or incorrect overstory species that would not meet management objectives. In
this analysis area, regeneration is proposed in some stands to promote regeneration of seral, fire-tolerant
species. Specifically, regeneration harvest is needed to restore western larch, ponderosa pine and western
white pine. Within proposed harvest units, there would be both live and dead trees that are designated for
reserve. The number of trees left and the associated stand structure is described by the varying regeneration
harvest methods proposed. A description of these methods follows.
Seed Tree with Reserves initiates the establishment of a new stand with reserved overstory trees. An
average of 8-10 trees per acre are being left for their seed-producing qualities, and structural attributes
that are a part of the desired target stand or landscape. In this project, approximately 15% of the existing
canopy cover would be designated to leave in a mix of large diameter ponderosa pine, western larch and
Douglas-fir. These reserve trees would be left singly and/or in small groups. Interplanting (or a very
wide spacing of 20 feet by 20 feet) of western white pine or ponderosa pine may be planted on some of
the areas to ensure species diversity.
Shelterwood Seed Cut with Reserves has a similar purpose as a seed tree cut except that an average of
15-25 overstory trees per acre would be left to shelter the developing stand from the elements, and
provide large tree structural attributes. Two units are proposed for this treatment. Interplanting of
ponderosa pine will be planted on some of the areas to ensure reforestation of ponderosa pine.
Irregular Shelterwood/Seed Cut with Reserves is similar to a shelterwood except that the leave trees
are left in an irregular pattern to manage for visual concerns.
Clearcut with Reserves also initiates establishment of a new stand. An average of 4 to 8 trees per acre
would remain on site post treatment and their function would be as snags, cavity habitat, or replacement
snags. Clearcuts are typically planted by hand, or may be reseeded by adjacent mature stands if
desirable trees are present.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 9 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Intermediate Stand Treatments are being proposed to modify existing forest conditions in order to
enhance growth, quality, vigor and composition of a forest stand and, in some cases, to reduce natural fuels.
This treatment generally occurs prior to stand maturity and is not intended to promote regeneration of the
stand. The following descriptions are examples of intermediate treatments proposed with this project. These
treatments are designed to leave a stand that is sufficiently stocked to follow a desired development pattern
until other treatments are considered appropriate.
Improvement Harvest is intended to produce a more resilient stand condition to MPB and represent a
fire tolerant tree species and reduced ladder fuels. This type of harvest is being prescribed to improve the
resiliency; composition and quality of specific forested areas by reducing the density of the trees to an
average basal area of 60-80 square feet per acre and promoting a more open stand structure, similar to
reference conditions for these stands (see the Forest Vegetation section in Chapter 3 for more
information). Improvement harvest treatments are prescribed in stands with ponderosa pine that is
overstocked and at high risk for infestation and losses from Mountain Pine Beetle (MPB). To accomplish
these objectives, this treatment would focus on thinning the stands and removing excess and/or poor
quality trees, mid-tolerant or intolerant tree explain species such as Douglas-fir and grand fir, and smaller
diameter trees that are less tolerant of fire. In ponderosa pine stands, leaving the best quality tree and
thinning at a specific spacing to create a desired distance between the boles of the trees make the stand
less attractive to beetles. For example a stand with an average diameter of 16 inches would be thinned to a
spacing of 30 feet by 30 feet. Improvement harvest prescription retains approximately 50-70% of the
existing canopy cover and maintain trees functional snow interception in winter range, creating small
canopy gaps for browse, and retaining forest conditions that support continuing options for future
management. Open areas requiring regeneration of trees is not a specific objective of this harvest. Up to
15% of these harvest units may be in a seed tree or shelterwood condition after implementation due to
current stand conditions.
Sanitation /Salvage are being prescribed to improve the long-term stand quality where this treatment is
prescribed. A sanitation/ salvage harvest involves the elimination of trees that have been attacked or
appear in imminent danger of attack by insect, dwarf mistletoe and/or fungi in order to prevent these pests
from spreading to other trees. Following sanitation/salvage prescription treatments a manageable stand
will remain in place. Five units have this treatment prescribed. This treatment specifically involves
removal of overstory western larch that is heavily infested with dwarf mistletoe. Dwarf mistletoe in the
overstory trees send out many seeds landing on and infecting the western larch sapling trees. This
treatment reduces the infection rate of the western larch understory.
Commercial Thinning treatments are prescribed to reduce stand density (of trees) primarily to favor
desired species and improve growth and improve forest health. Commercial thinning is prescribed in many
stands with ponderosa pine that are at high risk for losses from Mountain Pine Beetle (MPB) as they are
currently overstocked and at high risk for mortality. To accomplish these objectives, this treatment would
focus on thinning the stands and removing excess and/or poor-quality trees, mid-tolerant or intolerant tree
species such as Douglas-fir and grand fir, and smaller diameter trees that are less tolerant of fire. The
intention of leaving the best quality tree and the needed spacing of those trees is to produce a more resilient
stand condition that are less susceptible to MPB and represent a fire-tolerant tree species and reduced ladder
fuels. These units would be whole tree yarded. The units that are shaded, in Table 2.2, would require winter
logging so as not to exceed the 15% maximum detrimental soil disturbance.
Slash Treatment, Site Preparation and Hazardous Fuel Reduction: The following slash treatments and
fuel reduction activities are prescribed in this project:
Slashing: Slashing involving cutting down unmerchantable trees that are not desirable due to
overstocking, poor quality, undesirable species or size class. Slashing is a useful tool to eliminate ladder
ALTERNATIVES
Page 10 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

fuels, reduce canopy fuels, and to favor desirable tree species. The intent of slashing is to reduce the
potential for crown fire initiation and to help ensure the survivability of desirable overstory trees that
would have otherwise be killed by prescribed fire or a wildfire. Slashing also occurs to create a fuel bed
for broadcast burning.
Excavator (Grapple) Piling: Grapple piling facilitates fuel reduction while protecting remaining trees,
where woody debris would be gathered and piled mechanically using an excavator. Spot excavator
piling is prescribed in many treatment units, because only those portions of these units with heavier
concentrations of fuel would be piled, rather than the entire unit. Large down woody debris would be
retained on the site, to levels specified for each unit in the design features section of this chapter, to
provide wildlife habitat and for soil nutrient recruitment. Piles are expected to be ignited in the late fall
during periods of optimum smoke dispersal. The piles would be placed at least 25 feet away from the
unit boundaries, leave trees, or leave islands to protect them from possible ignition. In narrow work
areas, piles would be located as far from leave trees/islands as possible.
Prescribed Burning: Burning of natural and activity fuel includes broadcast burning, underburning
and burning of excavator-piled material. Wildlife forage improvement and ecosystem maintenance
burning is also prescribed. Specific prescribed fire treatments would be dependent on the amount of
down woody material remaining after harvest and/or slashing is complete. Burning would only be
completed when conditions described in the site-specific prescription and burn plan are met. Most
prescribed burning occurs in the spring or fall under good smoke dispersion and when the risk of an
escape is low.
Precommercial Thinning: The proposed action includes approximately 5,563 acres of precommercial
thinning (PCT) in overstocked, sapling-size trees that have been initiated in the past 15 to 25 years. This
treatment is intended to reduce tree density and improve the growing conditions of the remaining trees by
reducing competition for light and nutrients. These treatments respond to the need to maintain the vigor and
long-term productivity of forest stands. Thinning would also address ecosystem restoration objectives of
restoring shade-intolerant species, restoring stand density to conditions consistent with historic disturbance
regimes, favoring species that are most resistant to insect and disease infestation for specific site conditions,
and generally improve stand health. Please refer to the precommercial thinning map (Map 15) in the map
section of this document for locations of units.
Table 2.1 –Precommercial Thinning - Alternative 2
UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

30
15
31
2
3
20
29
21
19
21
29
11
24
15
14
15
22

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

55
11
18
16
11
5
32
73
27
63
74
7
3
3
12
9
8

98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115

48
30
24
46
4
19
31
11
9
15
18
12
30
24
4
45
14

146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162

1
43
27
5
8
39
24
30
14
18
7
62
13
81
1
15
6

193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209

31
23
44
38
49
19
21
9
51
63
47
26
41
32
22
11
109

ALTERNATIVES
Page 11 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

UNIT #

ACRES

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

11
19
6
7
7
2
2
38
51
25
11
26
42
25
48
6
12
7
6
11
12
14
28
6
57
13
7
20
42
44

67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

37
7
13
43
2
28
85
15
3
63
53
34
24
26
11
31
35
40
49
35
39
11
3
16
19
6
10
3
8
2

116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145

9
16
39
27
22
16
32
4
47
9
4
12
7
25
19
16
23
27
14
12
14
6
6
15
4
20
23
28
5
4

163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192

4
6
7
5
5
29
12
32
24
24
27
16
16
5
13
29
13
19
12
27
23
38
38
24
46
47
37
24
39
19

UNIT #

ACRES

210
37
211
20
212
28
213
20
214
40
215
15
216
32
217
29
218
48
219
40
220
50
221
17
222
46
223
25
224
12
225
57
226
18
227
7
228
53
229
19
230
43
231
17
232
11
233
14
234
69
235
35
236
54
274
21
275
3
TOTAL = 5,563 ac

White pine precommercial thinning and pruning (~ 212 acres) would be done on plantations that are in lynx
habitat but have planted rust-resistant western white pine trees. White pine precommercial thinning or
daylighting of white pine clears competing vegetation adjacent to planted rust-resistant western white pine
trees at a fixed radius. Daylighting removes competing trees greater than 2 feet in height around desired
trees within a 10-12 foot radius circle. Pruning removes the lower branches of western white pine trees.
Branches infected by blister rust or near enough to the ground to be highly susceptible to infection are
removed to prevent spread of the disease to the tree stem. Pruning is done to reduce the potential for
mortality caused by blister rust. White pine precommercial thinning is intended to improve the chances of
the white pine trees reaching maturity. By daylight thinning and pruning, the white pine would compete
better with surrounding vegetation of the stand and maintain lynx habitat. Only 20% of each stand would be
thinned in order to be in compliance with the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD).
Alternative 2 White Pine Daylight Thinning
UNIT NO

237
238
239
240
241
242
243

LYNX HABITAT

Stand Initiation
Early Stand Initiation
Stem Exclusion
Early Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Early Stand Initiation

ACRES

UNIT NO

21
8
5
15
22
44
2

256
257
258
259
260
261
262

ALTERNATIVES
Page 12 of 38

LYNX HABITAT

Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation

ACRES

11
28
17
24
20
39
14

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

244
UNIT NO

245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255

Stand Initiation
LYNX HABITAT

Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation
Early Stand Initiation
Stand Initiation

18

263

ACRES

UNIT NO

14
23
17
41
211
56
41
8
20
31
34

Stand Initiation

27

LYNX HABITAT

ACRES

264
Stand Initiation
33
265
Stand Initiation
29
266
Stand Initiation
29
267
Early Stand Initiation
16
268
60
Stand Initiation
269
Stand Initiation
24
270
Stand Initiation
16
271
Stand Initiation
36
272
Stand Initiation
3
273
Stand Initiation
3
TOTAL = 1,060 ACRES (20% = 212 ac)

Reforestation: Where regeneration harvest is proposed, planting would supplement the natural reforestion
anticipated and restore tree species that are presently not sustainable due to inadequate seed source in the
residual or adjacent stands. Planted conifer seedlings would assure timely reforestation and contribute
towards long-term desired habitat conditions. Tree species to be planted include ponderosa pine, western
larch and western white pine. These species have all declined in total area and stand dominance due to
advancing succession and lack of natural fire. Approximately 3,348 acres will be planted to ensure
reforestation of the desired species.
Fuel Treatments: The primary objective of these units is to reduce hazardous fuels by utilizing a
combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatments. Almost all of these units are immediately
adjacent to private property. Prescribed burning could include underburning, jackpot burning, or pile
burning. Mechanical treatments may include a combination of hand slashing, grapple piling, chipping or
mastication.
Table 2.4 - Alternative 2 Proposed Fuel Treatment Units
UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT1

F1
F1A
F1OG
F2
F3
F3OG
F4
F8
F11OG

174
17
38
116
17
20
17
52
54

MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn

MFT = Mechanical Fuel Treatments

MA

UNIT

10, 11, 12, 24
F12
11, 30
F13
12
F13OG
11, 16
F14OG
11, 17
F15
13
F15OG
10
F16
10, 17
F18
13
F45
TOTAL = 1,378 acres

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

11
24
5
43
9
13
73
568
125

MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
Burn
Slash/Burn

11
15
13
13
17
13
11, 12
2
11, 12

Slash = hand slashing without the potential for mechanical product removal.

Fuel and Wildlife Units: There are 33 burn units within the analysis area that have been identified as Fuels
and Wildlife units. Approximately 10, 049 acres of burning and/or slashing may occur over the next ten
years. The purpose of these treatments is to enhance wildlife habitat (e.g. bighorn sheep escape habitat and
foraging) and ungulate browse in the analysis area and to reduce hazardous fuels. All the units are proposed
to be burned and/or slashed. Due to budget constraints and limited burn windows the district estimates that
slashing would occur on 100-500 acres per year and burning would occur on 500-2,000 acres per year.
Overall acres could be reduced (by approx. 608 ac) if burning conditions are not favorable within the lynx
analysis unit and burning would result in habitat reduction. Treatment units for which this reduction would
occur are available in the project file. Table 2.5 displays the Fuels and Wildlife units with acres and
treatment.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 13 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Table 2.5 – Alternative 2 Fuels and Wildlife Units
UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT1

FW501
FW502
FW503
FW509
FW511
FW512
FW516
FW521
FW522
FW524
FW525
FW533
FW535
FW536
FW539
FW540
FW543

281
159
215
32
34
51
39
41
642
484
84
214
142
307
121
538
215

Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB\
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
Slash, Spring/Fall UB

UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

FW544
576
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW545
429
Spring/Fall UB
FW577
147
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW589
335
Spring/Fall UB
FW5109
170
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW5111
46
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW5122
112
Spring/Fall UB
FW5125
14
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW50601
294
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW50602
913
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW51101
575
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW51102
272
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW51103
743
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW53401
596
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW53402
581
Slash, Spring/Fall UB
FW53403
646
Spring/Fall UB
TOTAL = 10,049 acres

UB = Underburn

Road System Management:
New Permanent Road Construction: Approximately 9 miles of new permanent road construction is
proposed in this project. These new roads would access harvest and fuels units (Table 2.6). About 0.20
miles of the new road would be built on FS lands to allow the DNRC access to their lands. Table 2.6
displays the road numbers and corresponding mileages for the proposed new road construction plus the
units that are accessed.
Table 2.6 – Alternative 2 Newly Constructed Permanent Roads
ROAD NUMBER

MILES

N1
N3
N4
N5
N6
N7 (6288)
N8
N9
N11
N12
N13
N14
N15
N16
N18
N19
N21
N23
N39
N40
N41

0.30
0.80
0.33
0.46
0.87
0.80
1.31
0.32
0.17
0.25
0.36
0.45
0.32
0.24
0.03
0.19
0.59
0.30
0.20
0.76
0.20

DRAINAGE

UNIT ACCESS

Fivemile
4, 132, Dispersed Camp Site
Canyon
29
Warland
15
Canyon
203
Davis Mtn
62, 62A, 317, 318
Warland
13, 14, 14A, 159, F10
Canyon
32, 205
Dunn
45A, 45B
Canyon
192
Dunn
45A
Dunn
45B, F45
Warland
9, 158
Warland
170
Warland
10, 157
Warland Reservoir
17
Cripple Horse
36
Davis
59, 317
Warland
170
Canyon
Cost-Share to Sec 36
Upper Fivemile
150
Summit Springs
TOTAL = 9.25 miles
ALTERNATIVES
Page 14 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Temporary Road Construction: Approximately 4 miles of temporary road construction is proposed to
access harvest units. These roads would be restored after timber harvest is completed. Table 2.7 displays the
list of temporary roads, their length, the drainage they would be in and which units they access.
Table 2.7 – Alternative 2 Temporary Roads
ROAD #

MILES

DRAINAGE

UNIT ACCESS

ROAD #

T5
T6
T14
T25
T28
T37
T42
T43

0.16
0.38
0.14
0.59
0.58
0.12
0.20
0.31

Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Davis Mtn
Canyon Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse
Dunn Creek
Dunn Creek

17
22
318
31, 197
38, 345
340
362
362

T44
T45
T53
T54
T55
T57
T58

MILES

DRAINAGE

UNIT ACCESS

0.15 Upper Fivemile
0.25
Warland Creek
0.37 Upper Fivemile
0.23
Canyon Creek
0.31
Canyon Creek
0.26
Canyon Creek
0.21
Cripple Horse
TOTAL = 4.26 miles

150
49
148
344
343
23
179

Road Reconstruction and BMP Implementation: This alternative would complete road repair and BMP
implementation on approximately176 miles of haul route. Implementation of BMP work would include
installing additional ditch relief culverts, replacing undersized or misaligned culverts where needed,
installing surface water deflectors and drain dips to control surface water run-off, cleaning ditch lines and
constructing ditches where needed, and grading road surfaces for drainage. This work would be done on all
road systems that are needed for timber haul for the selected alternative. Additional BMP work on roads
within the analysis area, not needed for the timber sale, has been identified and would be implemented as
other funding becomes available.
Access Changes: Several roads that access dispersed camping areas along the Koocanusa Reservoir would
be open yearlong which is a change from seasonal closures. Table 2.8 displays the roads that are proposed
to change access.
Table 2.8 – Alternative 2 East Reservoir Road Access Changes
ROAD #

ROAD NAME

4890

Canyon Creek Access

5296

Canyon Bay Dispersed East

5298

Canyon Bay Dispersed West

14519

Yarnell Access

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT STATUS

10 – Restricted seasonally to motor
vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
10 - Restricted seasonally to motor
vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
10 - Restricted seasonally to motor
vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
10 - Restricted seasonally to motor
vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
TOTAL = 1.79 miles

MILES

Open Yearlong

0.84

Open Yearlong

0.17

Open Yearlong

0.19

Open Yearlong

0.59

Access changes would occur on approximately 37 miles of trails for the purpose of wildlife security. Table
2.8A displays the trails that are proposed to change access from motorized to non- motorized.
Table 2.8A – Alternative 2 East Reservoir Trail Access Changes
TRAIL ID

279
280
281
420
426
500

LOCATION

Warland Ridge
Warland Peak Lookout
Cripple Horse
Canyon Divide
Fivemile
Hornet Ridge

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT STATUS

MILES

Motorized allowed

Non-Motorized Only

Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed

Non-Motorized Only
Non-Motorized Only
Non-Motorized Only
Non-Motorized Only
Non-Motorized Only

10.70
2.30
6.22
9.83
1.82
5.69

ALTERNATIVES
Page 15 of 38

CHAPTER 2
TRAIL ID

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
LOCATION

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT STATUS

MILES

TOTAL = 36.56 miles

Road Storage (Intermittent Stored Service)/Decommissioning: A Travel Analysis Process (TAP) was
done for the analysis area. All roads within the analysis area were considered by district resources in terms
of benefit, problems and risk. This report is in the Project File. Based on the TAP, it was determined that
approximately 16 miles of road would be placed into intermittent stored service in order to maintain a safe
and efficient transportation system, improve watershed conditions and enhance wildlife security. Storing
roads that are not needed in the short- or long-term (10 to 20 years) allows the agency to focus limited road
maintenance funds on those roads that are more important for land management and public access.
Roads that are not needed in the short-term (ten to 20 years), but would likely be needed at some time in the
future would be stored. Storage may include surface ripping, seeding and/or cross ditching and may include
some sections of partial road recontouring as needed on a site-specific basis, but the majority of the road
prism would be retained. Road storage may also include culvert removal. The stored roads would not be
drivable but trail prisms would be left (including recontoured areas) to allow non-motorized access. These
trail prisms would not generally be added to the system nor be maintained as such and most would not be
accessible after 10-15 years due to shrub reestablishment. Many of these roads are historic roads that are
currently not accessible due to vegetation and blowdown. All the roads proposed for storage are currently
restricted yearlong to motorized vehicles. This proposal would not change access. If the road is currently
open to snow vehicles it would remain open to snow vehicles. Map 12 shows the location of the road
changes.
The roads would be closed to traffic and left in a condition that there is little resource risk if maintenance is
not performed. All but 0.38 miles of these roads are already restricted to public motorized access and those
roads that are open to snow vehicles would remain open to snow vehicles.
Decommissioned roads are roads that not needed as part of the transportation system in the future or that
have a high risk of impacting resources. Decommissioning of roads that are not needed in the long-term
allows the agency to focus limited road maintenance funds on those roads that are more important for land
management and public access. Approximately 6 miles of road is proposed to be decommissioned.
Table 2.9 displays the roads proposed for storage or decommissioning. The Alternative 2 proposed road
change map shows the road locations (Map 12).
Table 2.9 – Alternative 2 East Reservoir Intermittent Stored Service and Decommissioning
ROAD #

ROAD NAME

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT
STATUS

LENGTH
(miles)

FIVEMILE CREEK

4885C

Stenerson Mtn C

4885H

Stenerson Mtn H

4885I

Stenerson Mtn I

4885J

Stenerson Mtn J

4893A

Middle Fork Fivemile

4895

Lower Fivemile

5047

North Upper Fivemile

12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
05 – Restricted yearlong to all
motorized vehicles
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
ALTERNATIVES
Page 16 of 38

Stored, undrivable

0.35

Stored, undrivable

0.49

Stored, undrivable

0.81

Stored, undrivable

0.12

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

1.95
2.29
0.88

CHAPTER 2
ROAD #

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ROAD NAME

EXISTING STATUS

5050

Upper Fivemile Face

09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

5049

Upper Fivemile View

Open yearlong

5050A

Upper Fivemile Face A

Open Yearlong

5050B

Upper Fivemile Face B

Open Yearlong

8843

South Fivemile

Private Access

POST-PROJECT
STATUS

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable

LENGTH
(miles)

0.45
0.20
0.15
0.16
0.01

WARLAND CREEK

566

Warland Creek Fivemile

4891D

Warland Basin D

5055

Upper Warland South

05 – Restricted Yearlong to all
motorized vehicles
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

Stored, undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Decommissioned –
not driveable

2.03
1.85
1.98

CRIPPLE HORSE CREEK

4904G

Boundary Mtn G

5060

Summit Springs Unit

5061

West Weigel Mtn III

5167

Cripple Horse Lake Creek

XX50

Summit Springs

4423B

Weigel Mtn B

4823C

Weigel Mtn C

4904K

Boundary Mtn K

4951

West Weigel Mtn

5062

West Weigel Mtn IV

5269

West Weigel Mtn II

09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Open
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Open
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, Undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable

1.95
0.27
0.28
0.38
0.30
0.13
1.22
0.11
0.63
0.16
0.13

CANYON CREEK

4917

North Canyon

09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

1.02

DUNN CREEK

XX29

Hornet Ridge

4923C

East Wyoma C

4923D

East Wyoma D

TOTAL STORED = 16.00 miles

05 – Restricted Yearlong to all
Stored, undrivable
0.58
motorized vehicles
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
Decommissioned –
0.75
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
not driveable
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
Decommissioned –
0.30
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
not driveable
TOTAL DECOMMISSIONED = 5.93 miles

Undetermined Roads: Table 2.10 displays a list of existing, undetermined roads which occur in the East
Reservoir analysis area. These roads would be added to the National Forest System of roads. A road
maintenance objective would be completed to establish the objective and operational maintenance levels of
each road.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 17 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Table 2.10 – Alternative 2 Undetermined Roads to National Forest Service Roads
ROAD NUMBER

MILES

4807B
5047
5060
5167
5216
5216A
5216B
5216C
5216D
5216E
5217
5262
5972 = XX1
5975 = XX15
5976 = XX17
5978 = XX22
5984 = XX14
5993 = XX2A
5994 = XX2
14534A
XX20
XX29
XX37
XX38
XX39
XX50
XX52

0.67
0.88
0.27
0.38
0.69
0.34
0.21
0.24
0.06
0.18
1.43
0.13
0.51
0.69
0.83
1.99
0.35
0.17
0.13
0.04
0.77
0.58
0.25
0.20
0.35
0.30
0.86

DRAINAGE

REASON to ADD to NFS ROADS

Yarnell Cripple Horse
Access to Unit 190A
Fivemile Creek
Access to Units 147, 150
Cripple Horse Creek
Future Access
Davis Mountain
Access to Units 59, 317
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Creek
Access to Lake Koocanusa
Fivemile Unit
Future Access
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Cripple Horse
Access to Marina
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Canyon Creek
Powerline road, to be gated
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Warland Camping Area Access to dispersed camping sites
Upper Fivemile
Access to units 147, 148, 311
Hornet Ridge
Future Access
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Along Lake Koocanusa Access to dispersed camping sites
Summit Springs
Access to Unit 335
Warland Creek
Access for Fisheries
TOTAL = 13.50 miles

Table 2.10A displays a list of existing, undetermined roads which occur in the East Reservoir analysis area.
These roads are not on the current transportation plan and are not needed. They are proposed to be
decommissioned when funds become available. No maintenance would occur on these roads.
Table 2.10A – Alternative 2 Undetermined Roads to Decommissioned Roads
ROAD ID

MILES

XX5
XX6
XX7
XX20
XX21
5047
5047

0.19
0.10
0.28
0.62
0.88
0.93
0.29

DRAINAGE

ROAD NUMBER

Warland Creek
5058
Warland Creek
5071
Warland Creek
5072
Upper Fivemile
5073
Cripple Horse Weigel
5110
N Upper Fivemile
5217A
N Upper Fivemile
5268
TOTAL = 6.24 miles

MILES

DRAINAGE

0.22
0.25
0.30
0.79
0.90
0.20
0.29

Cripple Horse Creek
Dunn Creek
Dunn Creek
Dunn Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek
Cripple Horse Creek

Proposed Cost Share Roads with DNRC: The Forest Service and the Montana State Department of
Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) have proposed to cost-share in several roads in the analysis
area. Table 2.11 displays the roads proposed for cost share and their mileages along with their locations.
Table 2.11 – Alternative 2 Cost Share Roads
ROAD ID

MILES

LOCATION

ALTERNATIVES
Page 18 of 38

ACTIVITY

NEW CONSTRUCTION

CHAPTER 2
7738
4907
6724
7713
7713A
566
7738
7738A
7713
6724
4904
4912
4925
4907
4908
4908A
4913
334
4953
4953A
N39
4925

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
1.23
0.34
0.32
0.22
1.05
0.17
0.15
0.19
0.06
1.44
1.18
3.61
1.41
0.31
2.64
1.25
3.30
7.30
0.56
0.89
0.20
1.90

South Warland Creek - Sec 36
Cripple Canyon – Sec 19
Gopher Hill - Sec 14
Gopher Hill
Sec 14
Warland Creek
Sec 25 and 35

FS/CS on State Land
FS/CS on State Land
FS/CS on State Land
FS/CS on State Land

No
No
No
No

DNRC/CS on FS Land

No

Gopher Hill - Sec 23
Gopher Hill - Sec 14
Cripple Canyon
Sec 25, 26, 27, 59, 30, 19

DNRC/CS on FS Land
DNRC/CS on FS Land
DNRC/CS on FS Land

No
No
No

Hornet Ridge - Section 31???
South Canyon Creek

DNRC/CS on FS, PCTC
DNRC/CS on FS Land

No
Yes; N39

Canyon Creek – Sec 14, 24

FS/CS on State Land

No

Recreation Proposal: The recreation proposal involves the dispersed recreation sites on the south side of
the mouth of Fivemile Creek and at the Yarnell camping area.
Currently the Fivemile area receives relatively little dispersed camping use due primarily to poor access.
Existing roads would be improved. New road construction (N1) to improve access would occur to provide
more opportunities for dispersed campsites. Native rock ring fire pits, vault toilets and signage and other
improvements would be provided.
The Yarnell area has been a very popular destination for dispersed camping. The site(s) are occupied
primarily from Memorial Day through Labor Day and receives steady use. The road infrastructure is in
place and the objective would be to improve the road without changing the character of the area.
U.S. ARMY- Corps of Engineers: In addition to the aforementioned activities, vegetation treatments
within the analysis area, on lands owned by the US ARMY- Corps of Engineers at and near Libby Dam will
be analyzed as part of the proposed action. The vegetation treatments include improvement harvest on
approximately 261 acres and fuel treatments on approximately 160 acres (units with fuel treatments include
a “F” in the unit name). The fuel treatments include thinning, slashing and/or burning or grapple piling
(Map 14). The shaded units in Table 2.12 would require winter logging to stay below FS recommendation
of 15% detrimental soil disturbance. The objective may be different for the COE. The COE would use the
FS analysis for treatment on their land and produce their own decision document as per COE rules and
regulations.
Table 2.12 – Alternative 2 U.S. ARMY- Corps of Engineers Libby Dam Units
UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

COE1
COE3
COE4
COEF5
COE5T
COE6

41
181
22
47
6
11

IMP/UB
IMP/UB
IMP/UB
Slash/Burn
IMP/UB
IMP/UB

LOGGING SYSTEM

UNIT

Tractor
COEF7
Tractor
COEF8
Tractor
COEF9
N/A
COEF10
Tractor
COEF11
Tractor
COE12
TOTAL = 421 acres
ALTERNATIVES
Page 19 of 38

ACRES

TREATMENT

LOGGING SYSTEM

37
25
23
12
8
8

Slash/Burn
Slash/Burn
Slash/GP
Slash/Burn
Slash/Burn
Slash/Burn

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
IMP – Improvement Harvest

UB – Underburn

GP – Grapple Pile

Forest Plan Amendments: Alternative 2 will require project-specific KNFP amendments including:
Project-Specific Amendment #1: Units #40 and 75 cannot meet MA 15 visuals direction because they are
planned for regeneration treatments (seed tree & shelterwood) to exceed 40 acres either singularly or in
combination with other units. (USDA Forest Service 1987a, III-64-65).
Alternative 2 will reduce tree canopy from fully stocked to a seed tree prescription in concert with
exceeding 40 acre limitation as directed by NFMA. Management Area 15 VQO is maximum
modification. Treatment of these units supports purpose and need statement #1.
Project Specific Amendment #2: Unit #362 cannot meet MA 12 visuals direction because it is planned for
regeneration treatment (clearcut) to exceed 40 acres. (USDA Forest Service 1987a, III-48-49).
Alternative 2 will reduce tree canopy from fully stocked to a clearcut prescription in concert with
exceeding 40 acre limitation as directed by NFMA. Management Area 12 VQO is “maximum
modification in areas of low visual significance, modification in areas of moderate visual significance,
and partial retention in areas of high visual significance, unless infeasible when attempting to meet the
goals of the Management Area.” Treatment of this unit supports purpose and need statement #1.
Project Specific Amendment #3: Units #73 and 188 cannot meet MA 16 visuals direction because they are
planned for regeneration treatment (seed tree) to exceed 40 acres in combination. (USDA Forest Service
1987a, III-69-70).
Alternative 2 will reduce tree canopy from fully stocked to a seed tree prescription in concert with
exceeding 40 acre limitation as directed by NFMA. Management Area 16 “minimum VQO is
modification.” Treatment of these units supports purpose and need statement #1.
Project Specific Amendment #4: This alternative would require a project-specific KNFP amendment for
harvest treatments in MA12 that removes hiding cover and movement corridors resulting in openings
greater than 40 acres (Chapter 3, Wildlife Section for more information on hiding cover and openings).
The KNFP standard for opening sizes in MA 12 is to maintain movement corridors of at least two site
distances (400 feet) between openings, and generally not to exceed openings over 40 acres (KNFP p. III49, Wildlife and Fish standards #7). Alternative 2 proposes one unit with acreage on MA12 land that
result in openings that do not meet this standard. Unit 362 results in a 192 acre opening on MA12.
Therefore, a site-specific KNFP amendment and Regional approval is necessary for this unit.
Alternative 2 would require Regional Forester approval for exceeding NFMA opening requirements and
36 CFR Part 219.27(d)(2) which states the maximum regeneration harvest treatment for Montana is 40
acres.
Past management within the analysis area has interspersed the forest with a series of 20-to-40 acre
openings with very distinct (hard) edges between harvested and unharvested areas. This disturbance
regime provides suitable habitat for species that are adapted to the edges between forested and nonforested areas. However, species that require larger blocks of habitat are at a disadvantage under such a
disturbance regime. The analysis presented in the DEIS found the effects of larger openings would not
result in adverse effects for big game, however treatments could result in openings that may not be fully
utilized by elk as foraging areas, at least diurnally.
Table 2.13 - Alternative 2 Proposed Even-aged Harvest Openings Over 40 Acres
PROPOSED HARVEST UNIT

MA

TREATMENT ACRES

ALTERNATIVES
Page 20 of 38

REGENERATION METHOD

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED HARVEST UNIT

MA

TREATMENT ACRES

REGENERATION METHOD

62
147
148
149
150
170
73T
75
188

15
15
15
15
15
15
16
15
15,16

77
93
77
65
103
97
31
36
40

ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves
SW with Reserves
ST with Reserves

80
36

15,16
15

110
41

SW/ST with Reserves
ST with Reserves

40
362

15
156
12
192
TOTAL = 1, 118 acres

ST with Reserves
CC with Reserves

Table 2.14 displays features of Alternative 2.
Table 2.14 - Features of Alternative 2
TIMBER HARVEST TREATMENTS

Intermediate Harvest
Sanitation Salvage
Improvement
Commercial Thinning
Regeneration Harvest
Seedtree with Reserves
Clearcut with Reserves
Shelterwood with Reserves
Seedtree/Shelterwood
Irregular Shelterwood
Improvement/Shelterwood
COE Lands
Improvement Harvest/Prescribed Burn
Fuel Reduction with Grapple Piles
SLASH TREATMENT

ACRES

332
2,799
2,256
1,507
521
297
135
69
929
261
23
ACRES

Grapple Pile/Burn Piles
Underburn with Timber Harvest
Prescribed Fire without Timber Harvest
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment
COE Lands
Fuel Reduction with Prescribed Fire
ROAD CONSTRUCTION/RECONSTRUCTION

New Permanent Road Construction
Temporary Road Construction
Road Reconstruction and BMPs (haul routes)
ACCESS CHANGES

3,952
2,771
1,378
10,049
137
MILES

9.25
4.26
176.40
MILES

Trails: Motorized Use Changed to Non-motorized Use
Roads: Change in Access
Undetermined Roads Changed to NFS Road
Undetermined Roads to Decommissioned Roads
WATERSHED REHABILITATION

36.56
1.79
13.50
6.24
MILES

Miles of Road Put in to Long-Term Storage
Number of Stream Crossings Restored (estimate)
ALTERNATIVES
Page 21 of 38

16.00
49

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Stream Bank Stabilization

Yes

PLANTING

ACRES

Conifer Planting

3,346

OTHER ACTIVITIES

Precommercial Thinning (acres)
White Pine Precommercial thinning (20% of stand acres)
Miles of Road Proposed for Cost-Share among the FS, DNRC

5,563
212
29.72

ALTERNATIVE 3
Alternative Design: Alternative 3 was designed to implement projects that meet the purpose and need for
action as described in Chapter 1, and to meet all standards put forth in the KNFP and NFMA. Briefly these
standards include opening size in MA 12 and 15, impacts to old growth forest stands and amount of
motorized trails in project area changing to non-motorized. Such activities are listed under the issue
identification section of this chapter on page 2.
Alternative Description: A listing of the changes in Alternative 3 from Alternative 2 follows.
• To meet NFMA requirements and KNFP recommendations for over 40 acre openings, all units were
reduced to 40 acres or under.
• Treatments in old growth units were dropped as a KNFP amendment would have been needed.
• Unit 68 was dropped due to the presence of a red-tailed hawk nest.
• Units 36, 179 and 182 were dropped to meet the maximum protection measures for goshawk according
to Reynolds et al. 1992 (refer to the goshawk analysis in Chapter 3 for more information).
• Unit F19 was added as fuels unit.
• Proposed commercial thinning for Alternative 3 is displayed in Table 2.17. Two units were dropped
311, 337 after additional field reconnaissance was done. The white bark pine thinning was dropped
from this alternative so as not to implement the exception in the Northern Rockies Lynx management
Direction and it also helps with the range of alternatives in this project.
• The units that are shaded, in Table 2.2, would require winter logging so as not to exceed the 15%
maximum detrimental soil disturbance.
• Overall acres in the Fuels and Wildlife units could be reduced (by approx. 608 ac) if burning conditions
are not favorable within the lynx analysis unit and burning would result in habitat reduction. Treatment
units for which this reduction would occur are available in the project file.
A description of the silviculture treatments that are designed to move existing vegetation condition to
desired condition are described previously under Alternative 2. Table 2.15 displays unit acres, silviculture
treatment, management area and logging system involved in Alternative 3.
Table 2.15 – Alternative 3 Proposed Harvest Units
UNIT

ACRES

1
1A
2
2B
2C
2D
3
3A
3B
3C
4
5

50
11
13
48
9
67
27
26
37
13
46
5

TREATMENT

MA

IMP/S/GP
11, 16
SW/S/GP/PLT
11, 16
ST/S/UB/PLT
11, 16
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/UB
11, 12, 24
IMP/S/UB
11
ST/S/UB/PLT
11, 16
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/UB
11
ST/S/UB/PLT
11
IMP/S/GP
11
IMP/S
16, 17
ALTERNATIVES
Page 22 of 38

LOGGING SYSTEM

Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
14A
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
39
40
41
42
43
44
45A
45B
46
47
49
51
52A
53
54
55
56
59
61
62
64
64A
64B
69

11
19
13
151
160
102
119
22
40
26
22
24
68
32
32
41
76
83
146
40
139
29
45
31
54
62
698
75
85
144
40
40
40
31
26
28
105
39
37
40
64
7
24
40
9
40
207
39
19
40
8
28
10
16

TREATMENT

MA

ST/S/GP/PLT
16, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
16, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
IMP-SW/S/UB
10, 11
IMP-SW/S/UB
10, 11
IMP-SW/S/UB
11
IMP-SW/S/GP
15, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
SW/S/GP
15
IMP/S/GP
17
Irregular SW/S/GP
17
IMP/S/UB
17
Irregular SW/GP
16, 24
IMP-SW/S/GP
11
IMP-SW/S/GP
11
IMP-SW/S/GP
11
IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
15, 17
IMP/S/GP
15
IMP/S/UB
15
IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
5, 17
IMP/S/GP
17
IMP/S/GP
11, 16
IMP/S/GP
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
11, 12, 18, 24
IMP/S/GP
12
San-Salvage/GP
15, 17
San-Salvage/GP
17
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
CCR/S/GP/PLT
15
IMP/S/GP
11, 12
IMP/S/GP
11, 12
SW/S/GP/PLT
11
IMP-SW/S/UB
11, 12
ST/S/UB/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/GP/PLT
12
IMP/S/UB
11, 12, 19
ST/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/UB/PLT
11, 12
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
11
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
CCR/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ALTERNATIVES
Page 23 of 38

LOGGING SYSTEM

Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

70
71
72
73T
74T
80
81
82
135
142
143A
144S
144T
147
148
149
150
151
157
158
158A
159A
170
173
174
176
183
185
185N
188S
190
190A
192
193
194S
194T
195
196
197
203
205
207
208
209
214
219
219A
305
306
307
317
318
319
327

14
18
12
29
40
40
36
25
16
9
9
22
18
40
40
40
40
40
54
143
33
18
40
18
29
15
68
27
22
10
43
44
40
17
36
31
28
14
24
59
34
40
40
24
6
38
32
43
57
305
63
131
17
46

TREATMENT

MA

ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
SW/S/UB
15
ST-SW/S/GP/PLT
15, 16
ST/S/GP/PLT
16
ST-SW/S/GP/PLT
16
IMP/S/UB
16
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/UB/PLT
16
ST/S/UB
15, 16
ST/S/UB
15, 16, 19
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP-SW/S/GP
10, 11
IMP-SW/GP
10
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
ST/S/UB/PLT
15
IMP/S/UB
5, 19
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/UB
11
IMP/S/GP
6, 16, 17
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
15
ST/S/UB
16
IMP/S/GP
15, 17
San-Salvage/PCT/GP
15, 17
IMP/S/UB
17
SW/GP/PLT
11
IMP/S/UB
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
10, 11, 18
San-Salvage/S/GP
16
IMP/S/GP
11
IMP/S/GP
11, 18
IMP/S/UB
12
IMP/S/UB
12, 19
SW/S/UB/PLT
15, 16, 17
ST/S/UB/PLT
15, 16, 17
IMP/S/GP
15
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
ST/S/GP/PLT
12
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
11
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
12
ALTERNATIVES
Page 24 of 38

LOGGING SYSTEM

Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Tractor/Skyline
Skyline
Tractor/Skyline
Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Skyline
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Winter Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
Skyline
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Winter Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
UNIT

ACRES

328
330
331
332
333
334
335
339
340
343
344
345
346
347
348
349
350
220
362A
362B
362C
363
364
365
366
367
367A
368
369

31
9
16
10
14
22
20
89
266
93
64
45
11
520
14
21
26
35
40
40
39
40
33
25
6
38
40
40
40

TREATMENT

MA

LOGGING SYSTEM

CT/YT
12
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15, 16
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
11, 12
CT/YT
15
CT/YT
12
CT/YT
15
CCR/UB/PLT
11, 12
CCR/GP/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/UB/PLT
12
CCR/GP/PLT
12
TOTAL = 7,782 acres

Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor
Tractor

Key: GS/IMP = Group Select/Improvement IMP = Improvement Cut ST = Seed Tree w/Reserves
CC = Clearcut CCR = Clearcut w/Reserves SW = Shelterwood w/Reserves
S = Slashing
UB = Underburning PLT = Plant GP = Grapple Pile

Precommercial Thinning: Same as Alternative 2, see Table 2.1 The white bark pine thinning was dropped
from this alternative so as not to implement the exception in the Northern Rockies Lynx management
Direction and it also helps with the range of alternatives in this project (Map 16).
Reforestation: Where regeneration harvest is proposed, planting would supplement the natural regeneration
anticipated and restore tree species that are presently not sustainable due to inadequate seed source in the
residual or adjacent stands. Approximately 1,729 acres would be planted to ensure reforestation of the
desired species.

Fuel Treatments: Alternative 3 proposes 13 fuels units in this alternative. Units F1OG, F3OG,
F11OG, F13OG, F14OG and F15OG were dropped to meet KNFP objectives to not treat in old
growth. Additional reconnaissance was done and Unit F19 was added.
Table 2.18 – Alternative 3 Proposed Fuel Treatment Units
UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

F1
F1A
F2

174
17
112

MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn

10, 11, 12, 24
11
11, 16

F13
F15
F16

24
9
73

Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn

15
17
11, 12

ALTERNATIVES
Page 25 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

UNIT

F3
F4
F8
F12

17
17
52
11

MFT/Burn
Slash/Burn
MFT/Burn
MFT/Burn

11, 17
10
10, 17
11

F18
F19
F45

MFT = Mechanical Fuel Treatments

Slash = Hand Slashing

ACRES

TREATMENT

MA

568
Burn
110
Slash/Burn
125
Slash/Burn
TOTAL = 1,309 acres

2
17
11, 12

PPR – Potential Product Removal

Fuels and Wildlife Units: Alternative 3 Fuels and Wildlife unit proposal is the same as
Alternative 2. Refer to Table 2.5 for information.
Road System Management:
New Permanent Road Construction: Approximately 7 miles of new permanent road construction
is proposed in this alternative. Table 2.19A displays the newly constructed permanent roads.
Table 2.19A – Alternative 3 Newly Constructed Permanent Roads
ROAD NUMBER

MILES

N1
N3
N4
N5
N6
N7 (6288)
N8
N9
N11
N12
N13
N14
N15
N16
N18
N21
N22
N39
N41

0.30
0.80
0.33
0.46
0.87
0.80
1.31
0.32
0.17
0.25
0.36
0.45
0.32
0.24
0.03
0.59
0.06
0.20
0.20

DRAINAGE

UNIT ACCESS

Fivemile
4, 132, Dispersed Camp Site
Canyon
29
Warland
15
Canyon
203
Davis Mtn
62, 62A, 317, 318
Warland
13, 14, 14A, 159, F10
Canyon
32, 205
Dunn
45A, 45B
Canyon
192
Dunn
45A
Dunn
45B, F45
Warland
9, 158
Warland
170
Warland
10, 157
Warland Reservoir
17
Davis
59, 317
Canyon Creek Bay Dispersed Camping Access
Canyon
Cost-Share to Sec 36
Summit Springs
Future Access
TOTAL = 8.06 miles

Temporary Road Construction: Approximately 4 miles of temporary road construction is proposed to
access harvest units under Alternative 3.These roads would be restored after timber harvest is completed.
Table 2.20 displays the list of temporary roads, their length, the drainage they would be in and which units
they access.

Table 2.20 – Alternative 3 Temporary Roads
ROAD #

MILES

DRAINAGE

T5
T6
T14
T25
T28
T37
T42

0.16
0.38
0.14
0.59
0.58
0.12
0.20

Warland Creek
Cripple Horse
Davis Mtn
Canyon Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse
Dunn

UNIT ACCESS

ROAD #

17
T43
22
T44
318
T45
31, 197
T53
38, 345
T54
340
T55
362
T57
TOTAL = 4.05 miles
ALTERNATIVES
Page 26 of 38

MILES

DRAINAGE

UNIT ACCESS

0.31
0.15
0.25
0.37
0.23
0.31
0.26

Dunn
Upper Fivemile
Warland
Upper Fivemile
Canyon
Canyon
Canyon

362
150
49
148
344
343
23

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Road Reconstruction and BMP Implementation: This alternative would complete road repair and BMP
implementation on approximately 140 miles of haul route as compared to approximately 170 miles under
proposed Alternative 2. Implementation of BMP work would include installing additional ditch relief
culverts, replacing undersized or misaligned culverts where needed, installing surface water deflectors and
drain dips to control surface water run-off, cleaning ditch lines and constructing ditches where needed, and
grading road surfaces for drainage. This work would be done on all road systems that are needed for timber
haul for the selected alternative. Additional BMP work on roads within the analysis area, not needed for the
timber sale, has been identified and would be implemented as other funding becomes available.

Access Changes: Several roads that access dispersed camping areas along the Koocanusa
Reservoir would be open yearlong which is a change from seasonal closures. In addition, a
segment of NFS Road #4904 has been added in Alternative 3. This road in Boundary Mountain
would give additional access to the trailhead for Trail #425. Table 2.20A displays the roads that
are proposed to change access.
Table 2.20A - Alternative 3 East Reservoir Road Access Changes
ROAD #

ROAD NAME

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT STATUS

MILES

ROADS

4890
4904
5296
5298
14519

Canyon Creek
Access

10 – Restricted seasonally to motor
vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to
Boundary Mtn
snow vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Canyon Bay
10 - Restricted seasonally to motor
Dispersed East vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
Canyon Bay
10 - Restricted seasonally to motor
Dispersed West vehicles, Open to snow vehicles.
10 - Restricted seasonally to
Yarnell Access motor vehicles, Open to snow
vehicles.

Open Yearlong

0.84

04 - Restricted seasonally to motor vehicles
10/15 – 06/30, including snow vehicles.

3.70

Open Yearlong

0.17

Open Yearlong

0.04

Open Yearlong

0.59

Access changes would occur on approximately 19 miles of motorized trails in Alternative 3 (Table 2.20B).
Trail 281 and 420 would remain as motorized creating a loop which includes open NFS roads for
recreationists to enjoy.
Table 2.20B - Alternative 3 East Reservoir Trail Access Changes
TRAIL ID

LOCATION

279
280
420
426
500

Warland Ridge
Warland Peak Lookout
Canyon Divide
Fivemile
Hornet Ridge

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT STATUS

Motorized allowed
Non-Motorized Only
Motorized allowed
Non-Motorized Only
Motorized allowed
Non-Motorized Only
Motorized allowed
Non-Motorized Only
Motorized allowed
Non-Motorized Only
TOTAL = 26.89 miles

MILES

10.70
2.30
6.38
1.82
5.69

Road Storage (Intermittent Stored Service): Approximately 18 miles of road would be stored in order to
maintain a safe and efficient transportation system, improve watershed conditions and enhance wildlife
security. A section of NFS Road #4893A (1.04 miles) has been added to be stored in this alternative.
Approximately 1.7 miles of seasonally restricted roads (4885C, 4885H, 4885I) are proposed to be stored.
All other roads proposed for storage are currently restricted yearlong to all motorized vehicles. If roads are
currently open to snow vehicles they would remain open to snow vehicles. Table 2.21 displays the roads
proposed for storage. Map 13 displays Alternative 3 road changes.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 27 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Table 2.21 – Alternative 3 East Reservoir Intermittent Stored Service and Decommissioning
ROAD #

ROAD NAME

EXISTING STATUS

POST-PROJECT
STATUS

LENGTH
(miles)

FIVEMILE CREEK

4885C

Stenerson Mtn C

4885H

Stenerson Mtn H

4885I

Stenerson Mtn I

4885J

Stenerson Mtn J

4893A

Middle Fork Fivemile

4895

Lower Fivemile

5047

North Upper Fivemile

5050

Upper Fivemile Face

5216
5216A
5216B
5216C
5216D
5216E

Mouth of Fivemile
Mouth of Fivemile
Mouth of Fivemile
Mouth of Fivemile
Mouth of Fivemile
Mouth of Fivemile

12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
12 – Restricted Seasonally 12/1 – 6/30,
including snow vehicles
05 – Restricted yearlong to all
motorized vehicles
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
Undetermined - Open Yearlong
05 – Restricted yearlong to all
motorized vehicles

5262

Fivemile Unit

5049

Upper Fivemile View

Open yearlong

5050A

Upper Fivemile Face A

Open Yearlong

5050B

Upper Fivemile Face B

Open Yearlong

South Fivemile

Private Access

8843

Stored, undrivable

0.35

Stored, undrivable

0.49

Stored, undrivable

0.81

Stored, undrivable

0.12

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Stored, undrivable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable

1.96
2.29
1.22
0.45
0.69
0.34
0.21
0.24
0.06
0.18
0.13
0.20
0.15
0.16
0.01

WARLAND CREEK

566
4891D
5055

Warland Creek Fivemile
Warland Basin D
Upper Warland South

05 – Restricted Yearlong to all
motorized vehicles
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

Stored, undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Decommissioned –
not driveable

2.03
1.85
1.98

CRIPPLE HORSE CREEK

4904G

Boundary Mtn G

5060

Summit Springs Unit

5061

West Weigel Mtn III

5167

Cripple Horse Lake Creek

XX50

Summit Springs

4423B

Weigel Mtn B

4823C

Weigel Mtn C

09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Open
09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Open
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
ALTERNATIVES
Page 28 of 38

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, Undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Stored, undrivable
Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –

1.95
0.27
0.28
0.38
0.30
0.13
1.22

CHAPTER 2
ROAD #

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ROAD NAME

4904K

Boundary Mtn K

4951

West Weigel Mtn

5062

West Weigel Mtn IV

5269

West Weigel Mtn II

POST-PROJECT
STATUS

EXISTING STATUS

vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable
Decommissioned –
not driveable

LENGTH
(miles)

0.11
0.63
0.16
0.13

CANYON CREEK

4917

North Canyon

09 – Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

Stored, open to snow
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30

1.02

DUNN CREEK

4923C

East Wyoma C

4923D

East Wyoma D

TOTAL STORED = 17.62 miles

09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
Decommissioned –
0.75
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
not driveable
09 - Restricted Yearlong, open to snow
Decommissioned –
0.30
vehicles 12/1 – 4/30
not driveable
TOTAL DECOMMISSIONED = 5.93 miles

Undetermined
Roads: Roads in the East Reservoir analysis area that would be changed from undetermined to National
Forest System roads under proposed Alternative 3are the same as in Alternative 2. Refer to Table 2.10
Table 2.22 displays a list of existing, undetermined roads which occur in the East Reservoir analysis area.
These roads are not needed and would be decommissioned when funds become available. Two roads were
added to this alternative to protect cultural sites. No maintenance would occur on these roads.
Table 2.22 – Alternative 3 Undetermined Roads to Decommissioned Roads
ROAD ID

MILES

XX5
XX6
XX7
XX20
XX21
5047
5047
5298

0.19
0.10
0.28
0.62
0.88
0.93
0.29
0.15

DRAINAGE

ROAD ID

Warland Creek
5298A
Warland Creek
5058
Warland Creek
5071
Upper Fivemile
5072
Cripple Horse Weigel
5073
N Upper Fivemile
5110
N Upper Fivemile
5217A
Canyon Bay
5268
TOTAL = 6.48 miles

MILES

DRAINAGE

0.09
0.22
0.25
0.30
0.79
0.90
0.20
0.29

Canyon Bay
Cripple Horse Creek
Dunn Creek
Dunn Creek
Dunn Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek
Cripple Horse Creek

Proposed Cost Share Roads with DNRC: This proposal is the same as in Alternative 2. Refer to Table
2.11 for more information.
Recreation Proposal: In addition to what is described under Recreation Proposal in Alternative 2, the
cultural and recreation team members on the East Reservoir IDT have proposed a new non-motorized trail
within the East Reservoir analysis area. The proposed trail is located in Sections 2 and 11 of T31N, R29W
(Cripple Horse Creek) and would be a 2.75 mile loop. The proposed trail is positioned between Lake
Koocanusa and Montana State Highway 37, south of the mouth Cripple Horse Creek.
The proposed trail would utilize historic railroad grades for a distance of 1.75 miles and requires new trail
construction for approximately one mile. The proposed trail would be managed for non-motorized travel
(horse, bicycle, foot) year long. The trail would occupy a 15 feet wide corridor with eight feet wide
vegetation clearing and eight feet high overhang clearing. Within that corridor, a centerline treadway two
ALTERNATIVES
Page 29 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

foot wide would be cleared of rocks and sticks. Some hand earthwork would be necessary for tread
construction where railroad grades are not being utilized (approx.1 mile). Biannual mowing of the treadway
to a width of 60 inches would be performed. Where needed, Carsonite markers would be placed to direct
traffic. Interpretive signs related to historic logging features would be placed along the trail.
A small marsh located at the southeast corner of the DSL inholding would be avoided during construction.
The trailhead would be constructed along the proposed cost-share road (N40) which accesses the DNRC
inholding in Section 2. Trailhead parking area would accommodate four to six vehicles. This road would be
gated at the east property line between DNRC and FS ownerships.
U.S. ARMY- Corps of Engineers (COE): Same as Alternative 2, refer to Table 2.12.
Forest Plan Amendments: This alternative has been designed so that no KNFP amendment(s) or Regional
Forester approval would be needed.
Table 2.23 displays features of Alternative 3.
Table 2.23 - Features of Alternative 3
TIMBER HARVEST TREATMENTS

Intermediate Harvest
Improvement
Improvement/Shelterwood
Sanitation Salvage
Commercial Thinning
Regeneration Harvest
Seedtree with Reserves
Clearcut with Reserves
Shelterwood with Reserves
Seedtree/Shelterwood
Irregular Shelterwood
COE Lands
Improvement Harvest with Prescribed Fire
Fuel Reduction with Grapple Piles
SLASH TREATMENT
Grapple Pile/Burn Piles
Underburn with Timber Harvest
Prescribed Fire without Timber Harvest
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment/Prescribed Fire
COE Lands
Fuel Reduction with Prescribed Burn
ROAD CONSTRUCTION/RECONSTRUCTION

New Permanent Road Construction
Temporary Road Construction
Road Reconstruction and BMPs (haul routes)
ACCESS CHANGES

ACRES

2,696
962
301
1,702
1,105
475
162
65
56
261
23
ACRES
2,457
3,390
1,309
10,049
137
MILES

7.23
3.91
167.85
MILES

Trails: Motorized Use to Non-Motorized Use
Road Access Changes
Undetermined Roads to NFS Roads
Undetermined Roads to Decommissioned Roads
WATERSHED REHABILITATION

Miles of Road Put in to Long-Term Storage
Miles of Existing Road to be Decommissioned
Number of Stream Crossings Restored (estimate)
Stream Bank Stabilization
PLANTING

26.89
5.34
13.37
6.48
MILES

20.19
5.93
49
Yes
ACRES

ALTERNATIVES
Page 30 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
Conifer Planting

1,729

OTHER ACTIVITIES

Precommercial Thinning (acres)
Miles of Road proposed for Cost-Share among the FS, DNRC

5,687
30.29

MANAGEMENT MEASURES and DESIGN FEATURES
Table 2.34 describes the design features and management measures that would be applied to this project to
protect resources in all action alternatives.
Table 2.34 – East Reservoir Project Management Measures & Design Features
Trails and Roads: Timber Sale Standard Provision B(T)6.22, Protection of Improvements, would be
included in all timber sale contracts. It would require the purchaser to protect specified improvements,
such as trails, roads and fences. Slash disposal adjacent to the Lake Koocanusa Scenic Byway (MSH 37)
and Lake Koocanusa is critical to meeting KNFP VQOs.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Soil: Refer to Appendix E for specific management requirements for the soil resource.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Sensitive Plants: Legal and biological requirements for the conservation of endangered, threatened,
proposed, candidate and sensitive plants would be met. These species have been identified in cooperation
with other agencies such as the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks
(FWP). Plant surveys would be completed prior to any ground-disturbing activities. Emphasis for surveys
would be placed on areas with moderate-to-high potential to provide sensitive plant habitat. These surveys
would be conducted by the District Botanist or a qualified biological technician. If any of these plant
species are located prior to or during implementation of any management activities, the activity would be
altered so that proper protection measures could be taken. Timber sale contract provision B(T)6.25,
Protection of Habitat of Endangered Species, would be included in any subsequent timber sale contract. If
necessary, additional modifications would occur through creation of special treatment zones or by
relocating unit boundaries to avoid negative impacts. Disturbance to any sensitive plant populations
observed during sale activity would be avoided through cooperation between sale administrators and sale
purchaser. Surveys for PTES plants of in-stream work areas to improve pool quantity and quality would be
completed before implementation.
• Retain all cottonwood, aspen and birch in all harvest units except in designated skid trails.
• Avoid burning and logging through the western pearl flower (Heterocodon rariflorum) population in
Unit 16 by creating a special treatment zone.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds can have a large impact on not only rare plant habitat but any native plant
habitat the following measures will be used to manage concerns for the spread of noxious weeds.
• Winter Tractor Units to Avoid Noxious Weed Spread: Winter tractor operations for Units 2B, 2C,
2D, 3A, 9, 10, 11, 17, 28, 157, 158, 158A, 190, 194T, 196, 305, 306, 307, COE1 and COE3.
• Certified weed-free forage is required for use on all national forest lands in Montana (36 CFR 261.50)
• Treat existing noxious weeds on roads to be reconstructed or stored prior to that activity, (if possible
schedule spraying two or more seasons before activities are expected to occur to reduce the amount of
viable weed seed stored in the soil).
• Treat existing noxious weeds in gravel/rock pits, inspect these sources for weeds and treat before
material is transported.
• Survey and pre-treat existing noxious weeds on proposed trailhead construction site, and access sites for
in-stream work.
• Require weed free certified straw for all construction, reconstruction, and restoration activities.
• Seed and fertilize stored roads with certified weed free seed immediately following restoration activities.
• Limit scarification objectives to the minimal required to meet reforestation objectives.
• Pressure-wash logging equipment, road maintenance and restoration equipment before entering the
ALTERNATIVES
Page 31 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

analysis area.
• Require timber sale purchaser to treat existing noxious weeds along haul routes the first operational
season for weed spraying (spring or early summer)
• Seed newly constructed roads, trailheads, landings and major skid trails with certified weed-free seed.
• Prevent road maintenance machinery from blading or brushing through known populations of new
invaders. In areas where weeds are established, (and activities are opening and blading restricted or
closed roads with significantly lesser infestations); brush and blade road systems from un-infested
segments of road systems to infested areas. Limit brushing and mowing to the minimum distance and
height necessary to meet safety objectives in areas of heavy weed infestations
• Minimize soil disturbance and mineral soil exposure during activities. Soil disturbance should be no
more than needed to meet project objectives. This includes not exceeding recommended mineral soil
exposure for site preparation in regeneration harvest units; and utilizing timing and designated skid trails
to minimize mineral soil exposure in harvest units.
• Survey proposed burn units for noxious weeds. Determine the risk of weed spread with prescribed fire. If
there is a risk of spread beyond the road corridor, defer burning until the weeds can be treated or ensure
post treatment funding for weed control.
• Survey proposed access for mechanized in stream for noxious weeds. Determine the risk of spread with
the associated activity. If there is risk of spread, pre-treat the area before activity.
• Continue to monitor/survey the analysis area for new invader weed species. Monitor weed population
levels in treated areas, with particular emphasis on haul routes, stored and decommissioned roads, and
landings. Retreat as funding allows.
• Treat and sign sites if new invaders are located and defer ground disturbing activities within those sites
until the weed specialist determines the site is no longer a threat, and approves those activities.
• Site-specific guidelines will be followed for weed treatments within or adjacent to known sensitive plant
populations. All future treatment sites would be evaluated for sensitive plan habitat suitability; suitable
habitats would be surveyed as necessary prior to treatment.
• All noxious weed control activities would comply with state and local laws and agency guidelines.
• As per the 2007 KNF Invasive Plant Management EIS and ROD, all herbicides used in the analysis area
would be applied according to the labeled rates and recommendations to ensure the protection of surface
water, ecological integrity and public health and safety. Herbicide selection will be based on target
species on the site, site factors (such as soil types, distance to water, etc), and with the objective to
minimize impacts to non-target species.
• Design road storage to allow passage of a 4-wheeler to continue treatment of hawkweeds and common
tansy in the future. Hawkweed and common tansy populations will continue to expand even after the
template has re-vegetated.
• Keep administrative traffic on closed roads to a minimum. Whenever possible, time activities prior to
seed set of the primary weed species or emphasis weeds on a given road.
• Release bio-control agents on applicable sites, as they become available, and funding allows.
• Plan follow up noxious weed treatment the spring or early summer, following final purchaser blading of
all haul roads if funds allow (this would be funded with appropriated or KV dollars).
• Burning and Noxious Weed Spread: A decision matrix will be developed to address weed concerns
and to prioritize the units for burning based on desired objectives of the burning. This decision matrix
will identify potential weed concerns and identify target habitat enhancement or fuel reduction
objectives. This way weed control efforts can focus on particular species prior and post-burning.
• Design road storage to allow passage of a 4-wheeler to continue treatment of hawkweeds and common
tansy in the future. Hawkweed and common tansy populations will continue to expand even after the
template has re-vegetated.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Burning and Noxious Weed Spread
A decision matrix will be developed to address weed concerns and to prioritize the units for burning based
on desired objectives of the burning. This decision matrix will identify potential weed concerns and
ALTERNATIVES
Page 32 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

identify target habitat enhancement or fuel reduction objectives. This way weed control efforts can focus
on particular species prior and post-burning.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Pile Burning Emissions
The amount of smoke emissions, resulting from prescribed burning of natural and activity fuels would be
mitigated by four general methods: fuel loading reduction, reduction in the amount of fuel consumed,
flaming combustion optimization, and impact avoidance.
Fuel Loading Reduction: The KNF has encouraged, through sale contract provisions, utilization of submerchantable material. Purchasers may be required to pay for, and therefore encouraged to utilize, top
wood smaller than the normal utilization standard. These measures help decrease the amount of woody
fuel, thus reducing the amount of smoke produced during burning.
Reduction in the Amount of Fuel Consumed: The reduction of the amount of fuel consumed by
prescribed burning would be accomplished by burning under higher fuel moisture conditions as long as it
still makes these fuels less available for consumption, thereby reducing the fuel consumed. Sometimes
this can be part of the resource objective to retain coarse woody debris on the site.
Flaming Combustion Optimization: Methods that increasing the flaming combustion phase would be
used when prescribed burning is determined to be the most appropriate fuel treatment. Concentration of
logging slash by whole tree yarding or excavator piling increases the amount of material consumed during
flaming combustion and also allows material to be burned in the late fall when the risk of escape is low.
Purchasers are required to construct piles so they are compact and free of excess soil.
Impact Avoidance: Smoke impact avoidance would be accomplished through daily monitoring of
airshed conditions. Burns will be coordinated with Montana/Idaho Smoke Monitoring Unit. This will help
ensure smoke impacts are minimized and burning only occurs when dispersion is forecasted to be good
and cumulative effects are not likely.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Soil and Water:
1) Timber Sale Contract Provisions to be Included
CT6.3 - Plan of Operations, BT6.4, CT6.4 - Conduct of Logging, BT6.42 - Skidding and yarding,
BT6.422 - Landings and Skid Trails, BT6.6, CT6.6 - Erosion Prevention Control, BT6.64 - Skid
Trails and Fire Lines, BT6.5 – Stream Course Protection, CT6.62 - Noxious Weed Control, BT5.2,
CT5.2 - Specified Road Construction, BT5.4, CT5.4 - Road Maintenance, CT6.603 - Road
Obliteration.
2) Best Management Practices (BMPs) - Implementation of the BMPs listed in Appendix C.
3) Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs)
Implementation of the KNFP RHCA widths for the units, shown in Appendix B, is required to meet
KNFP standards as amended by INFS. Also if any additional streams are found during layout they will
also be buffered to meet this requirement.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Aquatic Species
Measures listed under soil and water, including implementation of BMPs and use of RHCAs as
prescribed in INFS will protect fish.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Winter Tractor Units to Avoid Over 15% and DSD for Alternatives 3:
Units: 2, 3, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15, 24, 26, 73T, 74T, 159A, 183, 190A, 305, 307, 311, 318, 319, 327, 328, 334,
335, 339, 340, 343, 344, 345, 346, 349, 350, COE4, COE5T, COE6, F1OG, and F2T1.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Forest Vegetation:
In addition to the appropriate BMPs, riparian guidelines and standard contract clauses, the following
management measures and monitoring would be included:
a. All harvest units would retain 7-30 tons per acre of downed woody material (or recruitment) greater than
ALTERNATIVES
Page 33 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

3” in diameter to provide nutrient recycling and habitat for mammals and invertebrates. The volume and
distribution of material may be subject to specific site conditions such as within the wildland urban
interface. The tons retained by VRU are described previously in Table 3.11.
b. All harvest units will be designed to retain adequate levels of replacement snags to provide for cavityassociated wildlife species, genetic seed reservoirs, relic overstory, and long-term soil productivity.
Replacement trees would be scattered throughout harvest units to the extent possible. A minimum of 810 replacement snags per acre will be retained. Where Non consistent with your description of a cc
with 4-8 trees retained possible within safety requirements, sound snags may be marked for retention. If
they are felled for safety purposes, they will be retained on site. Silvicultural and burning prescriptions
would be prepared with the goal of protecting large diameter relic trees, during site preparation and fuels
treatment.
c. A marking review will be performed by a silviculturist on a minimum of 10% of proposed units to ensure
marking guides are being implemented as per the prescription.
d. All tractor harvest units with an intermediate harvest prescription will have designated skid trails to
facilitate removal of designated material while minimizing damage to less than 15% of the residual trees.
e. Harvest treatments will be designed to mimic natural process, and marking guides will emphasize
working with existing stand structures, and will not result in a uniform or evenly spaced residual stand or
an evenly spaced seed trees or relic trees.
f. If insect activity is present in the area, prescribed fire in dryland types may be postponed to a later date to
give the residual trees time to recover.
g. Spring burns in the dryland types will be implemented before the ponderosa pine and bunchgrass are
actively growing to minimize damage to native grasses.
h. Maintain old growth characteristics within old growth character stands (Green et al, 1992; USDA Forest
Service, 1987a).
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Wildlife:
Minimize Disturbance to Raptors: If raptor-nesting territories are observed, avoid disturbance when
possible, during the nesting/fledgling period (5/15-8/15). Include in sale contract if sites are known prior to
selling. Consult with Wildlife Biologist on specific buffers and disturbance period dates. Utilize this
criterion specifically on Unit 68 for Alternatives 2 and 4 - Pre-sale and harvest – all alternatives.
Protect Cripple Horse Goshawk Nest:
1. No management activities should occur within 0.5 miles of nest area (as mapped) between 3/1 and 8/30;
2. Route helicopter flights away from nest site and PFA as shown on territory maps (Project File).
3. Activities greater than ½ mile from the nest site should not occur until after July 15th or prior to April 1
(also see Criterion #2).
All criteria applicable to all alternatives for pre-sale, during and post-sale activities.
Maintain Cavity-Nesting Habitat: Where snag numbers are insufficient to meet snag levels by VRU
(identified in the Snag Section at the 100% level) existing DF, WL and PP snags greater than 10" dbh and
10 feet in height would be marked and protected during timber harvest and site preparation as long as safety
requirements are met. Merchantable trees (live or dead) would be reserved (Provisions CT2.3# and
CT6.32#) C2.3# and C6.32# -- provisions were never intend for snags – intended for superior seed trees,
research trees or high value wildlife trees (nest trees)). C6.32# - requires liquated damages ($) for damage.
Not advisable to use if snag levels are still not met. If felled for safety, they would be left on site. Maintain
the largest snags first. Favor trees further than one tree length from the road prism or any external boundary
- Pre-sale and harvest – all alternatives.
Provide for Future Cavity-Nesting Habitat, Down Woody Habitat Recruitment, and Structural
Diversity: KNF snag management protocol would be utilized to provide adequate snags for wildlife habitat.
Units in MA 15 would be managed at the 40% level as prescribed in the KNFP. All other MAs would be
managed at the 100% cavity habitat effectiveness level. Pre-sale – all alternatives.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 34 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Leave Tree Protection: Evenly distribute slash to protect leave trees. Pre-sale - all alternatives.
Maintain Winter Range Integrity: Restrict mechanized activities associated with logging and slashing off
Roads 4885, 4886, 6271, 4916 (Dec. 1 – June 30); 6274, 4908A/B (Oct 15 – June 30); 4890, 5298 Sept 1 –
May 30) to be consistent with the Road Closures as shown and applicable. Pre-sale, harvest and site prep –
all alternatives. Winter logging would be required in Unit 1 in Alternative 2 and Units 1, 1A, 2B, 2C, 2D,
3A, 9, 10, 17, 28, 157, 158, 158A, 190, 194T, 169, COE1and COE3 for Alternatives 3 and 4.
Provide for Wildlife Security: Determine the time of road restrictions involved with timber sales in the
pre-sale roundtable discussion. Implement new road restrictions after timber harvest where applicable and
maintain existing restrictions to the public during all operations. Pre-sale, Post-sale – all alternatives. This
criterion could vary by MA (e.g. summer range versus winter range) and could be influenced by other
management boundaries such as Bears Outside Recovery Zone (BORZ). Generally, roads entering into or
within these management boundaries will not be open to the public while treatment activities are occurring.
Meet Standards and Guides of the Lynx Amendment for Management in Lynx Habitat: including use
of prescribed fire. Prior to activity- Alternatives 3 and 4 as described in effects analysis, Chapter 3 of this
document. If these are for alts, need to correct the PA.
Meet ESA Requirements: If critical habitat is identified during implementation of the proposed activities,
special protection measures would be implemented by including provision CT6.251 in all applicable timber
sale contract packages. This provision is mandatory. Contract prep and logging – all alternatives.
Maintain Minimum/All Associated Old Growth Characteristics within Old Growth Character Stands
(Green Et Al, 1992; USDA Forest Service, 1987a): In the MA 13 portions of Units F1OG, F3OG,
F11OG, F13OG, F14OG and F15OG no merchantable material would be removed. Outside MA 13 in these
units, products (e.g. biomass) may be removed. Harvest Prescription, Sale Prep – Alternatives 2 and 4.
Ensure burning is planned to minimize impact on the large old tree component and subsequent risk of insect
infestation. May want to defer burning until MPB population has subsided.
Protect Specialized Wildlife Habitats: Protect currently unknown (not mapped) specialized habitats (e.g.
wetlands, fens, bogs, elk wallows, nests, etc.) found during timber sale preparation activities with
appropriate buffers. When new sites are found consult wildlife biologist, fish biologist or hydrologist for
direction. Pre-sale and during activities – all alternatives.
Temporary Roads within the Tobacco BORZ: Portion of the East reservoir Analysis area will be
returned to contour immediately following harvest and slash activities (units) or within one active bear year
(4/1 to 11/30), unless unforeseen circumstances (e.g. weather) prevents completion of the treatment units
accessed by these temporary roads. Temporary roads needed for another work season will be closed with
the appropriate restriction device (i.e. rods, gate, earth barrier, etc.).
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Heritage Resources:
Heritage resource surveys were completed on all treatment units. The action alternatives were designed to
protect known cultural sites, provide for protection of sites discovered during implementation, and protect
treaty rights. These concerns would be addressed through ongoing consultation with tribal representatives.
Appropriate Timber Sale Contract Provisions would be included in any timber sale contract. The
appropriate provision specifies that the Forest Service may modify or cancel the contract to protect cultural
resources, regardless of when they were identified.
Winter logging would be required for Unit 1 in Alternative 2 and Units 1 and 1A for Alternatives 3.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Scenic Resource:
To meet visual quality objectives the following measures would be taken:
Units 2, 3, 6, 16, 18 – High level of slash disposal along Highway 37.
Units 7, 8, 59, 62, 80, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151 – 10 to 12 trees/acre leave trees in unit.
ALTERNATIVES
Page 35 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

Units 41, 81 – Leave tree islands (1-2 acres) left in unit.
Units 6 - 10 to 15 trees/acre leave trees in unit.
U. S. Corp of Engineers Land: The following BMP must be employed within the boundary of recorded
archaeological sites and/or in areas where additional archaeological identification work cannot be
completed prior to project implementation.
A) Soil and duff moistures must be high enough to prevent thermal damage to artifacts that may be present
in the lower duff layers or soil. Duff moistures of greater than 120% tend not to burn (Timmons, et al.
1996); consequently, the burn shall take place in the spring and/or late fall when conditions favor high
duff moistures.
B) Any stumps within recorded archaeological sites that will be burned must be protected by wetting or
foaming prior to ignition.
C) To keep excavation of soil to a minimum, control lines for prescribed burn operations must be located
on existing roads, trails, topographical breaks, and any other natural barriers. Wet lines and/or foam
lines are strongly recommended.
D) Slash piling, for the purpose of burning, will not occur within recorded archaeological sites. Many areas
on COE fee owned land considered high probability: Slash piling, for the purpose of burning, shall be
avoided where feasible.
E) Mechanical timber harvest must be done on frozen ground within recorded archaeological sites and
high probability areas and in accordance he following stipulations.
1. Logging must be performed over frozen ground or over an accumulation of a minimum of one foot of
compacted snow.
2. A rubber-tired skidder shall be used.
3. Logs will be limbed at the stump.
4. Dispersed skidding.
5. Logging landings shall be designated in areas outside of recorded archaeological sites and high
probability areas. Landings will be clearly delineated by the COE archaeologist on the ground for the
sale administrator and the contractor.
6. Slash piling will not occur within any recorded archaeological sites or high probability areas.
Appropriate areas must be clearly delineated by the COE archaeologist on the ground for the sale
administrator and the contractor.

RECOMMENDED MONITORING
a. Monitor marking and layout on a minimum of 10% of the units by silviculturist.
b.Monitor units following harvest to document existing condition, and recommend future stand treatment
needs by silviculturist.
c. Monitor all regeneration units for reforestation success by silviculturist.
d.Monitor the effects of prescribed fire on vegetation within harvest units and prescribed fire outside
harvest units on a minimum of 10% of the units to ensure objectives are met by fuels specialist.
e. OG treatment monitoring: pre- and post-treatment surveys. Are required for all old growth treatments
f. Noxious weed monitoring by weeds specialist to check effectiveness of treatment.
g. Cavity habitat monitoring on 10% of the units to ensure objectives for snag retention are met.
h.Road storage effectiveness to ensure
i. Soils monitoring to determine effectiveness of management measures and design criteria.
j. BMP monitoring by Interdisciplinary Team to check effectiveness of BMPs implemented.
k.Effectiveness of trail changes by recreation specialist, monitor use.
l. Monitor sensitive plant populations, check population near treatment units.
Refer to Appendix I, the East Reservoir Monitoring Plan for more information on how monitoring would be
accomplished.
KV Projects
The list of KV projects is in order of priority for reforestation projects:
ALTERNATIVES
Page 36 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

a. Site preparation as summarized in the alternative summaries.
b.Pre-plant and stocking surveys in regeneration units for stocking levels.
c. Planting for reforestation and restoration as summarized in Alternative summaries and detailed
prescriptions for essential reforestation.
d.Planting for reforestation and restoration as summarized in Alternative summaries and detailed
prescriptions for species restoration reforestation.
KV-Other Projects
The following is a list of KV-other projects other than reforestation projects::
a. Prescribed burning to reduce natural fuels and improve wildlife habitat and browse;
b.Removal of culvert on NFS Road #835A;
c. Road decommissioning, storage and culvert upgrades;
d.Fivemile fencing project (T32N, R27W, Section 14) on the creek bottom below private land, ½ mile of
fence; Warland fencing project (T32N, R28W, Section 28) on the creek bottom, ½ mile of fence
extending current riparian exclosure;
e. Warland Creek water development (T32N, R28W, Section 28) on the creek bottom, water tank and pipe
with placement by contract equipment.
f. Leave Tree protection (i.e. duff clearing prior to prescribed burning)
g. Monitoring Leave Tree protection.
h.Old growth posting.
i. Monitoring old growth posting.
a. Aspen restoration fencing.
b.Noxious weed spraying.
c. Noxious weed monitoring.
j. Sensitive plant monitoring
k.Additional road maintenance within the project area.
m. Gate and berm maintenance within the project area.

COMPARISON OF ALTERNATIVES
This section displays a tabular comparison of the alternatives considered in detail. This information, along
with a detailed discussion of the environmental consequences presented in Chapter 3, provides the basis for
comparing alternatives.
Table 2.35 - Comparison of Alternative to Meet Purpose and Need Objectives
RE-ESTABLISH, RESTORE and RETAIN LANDSCAPES that are MORE
RESISTANT and RESILIENT to DISTURBANCE (INSECT and DISEASE
INFESTATIONS, FIRE) and UNCERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
such as CLIMATE CHANGE

Commercial Timber Harvest (acres)
Precommercial Thinning (acres)
White Pine Precommercial Thinning (20% of stand acres)

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0
0

8,845
5,563
212

7,782
5,563
0

0
0

36.56
10,049

26.89
10,049

0
0

78,761
629

7,782
560

0

1,378

1,309

0

10,049

10,049

CREATE a HETEROGENEOUS LANDSCAPE that PROVIDES a VARIETY of
HABITATS to SUSTAIN POPULATIONS of TERRESTRIAL and AQUATIC
SPECIES

Motorized Trails Changed to Non-Motorized (miles)
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment (acres)
PROVIDE AMENITIES, JOBS AND PRODUCTS TO THE COMMUNITIES

Timber Harvest Volume, Estimated, CCF
Total Employment (persons)
REDUCE HAZARDOUS FUELS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY AND
ACROSS THE LANDSCAPE WHILE RE-INTRODUCING FIRE TO THE
ECOSYSTEM

Natural Fuel Reduction/Stand IMP through Hand Slashing, Grapple
Piling, Chipping, Mastication or Mechanical Product Removal (acres)
Fuels and Wildlife Treatment (acres)
ALTERNATIVES
Page 37 of 38

CHAPTER 2

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

ENHANCE RECREATION SETTINGS AND FACILITIES WITH THE GOAL OF
PROVIDING HIGH QUALITY EXPERIENCES

Construction and Improvement of Recreation Access Roads (miles)
Road Access Changed to Yearlong Access (miles)
Native Rock Ring Fire Pits, Vault Toilets and Signage Proposed
NE = No Effect

0
0
No

6.28
1.79
Yes

6.28
1.79
Yes

NLAA = May affect, likely to adversely affect) (NLAA = may affect, not likely to adversely affect

Table 2.36 - Comparison of Issue Indicators by Alternative
ISSUE #1 – REGENERATION HARVESTS OVER 40 ACRES

Number of Units Over 40 acres in MA12
Number of Units Over 40 acres in MA 15, 16

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0

1
12

0
0

25
N/A
158,400
136
1,744
7,518
N/A
11.2

137
43
+666
+28
+250
7,268
1,326
11.2

0
0
+666
+23
+241
7,277
0
11.2

ISSUE #2 - IMPACT to OLD GROWTH FOREST STANDS

Vertical Structure Removed in Designated OG/ROG (acres)
Vertical Structure Removed in Undesignated OG (acres)
Road Length Existing/Built Adjacent/Through Designated OG/ROG (ft.)
Number of Existing or Proposed Regeneration Units Adjacent to OG
Edge Influence in OG (acres)
Interior Habitat Remaining in Old Growth (acres)
Treated to Maintain OG or Trend Stand Toward OG (Burning) (acres)
Percent of Designated Old Growth in the PSU
ISSUE #3 - MOTORIZED vs. NON-MOTORIZED TRAILS

Motorized Trails Changed to Non-Motorized (miles)
Security Cover (Standard 30%)

ALTERNATIVES
Page 38 of 38

0
28.1

36.56 26.89
35 33.4

East Reservoir Project DEIS
Chapter 3
Affected Environment
and
Environmental Consequences

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

INTRODUCTION
This chapter summarizes the physical, biological, social and economic environments of the project area
(from now on referred to as the analysis area) and the effects of implementing each alternative on that
environment. It also presents the scientific and analytical basis for the comparison of alternatives
presented in the alternatives chapter.
Chapter 3 describes the environment (including its human elements) in and around the analysis area and
discusses the environmental consequences by resource that may result from implementation of each of the
alternatives. It provides the scientific and analytic basis for the comparison of alternatives presented in
Chapter 2. Maps referred to in the analysis are located at the end of this document.
The Council on Environmental Quality Regulations (CEQ) recognizes three types of effects:
• Direct Effects are caused by an action and occur at the same time and place.
• Indirect Effects are caused by an action but occur later in time or farther removed in distance.
• Cumulative Effects result from the incremental impact of an action when added to other past,
present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions, regardless of what agency or person undertakes the
other actions (40 CFR 1508.7 and .8). Since the results of past actions are already included in the
affected environment, the cumulative effects analysis builds upon this existing condition assessment
by considering the incremental addition of direct and indirect effects of the proposed action as well as
ongoing and reasonably foreseeable actions.

PAST, PRESENT AND REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
Analysis of cumulative effects presented in this chapter considered past, present, proposed and reasonably
foreseeable activities that could affect the issues pertinent to this analysis. Activities on public and private
lands have been considered.
Reasonably foreseeable actions include those management activities that are on-going or scheduled to
occur within the next five to ten years and for which a proposed action has been developed. These
activities may occur regardless of which alternative is selected for implementation.
The environmental analysis required under NEPA is forward-looking, in that it focuses on the potential
impacts of the proposed action. Past and present activities and natural events have contributed to creating
the existing condition and trends across the Kootenai National Forest (KNF). In order to understand the
contribution of past actions to the cumulative effects of the proposed action and alternatives, this analysis
relies to a large extent on an examination of the current environmental conditions in order to highlight the
impacts of past actions. This method is useful because existing conditions reflect the aggregate impact of
all prior human actions and natural events that have affected the environment and might contribute to
cumulative effects. Additionally, some of these activities, as well as reasonably foreseeable activities,
may continue to produce environmental effects that overlap in time and space with issues or resources
relevant to the proposal. Therefore, past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities have been
considered in the cumulative effects analysis for each resource area relative to potential future effects of
the proposal.
The cumulative effects analysis in this Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) is consistent with
regulations at 36 CFR 220.4(f) (July 24, 2008) in accordance with the CEQ Memorandum, Guidance on
the Consideration of Past Actions in Cumulative Effects Analysis, which state, in part:
“The analysis of cumulative effects begins with consideration of direct and indirect effects
…agencies then look for present effects of past actions that are, in the judgment of the agency,
relevant and useful because they have a significant cause-and-effect relationship with the direct
and indirect effects of the proposal for agency action and its alternatives. CEQ regulations do
not require the consideration of the individual effects of all past actions to determine the present
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 1 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

effects of past actions. Once the agency has identified those present effects of past actions that
warrant consideration, the agency assesses the extent that the effects of the proposal for agency
action or its alternatives will add to, modify, or mitigate those effects. The final analysis
documents an agency assessment of the cumulative effects of the actions considered (including
past, present, and reasonable foreseeable future actions) on the affected environment. With
respect to past actions, during the scoping process and subsequent preparation of the analysis,
the agency must determine what information regarding past actions is useful and relevant to the
required analysis of cumulative effects. Cataloging past actions and specific information about
the direct and indirect effects of their design and implementation could in some contexts be
useful to predict the cumulative effects of the proposal. The CEQ regulations, however, do not
require agencies to catalogue or exhaustively list and analyze all individual past actions. Simply
because information about past actions may be available or obtained with reasonable effort
does not mean that it is relevant and necessary to inform decision making. (40 CFR 1508.7)”
During the scoping process and subsequent analysis of this project, the Forest Service (FS) determined
that the following activities, decisions, information and environmental documents are applicable to all or
portions of the National Forest Service (NFS) lands included in the analysis area for this DEIS. As
appropriate, they were considered during the cumulative effects analyses discussed in this chapter. This
section also lists known past activities identified by resource specialists as being pertinent to an analysis
of cumulative effects for the East Reservoir project. There are marked differences between past and
current land management practices and policies. The evolution that has occurred in land management
practices is the result of science, our ongoing monitoring actions, and changing public values.
A cumulative effects map showing considered activities is included in the project file.
The following discussion identifies those past, present, and foreseeable actions that have occurred within
the East Reservoir analysis area. Data on private lands within the subunit has a moderate level of
accuracy, and is the best available information obtained from those landowners and field verified
information.
Land Ownership: Total acres and percent of total land in the Cripple Planning Subunit by landowner
are displayed in Table 3.0.
Table 3.0 - Acres by Land Owner and Percent of Total Land in Analysis Area
LAND OWNER

TOTAL ACRES

% OF TOTAL LAND

78,546
7,672
4,032
1,355
802
92,407

85.0
8.3
4.4
1.4
0.9
100

USDA Forest Service
Plum Creek Timber Company
Montana Department of State Lands
Other Private
US Army Corps of Engineers
Total Acres

Past Harvest: Table 3.1 displays harvest history in the East Reservoir analysis area by landowner, by
decade and by acres of harvest type.
Table 3.1 - Harvest History of the Cripple Planning Subunit
LAND OWNER

Forest Service

YEAR

1960-1969
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999

TYPE of HARVEST (acres)
INTERMEDIATE LIBERATION REGENERATION

1,418
2,698
1,014
78

46
372
704
6,773

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 2 of 410

2,542
1,873
8,486
4,080

TOTAL

4,006
4,943
10,204
10,931

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
LAND OWNER

TYPE of HARVEST (acres)
INTERMEDIATE LIBERATION REGENERATION

YEAR

Plum Creek Timber Company

Private

Montana Dept. State Lands

2000-2009
2010-2019
1950-1959
1960-1969
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-2009
2010-2019
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999

0
0
20
18
355
1,293
1,384
176
0
277
140
0
111
905
578

1,639
0
0
105
38
33
121
0
0
0
374
115
0
24
0

412
2,932
0
0
64
1,127
684
371
0
0
0
0
0
106
187

TOTAL

2,051
2,932
20
123
457
2,453
2,189
547
0
277
514
115
111
1,035
765

A listing of all past timber sales by names and the year those sales were sold is included in Table 3.2. This
table does not contain every timber harvest activity in the subunit because some harvesting took place that
did not have a timber sale name.
Table 3.2 - Past Timber Sales on USFS Lands within the Cripple Planning Subunit
SALE NAME

YEAR SOLD

ACRES

SALE NAME

YEAR SOLD

ACRES

Canyon Creek
Stenerson
Ant Hill
Lost Margaret
Tidy Bowl
Davis Mountain
Cripple Larix
Five Mile Davis
Gone To The John
Warland Cripple
Warland Davis Bugs
Bornite OSR
Canyon Creek
Cripple Fish
Juicy Davis
Hornet Power
Killum Horse Cleanup
LA Bootleg
Looky Lou
Blas Production
Chromite STR
Galena
Magnetite STR
Molybdenite STR
Snag Park
Swamp Mtn Pest
Yarnell Cripple Horse PC
Canyon Bait and Salvage
Dunn Creek PC
Horsebait PC
Mallard STR
Red Fever

1976
1977
1981
1981
1981
1982
1982
1982
1982
1982
1982
1983
1983
1983
1983
1983
1983
1983
1983
1984
1984
1984
1984
1984
1984
1984
1984
1985
1985
1982
1985
1985

257
325
317
365
82
501
87
266
25
366
167
85
954
9
40
62
11
35
185
19
47
28
40
197
1,311
23
1,446
15
523
27
28
9

Hornet Power Poles
Old Nag Salvage
Out Of The Black PC
Patches PC
Sten Again Salvage
Grimm OSR
Blowout Salvage
Dry Fork Roadside
Blue Sky Bugs Salvage
Five Mile Pulp Salvage
Cripple Land STR
DWS Heli Salvage
Head of 5 Mile PC
Lake Creek Insect Salvage
Snag Roadside Salvage
Tucan STR
Wipeout Salvage
Wyoma Pine
Huckleberry PC
5 Below Down Salvage
Boof
Grimm Falls Salvage
Canyon YCH STR
Go For It LP Salvage
High Five PC
Shore Line Salvage
Back to Canyon STR
I Am Bushed STR
Horn It Out
Broomtail Salvage
Buckshot STR
Keep It Going Blow

1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993

1
8
40
20
166
58
17
4
5
32
252
182
580
20
84
48
37
78
175
117
21
12
261
22
36
170
253
38
75
34
73
28

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 3 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

SALE NAME

YEAR SOLD

ACRES

SALE NAME

YEAR SOLD

ACRES

Redhead STR
Wolf STR
Scuzzite
Summit Springs Bait
Syrup Redemption PC
Dunn Away PC
Pintail STR
Scarlet Wyoma PC
Stan’s Demand STR
Ucan PC
Warhorse PC
Canyon Pine Salvage
Canyon Z PC
Dry Three Mile PC
Nutria STR
Sore Feet PC
Tangled Elk PC
Al’s Finale
Buggy Five PC
Canyon Finale
Canyon Salvage
Cherry PC
Cripple Pine PC
Grim Creek
Hidden Gorge
N Fork 5 Mile PC
Scoodles PC
Son of Wolf Ins Salvage
South Dunn PC
Stenerson Salvage
Warout PC
Billy Gobbler PC
Canyon Creek
Crossroads Salvage
Freckled Horse PC
Giesville Pine PC
Sheep Creek
Smokeys Despair
Stump Holes and Ash
Toasted Board Salvage
Warland PC
Waron Bugs
Ant Out
Black Bush Salvage
Black Horse Salvage
Can Horn PC
Canyon Post and Pole
Cripple Hot Salvage
Bound Up STR
Down Home Davis
Devastation Alley
Green Burnt Salvage

1982
1985
1985
1985
1985
1986
1986
1986
1986
1986
1986
1987
1987
1987
1987
1987
1987
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1988
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990

19
124
98
14
101
37
78
368
81
37
27
133
186
283
118
52
59
331
80
153
204
145
104
69
2
156
195
36
459
76
209
63
92
82
511
100
101
63
78
116
548
127
179
116
154
22
5
16
116
14
244
88

Duck Neck Post and Pole
Five Mile Helicopter
Lake Creek Salvage
Lookout Salvage
Mineral Sheep
Cripple Cord
Old Weezer STR
Lake Mtn Salvage
S Cripple Horse Rdsd Salvage
Wag Salvage
Why Not STR
Dunn Down
Heli House Salvage
Lake Creek
Loner STR
Summit Cord
Weigel House Salvage
YCH Roadside Salvage
Ant Wildlife
Backus Roadside
Cripple Peak Heli Roadside
Movie Spur Salvage
Canyon Area Salvage
Wag 2 Salvage
Fly It Out Heli Salvage
Hiper Roadside Salvage
Out the Door Roadside Salvage
Two Stooges Salvage
Sheep Mountain
Stenerson Saddle
Done Creek Salvage
Huff Puff Heli Salvage
Snag STR
Spring Loaded
Upper 5 Mile Salvage
Warland Salvage
Bed Springs BD
Swamp Ridge
Wolf Davis Rdsd Heli Salvage
Boundary Mtn Salvage
Cripple Horse Salvage
Twisted Knee Salvage
Weigel Salvage
Yarnell STR
Canyon II Salvage
So Fork 5 Mile Salvage
3 Dog Down Blowdown
Grimm Lake Salvage
Dry Pocks Salvage
Stenerson Cliff Salvage
Can IT Salvage
Reservoir East Re-Ad

1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000
2000
2001
2001
2002
2010

1
165
21
34
53
3
132
13
26
193
318
13
305
57
144
4
46
80
46
3
81
27
453
20
188
11
51
83
41
18
371
35
261
38
739
197
3
30
13
358
597
2
86
129
250
118
9
33
26
30
297
69

PC = Pest Control

STR = Seed Tree Removal BD = Brush Disposal
OSR – Overstory Removal

Heli – Helicopter

Rdsd – Roadside

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 4 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

Forestwide Fuels: In 2011, three Forestwide Fuels units (2001 Forestwide Fuels Reduction and Wildlife
Habitat Enhancement EA) were slashed in preparation to be burned (910 acres). These units are FWF545
(Gopher Hill) which is 265 acres, FWF536 (Warland Peak) which is 195 acres and FWF52403 (Warland
Peak) which is 450 acres. These units are scheduled to be underburned between 2013 and 2015. In 2010,
170 acres of FWF589 was slashed. Twenty-five of those acres are in old growth and are expected to be
burned in 2013.

REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
Reasonably foreseeable actions include continued forest management on private and Forest Service land
in the Cripple Planning Subunit that are on-going or scheduled to occur within the next five to ten years
These activities are expected to continue to occur and have been included in the analysis of cumulative
effects. A large amount of private industrial lands are included in this analysis area. Data on those lands
has a moderate level of accuracy, and is the best available information derived from those landowners and
field verified information.
Actions on Private Lands: Continued development of private lands within the analysis area is expected.
Development is expected to include commercial timber harvest, land clearing, home construction, road
construction, septic field installation, water well drilling, livestock grazing, pile burning and stabilization
of migrating stream banks.
Table 3.3 shows the foreseeable activities within the next ten years on State of Montana lands within the
East Reservoir analysis area. This information was requested from the State of Montana Department of
Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) when the analysis of this project began.
Table 3.3 – State of Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation Activities
LEGAL LOCATION

SECTION

HARVEST TREATMENT

ACRES

T31N, R29W

12

Regeneration

198

ACTIVITY

MILES

New Road Construction

0.84

Regeneration Harvest Treatments: Shelterwood w/Reserves, Seedtree w/Reserves or Clearcut w/Reserves

U. S. Corps of Engineers: The Dunn Creek Watershed Connectivity Project has been proposed.
Depending on the level of restoration implemented, the following may occur; the historic railroad
concrete box culvert would be removed or bypassed; the culvert under Hwy 37 would be replaced or
modified to accommodate aquatic organism passage; and the last ½ mile of Dunn Creek would be fully
restored to return stream function as well as aquatic organism passage; large eroding banks two miles
upstream of Hwy 37 would be stabilized.
Precommercial Thinning: Approximately 760 acres of precommercial thinning has been approved and
contracts have been awarded in the Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek drainages. This thinning is will be
on-going over the next 5 years.
Forestwide Fuels: The three Forestwide Fuels units (2001 Forestwide Fuels Reduction and Wildlife
Habitat Enhancement EA) that were slashed in 2011 will be underburned between 2013 and 2015 (910
acres).
Outfitter and Guide Activities: One outfitter holds a permit for hunting activities within the Reservoir
East analysis area. That outfitter has had camps in Dunn Creek (2) and the South Fork Cripple Horse in
previous years but currently none are planned or approved. If camps are proposed and approved, the
outfitter is allowed two motorized trips per camper year behind gates, one trip prior to hunting season to
move in camp and one trip after hunting season to move out. Clients move in/out of camp by horse drawn
wagon intermittently during the hunting season.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 5 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

Small Sales: Small fuels reduction projects may be authorized in the analysis area through separate
decisions.
Data Gathering Activities: Field surveys to gather resource data are likely to occur within the analysis
area within the next five years. Types of data collection may include vegetation surveys, fire history
sampling, cultural resource surveys, ecodata plots, wildlife habitat surveys, noxious weeds surveys,
stream surveys, road maintenance surveys, and fuels surveys.
Road Activities: Routine road maintenance is likely to occur as needed on existing roads in the analysis
area. The roads most likely to receive maintenance are those open to vehicle traffic.
Fire Suppression Activities: If conditions are such that there are fire starts within the analysis area,
efforts will be made to suppress any and all fires.
Weed Control: Spraying to control weeds is ongoing within the subunit area under the Kootenai National
Forest Herbicide Weed Control Plan Environmental Assessment and associated Decision Notice and
Finding of No Significant Effect, 1/97. Noxious weed management activities may also occur on PCTC
lands, state lands and private property. Approximately 183 acres was sprayed in the Cripple Planning
Subunit (Weeds project file) in 2010.
Minerals Activities: There are ten gravel pits within the East Reservoir analysis area. Table 3.4 displays
the names of the gravel pits and what their status presently is. The gravel pits are located on National
Forest Service lands. Three of these active pits still have reserves of material. Gravel pit locations are
shown on the cumulative effects map in the project file.
Table 3.4 – Gravel Pits in East Reservoir Analysis Area
GRAVEL PIT NAME

Fivemile Creek
Ant Hill Quarry
Cripple Horse
Lower Cripple Horse
S Fork Cripple Horse
Middle Cripple Horse
Gopher Hill Pit
West Dry Fork Quarry
Hornet Ridge Quarry
Dunn Creek Quarry

STATUS

Reclamation
Active
Reclamation
Active
Reclamation
Reclamation
Reclamation
Active
Reclamation
Pending

The Libby Ranger District has received interest for small sales of building and landscape stone from
the Cripple Horse Area. Stone sales would be small in nature – generally for 20 – 200 tons. There are
several sites adjacent to the main Cripple Horse Road #835 from milepost 5 – milepost 7.5 that would
be appropriate for this activity. Equipment may be used to load heavy stone or pallets of stone onto a
vehicle for transport offsite. No road building would take place.
Special Use Permits: There are ten special use authorizations within the East Reservoir analysis area.
Linear uses consist of authorized rights-of-way for roads, water developments, and utility corridors. Most
road uses are short segment roads that were built to access private land/residences from major Forest
roads. Water developments normally consist of a spring developments and water transmission line
crossing NFS lands leading to a residence for domestic potable and non-potable uses. Electric and
telephone utility corridors are normally buried in the right-of-way adjacent to major Forest roads.
Area uses include marina, cultivation and experimental authorizations. Cultivation authorizations usually
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 6 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PAST, PRESENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS

allow the use of NFS lands for hay or other cultivation. The Libby Dam has experimental or
demonstration authorizations which allow the use of NFS lands as a location for some sort of scientific
monitoring station or apparatus.
Marina authorizations include access to a body of water on NFS lands, and can also include associated
uses such as lodging, guiding, sales, etc. The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping sites during
2013. This expansion includes 33 new seasonal RV camping sites, a new septic system and a new well.
There will be selective tree and vegetation removal allowing for the construction of the access road and
sites, while providing screening for the sites. The sites will be situated on an additional loop road –
portions of which will be reconstructed road and new road construction. An extension to the existing
waterline will service the new RV sites, and a new septic and drainage lines will be installed. An
additional well will be drilled, and a new pump house will be built in place of the existing one.
The proposed expansion will ideally take place in the fall of 2012 and spring 2013, with the new sites
being opened summer 2013.
Another project planned for this summer/fall of 2013 is the Marina repaving project, which will chip seal
approximately 0.9 miles of the access road and the parking lot.
State Designation of Hwy 37: Hwy 37 has been designated a State Scenic byway. An interagency team
is working on proposed interpretive and developed sites.
Grazing: There are four grazing allotments in the analysis area. They are Fivemile, Warland, Cripple
Horse and Canyon Creek. Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek allotments have been closed through the
administrative closure process due to declining transitory range, lack of demand and riparian area
concerns. Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek have been inactive for over 10 years. The Warland Creek
Allotment has been vacant for 6 years; the permit was waived back to the Forest Service in 2010. It will
be maintained as a vacant allotment with potential for grazing in the foreseeable future. Fivemile is an
active allotment that supports 17 cow/calf pair with a grazing season of June 1to October 15. Much of the
grazing is on private land owned by the permit holder along Fivemile Creek and upland areas adjacent to
Blue Sky Road #6271. A Designated Monitoring Area (DMA) was established during the 2010 grazing
season on Fivemile Creek immediately below the permit holder's private land boundary. Monitoring of
the DMA and accompanying fish habitat monitoring would establish trend information for the riparian
and stream channel conditions on the Fivemile Allotment. All four allotments were included in the
Reservoir Range Environmental Analysis (EA) completed in 1997/1998. The Reservoir Range EA
permitted grazing on all four allotments from 1998-2008.
Public Activities Likely to Occur: Firewood and Christmas tree cutting is likely to continue to occur
along open roads. Recreational use of the area will also continue and includes driving open roads,
snowmobiling, hunting, hiking, berry picking, and other activities.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 7 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

VEGETATION RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
The forests of the Inland Northwest, including the drainages along the east side of the Koocanusa
Reservoir, are ecologically diverse in many aspects. This diversity stems from complex ecological
interactions between forest tree species and climate, geology, soils; and disturbance patterns such as
logging, insects, disease, fire and extreme weather events. These elements combine with productive
growing conditions and ample available moisture to create some of the most varied and productive forest
communities in the Inland Northwest. These forest communities are dominated and defined by conifer
trees such as western hemlock (WH), mountain hemlock, western redcedar, grand fir, Douglas-fir (DF),
western larch (WL), western white pine (WWP), lodgepole pine (LPP), ponderosa pine (PP), subalpine fir
(AF) and Engelmann spruce; and associated shrub and herbaceous plant species.
The following vegetation analysis describes the existing condition and effects of the alternatives to
vegetation and ecological processes in Fivemile Creek, Warland Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Canyon
Creek, Dunn Creek, as well as associated face tributaries to Koocanusa Reservoir. This section will
address the vegetation treatments in regard to the identified purpose and need to:
• Re-establish, restore and retain landscapes that are more resistant and resilient to disturbance (insect
and disease infestations, fire) and uncertain environmental conditions (climate change) by enhancing
species diversity and managing density;
• Reduce hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across the landscape and re-introduce fire to
the ecosystem;
• Restore, maintain or improve wildlife habitat;
• Improve recreation settings, opportunities and experiences;
• Provide amenities, jobs and products to the communities and maintain an adequate, balanced
transportation system.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Federal
The regulatory framework providing direction for the management of forest vegetation is provided
through the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (NFMA) and the Forest Plan for the Kootenai
National Forest (KNFP) (1987). NFMA provides for balanced consideration of all resources and requires
the Forest Service (FS) to plan and manage for diversity of plant and animal communities. The KNFP, in
compliance with NFMA, establishes forestwide management direction, goals, objectives, standards and
guidelines for the management for forest vegetation and plant communities. Silvicultural Practices
Handbook (FSH 2409.17) gives direction on vegetation management practices.
State
HB-731, Montana Stream Management Zone Law for vegetation management within Stream
Management Zones (SMZs), defines sideboards for management activities within the SMZ. In general,
this act is overshadowed by the Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS) on National Forest Service (NFS)
lands because INFS requires even larger protection zones for streams than that prescribed by the Montana
Stream Management Zone Law.

ANALYSIS AREA
The East Reservoir analysis area lies within timber stand compartments 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63 and
64, covering approximately 92,400 acres. The potential environmental effects (direct, indirect and
cumulative) of the proposed action and alternatives on the vegetation will be discussed.
The defined boundaries provide an appropriate analysis area for the vegetation resource related to
characteristics such as species composition, forest structure and patterns, and disturbances such insect,
disease and fire. The scale of analysis also provides an appropriate size area to monitor changes in
vegetation trends over time, natural or human-caused. The time frame for this effects analysis would
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 8 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

extend out to the expected ecological rotation age of the typical forested communities in the area.

ANALYSIS METHODS
This analysis will review the existing and historical conditions, trends and desired future conditions in the
analysis area, focusing on proposed activities that may have a measurable effect on vegetation.
District vegetation databases (FACTS, FSVeg), a R1 Summary Database and field reconnaissance were
utilized to generate information on forest vegetation attributes such as forest cover type, stand density and
successional stage, the vegetation response unit (VRU) classification, incidents of insect and disease, as
well as information on past activities. Annual aerial observations of insect and disease activities were also
evaluated to facilitate understanding of longer term fluctuations in insect and disease dynamics across the
landscape. Aerial photographs, both historic and contemporary were used at various stages of the
analysis. Scientific literature, field reviews and subsequent silvicultural assessment were also used in the
analysis. These analysis tools were used to identify site-specific treatment needs that address the purpose
and need for the project.
The inherent limitations to the database and models are recognized. Not all surveys and subsequent data
come from the same time period, with some surveys over 20 years old. The data is used primarily for
broad generalizations, arithmetic sums and means, and to supplement current, site-specific information
gathered at each proposed unit and area of interest. R1 FSVeg has adequate resolution and accuracy for
applications required in this effects analysis discussion.
This effects analysis relies in part on the Montana Habitat Type system as described by Pfister et al.
(1977) because this part of Montana supports very similar ecological conditions.
The habitat type information helped guide stand-level diagnosis and analysis, for development of
proposed treatments, and to better understand potential effects. For more broad scale evaluations and
planning, habitat types were grouped, referred to as VRUs, to facilitate landscape-level analysis based on
similar environments and vegetation characteristics such as productivity, disturbance regimes, stand
dynamics, susceptibility to insect and disease, forest cover types, structural stages and successional
pathways.
Proposed treatments were identified by a silvicultural forester based on observed insect and disease
activity and potential risk; existing vegetation conditions; desired stand conditions based on
interdisciplinary evaluation; and potential contribution to the larger landscape desired condition (Project
File). Desired stand conditions and potential treatments to obtain them are ecologically compatible with
the site, and the current and reference disturbance patterns and successional pathways of the landscape’s
vegetation. These desired stand conditions are also based on the KNFP management area direction, and
site-specific objectives recommended by the Interdisciplinary Team (IDT). Recommendations from site
visits by Region 1 Forest Health Protection specialists, Forest Silviculturist and Forest Leadership Team
were incorporated into the proposed treatments.
Indicators are used to examine how management actions would possibly address the purpose and need,
and to aid in analyzing potential environmental effects to vegetation. These indicators and the units of
measure for each are:
1) Implement activities that trend tree species composition towards the reference tree species composition
for each VRU. The reference composition was more resistant and resilient to disturbance (insect and
disease infestation, fire and uncertain conditions such as climate change). This will be measured by
showing the acres that are treated (either through thinning or regeneration followed by planting of the
desirable species) to increase the relative composition of rust resistant western white pine, larch and
ponderosa pine.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 9 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Species composition or forest type of the stand is determined from the greatest amount of square feet of
basal area of the total live component of the stand. Basal area (BA) is the cross-sectional area of a tree
at diameter breast height (DBH). The BA of a forest stand is found by adding the basal areas of all of
the trees in an area and dividing by the area of land in which the trees were measured. Basal area is
expressed as square feet per acre.
2) Implement activities that trend stand-level tree density (BA) towards reference density condition by
VRU. Stand density was determined from the amount of total live square feet of basal area per acre.
The reference density levels are more resistant to insect and disease infestations, fire and uncertain
conditions such as climate change. This will be measured by showing the treatments by number of acres
that reduce basal area by VRU.
Total live basal area per acre was then put into the following density classes for this analysis:
TOTAL LIVE SQUARE FEET OF BASAL AREA PER ACRE

Less than 20 feet
20-50
51-80
81-120
Greater than 120

3) A landscape that is closer to reference conditions will be more resilient, resistant and better adapted to
disturbance due to diversity of stand successional stages across the landscape. This indicator will
display changes in the successional stages by VRU across the landscape as a result of proposed
activities and compare the current and future percentages of successional stages by VRU to the
reference percentages.
Successional stages were determined by grouping ages into classes to describe Early- successional,
Mid-successional, Late-successional and Very-late successional (Table 3.5).
Table 3.5- Age Class as Estimate of Stand-level Successional Stages
AGE CLASS

SUCCESSIONAL STAGE

0-40 years old
41-100 years old
101-150 years old
+151years old

Early-Successional
Mid-Successional
Late-Successional
Very Late Successional

Vegetation Response Unit Characterizations and Target Landscape Prescriptions (USDA 1999) are
used to define groupings of Habitat Types into VRUs. The Region 1 Habitat Type Groups were the
foundation for this VRU classification. To a large degree, the habitat type groups do a very good job of
describing disturbance probabilities and vegetation responses (USDA 1999).
Table 3.6 - VRU Groups and Fire Regimes
VRU GROUP

CONSTITUENT VRUS

ACRES

% OF PA

FIRE REGIMES

Moderately Warm/Dry
Moderately Warm/ Moderately Dry
Moderately Warm/ Moist
Warm/Moist
Cool/ Moist
Cool/Moderately Dry

VRU 2S
VRU 3
VRU4N
VRU 5
VRU 7
VRU 9

16,532
17,467
7,847
946
22,453
10,252

21
22
10
1
29
13

I
III
V
V
III and IV
III and IV

The VRU is intended to be an aggregation of land having similar capabilities and potentials for
management. As mapped polygons, these units have similar patterns in potential natural communities
(habitat types), soils, hydrologic function, landform and topography, lithology, climate, climate air
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 10 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

quality and natural disturbance processes (fire regimes, succession, productivity, nutrient cycling). The
interaction of all these processes creates a mosaic across the area landscape. Within individual polygons
of any VRU over time, the proportion of age and size classes, succession stage and impacts of fire
and/or disease will be dynamic as natural and managed disturbances occur (USDA 1999).

FIRE DISTURBANCE REGIMES
Four different fire regimes occur on this landscape. A natural fire regime is a general classification of the
role fire would play across a landscape in the absence of modern human mechanical intervention, but
including the influence of aboriginal burning (FRCC 2005).
Fire Regime I occurs on the warm and dry south and west aspects, and consists of frequent low severity
fires on a frequency of 0-35 years (average of 22 years). This is a low severity (non-lethal) to mixed
severity fire that consumes accumulated litter and undergrowth but leaves the majority of the overstory
intact. At times these non-lethal burns may have created small, mosaic type openings (USFS 1999, page
6, FRCC Analysis, page 2-1, 4-22). The non-lethal burns interrupted the succession of Douglas-fir and
were an important agent in controlling density and species composition in VRU 2.
Fire Regime III occurs on the moderately dry north and east aspects within VRU 2N and 3, and
moderate to gentle topography within VRU 4 and 5, and is dominated by infrequent mixed severity,
mosaic fires on a frequency of 35-100+ years. The average fire return is 59 years. These fires typically
burn in a mosaic (USFS 1999, page 6, FRCC Analysis, page 2-2, 4-22). These fires would creep along
the surface and occasionally flare up, killing trees in patches and favoring the fire tolerant western larch
and ponderosa pine. During fire-free periods, the density of the more tolerant species would increase in
the understory. The overstory trees become susceptible to crown fires when this occurs, as the ladder
fuels provide access to the crowns in an otherwise surface fire. This condition can result in severe stand
replacing fires.
Fire suppression activity has disrupted the low severity and mixed severity fire regime and has moved
the landscape to one dominated by overstocked Douglas-fir, grand fir (GF), and other tolerant species
stands that are at risk for severe, larger scale stand replacing fires.
Fire Regime IV is a high severity, stand replacing fire, on a frequency of 35 to 100+ years with an
average return interval of 111 years. These fires typically kill more overstory than the mixed severity
burns. High severity fires burn in a mosaic creating larger patches of openings and leaving variable
portions of the forest structure intact. Quite often, unburned patches occur in predictable micro-sites
(USFS 1999, page 6 and 7, FRCC Analysis, page 2-2, 4-22). The function of high severity, non-uniform
burns is to replace the existing stand and move the vegetation back to the early successional stage. This
regime is common on steeper slopes in VRU 4 and 5, and on all but the riparian areas and gentle and
protected topographic areas in VRU 7 and 9.
During fire-free periods, dense thickets of lodgepole pine regenerate and develop into dense stands with
inter-connected crowns with shade tolerant Douglas-fir, grand fir and subalpine fir in the understory.
These stands are then more susceptible to crown fires when fire does occur, as the ladder fuels provide
access to the inter-connected crowns. Fire suppression activity has resulted in little disruption to the
high severity fire regime; however these stands are ripe for another stand replacing event due to the
mortality in the lodgepole pine and the associated high down fuel loadings, and the fuel ladder provided
by the tolerant species in the understory. Functionally the majority of this landscape type is moving
towards the outer end historic range of variability. However; some of the mid elevation lodgepole pine
stands that have a moderate component of western larch and Douglas-fir (50+ basal area), may trend
towards more mixed severity fire cycles, and longer periods between high severity fire events.
Therefore, some of this area may be within the historic range of variability for high severity fire, but
towards the outer range for mixed severity.
Fire Regime V is a high severity, stand replacing fire, on a frequency of 200+ years with an average fire
return interval of 223 years. These fires typically kill more overstory than the mixed severity burns, and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 11 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

average 77% stand replacement. High severity fires burn in a mosaic creating larger patches of
openings and leaving variable portions of the forest structure intact. Quite often, unburned patches
occur in predictable micro-sites (USFS 1999, page 6 and 7, FRCC Analysis, page 2-2, 4-22). The
function of high severity, non-uniform burns is to replace the existing stand and move the vegetation
back to the early seral stage.
This fire regime generally occurs on flat to moderately steep ground in the mid to upper elevations and
is commonly within the riparian influence areas within VRU 4, 5, 7, and 9. Fire suppression activity has
resulted in little disruption to the high severity fire regime in these areas.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
The analysis area is included in the Northwestern Montana Forest Region described by Pfister et al.
(1977) and refined by Arno (1979). These landscape conditions are reflected in the Vegetation Response
Unit Characterizations and Target Landscape Prescriptions (USDA 1999) which is used for target stand
development and is a useful reference to describe the departure from historical conditions in the following
sections. Map 6 shows the distribution of the vegetation response units (VRUs) within the analysis area.
Historic Range of Variability
The overall climatic condition on the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) has remained relatively uniform for
approximately the past 1,400 years (Chatters and Leavell 1994). Within this time frame, disturbance
processes together with landform and other environmental elements formed the major factors influencing
the patterns of vegetation types across the landscape. Species abundance, distribution and viability
resulted from this dynamic pattern. Native plants and animals throughout this time period and prior to
changes brought about by modern day settlement and management, adapted to the rate of these climatic
and disturbance regimes.
The Historic Range of Variability (HRV) is the context in which current and future conditions can be
evaluated. For example, the condition and treatments of vegetation can affect the:
• Departure from forest species composition;
• Departure from stand density;
• Departure from successional stages.
Departures from HRV result in changes to one or more ecological components including vegetation
characteristics, fuel composition, fire frequency, severity and pattern and other associated disturbances
such as insect and disease, grazing, harvesting, etc.
Reference Conditions
Reference conditions refer to past or historic conditions of an ecosystem. HRV and Natural Range of
Variability (NRV) are terms found in the literature that describes historic (reference) conditions. The
purpose of describing reference conditions is to explain how conditions have changed over time as a
result of human and natural disturbance, and forest succession. This information provides insights to
important questions such as recent (past 150 years) frequency, intensity and scale of disturbances,
abundance and rareness of plant and animal species, and the age-class and composition of trees (Kaufman
et al. 1994). Fire, wind, insects and disease are important disturbance processes which create a dynamic
mosaic of forest conditions. These natural events can occur in small, localized areas or impose changes
over broad landscapes. Species composition, habitat diversity, age class distribution and stand structure
are direct results of disturbances, which includes natural and human influenced disturbances.
There is support for managing ecosystems within the range of variability that has occurred during the past
2,000 years to sustain native species and maintain ecosystem integrity (Leavell and Chatters 1994). While
dominant native species presence was sustained; managers must acknowledge that climate was not static
within this time period. Throughout centuries, shifts in climatic conditions played a critical role in how
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 12 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

landscapes develop over decades or centuries. The use of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) provides
a look into the changes that occur over centuries.

As an example, severe fire years tend to occur almost exclusively when warm weather spikes follow cool
wet weather cycles. This correlation is also supported by a recent study of climate and fire correlations
across the Northern Rockies by Heyerdahl, Morgan and Riser - Ecology 89(3) 2008. Climatic patterns are
a major driver of insect infestations and wildfire effects and therefore have a strong influence on the
landscape patterns and forest structure.
We are not attempting to recreate past conditions, and do acknowledge that the modern human imprint
cannot be eliminated. Our proposal to restore ecosystems within a broad historical range is an attempt to
keep all the parts, and to maintain a sustainable and resilient ecosystem, based on coarse filter
management theories.
Proposed management activities are designed to fit within acceptable and manageable historic ranges
(reference conditions) we have identified, and are designed to foster the processes and patterns that make
up the ecosystem. Knowledge of historic conditions and natural disturbance processes, as described in the
VRUs later in this analysis, can help clarify the types, extent and causes of ecosystem changes, and can
help identify management objectives and restoration priorities (Brown 2004). It is hypothesized where
community composition and structure occur within a historic range of conditions, the function of the
landscape community will also be maintained within its historic range. It is important to note that function
cannot be maintained by restoring the vegetation structure, composition and patch size without restoring
fire on the landscape. No mechanical means alone can duplicate the unique ecological effects of wildland
fire, such as soil heating, nutrient recycling, and the resulting effects to the community composition and
structure (Kauffman 2004, pg. 880).
Reference conditions provide insights to important questions such as natural frequency, intensity and
scale of disturbances, abundance and rareness of plant and animal species, and the age-class, size classes,
and tree species composition (Kaufman et al. 1994). They also provide a valuable tool when combined
with other information gathered from a variety of sources, such as site-specific investigation, old timber
type data, old photos, fen (bog) sediment analysis, fire scar analysis, historical and research references,
and inferences from VRU classifications designed for the Kootenai National Forest.
East Reservoir Analysis Area
The vegetation in the East Reservoir landscape is dominated by conifer forest. Major forest types include
Douglas-fir mixed with ponderosa pine on the drier slopes and true firs, Douglas-fir, western larch,
lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce on the cool moist sites. Natural grass/shrub lands intermixed with
rock outcrops make up a moderate portion of the landscape, and natural meadows, riparian zones,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 13 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

wetlands, and aspen groves, make up a minor but important portion of the landscape.
As described in the section on Reference Conditions, the cumulative influence of natural and humancaused disturbances define the species composition, forest density and function of the landscape.
Historically, wildfire and Native American burning played a role interrupting forest succession and
creating much of the existing vegetation diversity. Since the mid-1900s harvest disturbances have played
an increasing role.
DISTURBANCE AGENTS
The forest communities are dynamic and changing systems. Disturbances characterize all forest types.
Effects from disturbances vary from minor (slow) changes to drastic (quick). In addition, continuous
landscape alterations can range from small to very large, encompassing a few to thousands of acres. These
disturbances historically include fires (wildfire and human-caused), domestic livestock grazing, insect and
disease epidemics, floods, windstorms, timber harvesting and permanent land clearing.
Species composition, habitat diversity, age class distribution and stand structure are direct results of such
disturbances, creating a dynamic mosaic of forest conditions. Since plants and animals adapt to habitat
and disturbance conditions, it is considered desirable to manage towards a broad range of historic
conditions. Restoration and managing for resilience is not just recreating historical conditions, but it
provides a baseline range of conditions to evaluate how existing conditions depart from historic
conditions that resulted largely from natural and historic human induced processes.
Insects and Disease
Most insects and diseases (pathogens) have integral functions in the forest ecosystem. They play a role in
the fire ecology of northwestern Montana by creating areas of dead conifers that fuel large, standreplacing fires. In general, where fire is removed from the natural processes, stand density would
increase, composition moves towards shade tolerant species, and the probability of insect and disease
outbreaks increase as populations increase and stress increases (Waring and Schlensinger 1985).
Historically, the most conspicuous insects and diseases in the forest were bark beetles, defoliators, stem
decays and root disease. Root disease commonly thinned the Douglas-fir and grand fir from early seral
stands of white pine, ponderosa pine and western larch. The early seral species have a high level of
resistance and were able to capitalize on this reduced competition. The fires of the 1890s, selective
harvest, fire suppression and the introduction of white pine blister rust has removed much of the intolerant
species and reduced the opportunity for early seral species to become naturally established in some root
disease areas. Root disease can predispose trees to attack by insects such as bark beetles.
Mountain pine beetle (MPB) was a large mortality factor in the LPP forest, with periodic infestations on
PP and white pines. Douglas-fir beetle periodically caused significant mortality in late seral stands with a
large diameter Douglas-fir component. Stem decays were common in Douglas-fir, grand fir and subalpine
fir.
The major insects and diseases found within the analysis area affecting forest composition, stand
structure, and fuel loads are described later in this analysis. There are other active insects and diseases
within the analysis area, but levels are generally low and not considered as threatening to forest
composition or stand structure. Many of these agents found affect species composition, but are considered
within the "normal range" of a natural process. A consideration of forest health emphasizes prevention as
opposed to suppression as a management strategy for insects, pathogens and natural disturbances that are
considered detrimental to resource production. This emphasis is made with recognition of their beneficial
role with regard to resources and ecosystem functions.
Forest insect and disease activity has been monitored via aerial observations for many years in Region 1.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 14 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

The 2009 and 2010 flights revealed MPB affecting the PP and LPP, western spruce budworm and some
Douglas-fir beetle affecting Douglas-fir in the analysis area (project file map). In comparing the 2009
flight to the 2010 flight MPB in PP and LPP was about the same between the years with 2-10 trees
infested per hot spot. Western spruce bud worm intensity has varied across the analysis area with larger
areas affected in 2010(many in the draw bottoms). Douglas fir-beetle was not detected in the analysis area
in 2009 but was detected slightly in 2010.
Mountain Pine Beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) is a bark beetle that generally attacks mature and
over-mature stands of LPP and other pine species. Outbreaks usually develop where average tree
diameters are greater than eight inches, average stand age is 80 years or more, and in stands with
extreme stocking. During major outbreaks, like those experienced on the KNF between1978 to 1985,
the majority of pine trees over seven inches are generally attacked. This analysis area had very high
infestations in the 1980s. The impacts of this very high infestation of mountain pine beetle were and
still are very significant impact to the landscape of East Reservoir.
Mountain pine beetle infestations are rarely seen in PP stands where average tree diameter is less than
six inches in diameter but are common in stands with average diameters between 8 to 12 inches in
diameter (Sartwell and Stevens 1975). Outbreaks in ponderosa pine have historically not been as
widespread as in LPP stands, but can kill ponderosa pine as young as 30-40 years of age. Most MPB
outbreaks occur in even-aged, high density stands. For PP, stands with BA exceeding 150 square feet
per acre, and average diameters greater than eight inches are considered highly favorable for MPB
outbreaks (Schmid et al. 2007). Schmid et al. (2007) found that unlike in lodgepole pine, MPB in
ponderosa pine attack a range of diameters. MPB activity in ponderosa pine often begins in densely
stocked small and mid-size diameter classes and then moves into the larger size classes.
Schmid et al. (2007) and Olsen et al. (1996) found that MPB attacked trees that occurred in clusters and
that hazard rating for stands with clumpy distributions is higher. In other words, even if a stand has a
BA of 80 square feet per acre but has denser clumps distributed within, significant MPB-caused
mortality may occur in those clumps and lead to additional mortality within the stand. Olsen et al.
(1996) suggested that the competition between trees in the clusters placed stress on individual trees
predisposing them to attack. A more even spacing within a stand leads to less inter-tree competition,
and different microclimates. It may also lead to an increase in the amount of time that it takes for a low
density stand versus a high density stand to become susceptible to significant MPB infestation.
The relationship between LPP and MPB has been extensively researched and is fairly well understood.
Endemic populations of MPB allow for natural thinning of LPP stands, resulting in large expanses of
mortality. Lodgepole pine surviving large infestations continue to grow until another beetle infestation
occurs. This cycle continues on a 20 to 40-year interval, depending on the size and growth of trees, until
LPP is eventually eliminated (Amman 1977). When MPB infestations occur in these LPP areas, heavy
fuel accumulations follows. Since the most significant fuel component in these LPP forests is dead,
woody material (Lotan, Brown and Neuenschwander 1984), heavy fuel accumulations result in very hot
fires spreading over large areas (Amman 1977). MPB infestations are expected to increase with the
predicted climate change. Also, when trees must compete for resources in overcrowded conditions, bark
beetles can more easily overcome these stressed trees’ defenses and initiate a severe outbreak.
A site visit of a regional entomologist confirmed that “MPB is at low and scattered levels on the Libby
Ranger District.” This is an opportune time to reduce potential impacts of MPB through silvicultural
thinning treatments. Removal of infested trees and reducing stocking densities can increase the
effectiveness of suppression techniques.
Douglas-fir Bark Beetle (Dendroctonus pseudotsugae) is a bark beetle that generally attacks large
diameter, mature and over-mature Douglas-fir in dense stands. Characteristics usually found where
Douglas-fir beetle epidemics occur are: stands with a component of Douglas-fir greater than 14" dbh;
over 100 years old; and overstocked (greater than 140-150 basal area). Conditions that contribute to
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 15 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Douglas-fir bark beetle epidemics are any that weaken the tree and make it more susceptible to attack
such as fire, windthrow and root disease.
Drought during the summer of 1998 increased the severity of the Douglas-fir Bark Beetle outbreak. The
occurrence of Douglas-fir Beetle on the KNF has been recorded since about 1950. The 1998 outbreak is
considered to be the most significant, although during the years 1950-1952 a major outbreak was noted
for Region 1 as a whole. The outbreak slowly dissipated and beetle populations are considered endemic
now, although surrounding forests are still reporting beetle populations (USDA 2009). Douglas-fir
Beetle infestations are expected to increase with the predicted climate change. Though numbers are
now endemic, it should be noted that a large portion of the East Reservoir analysis area is composed of
Douglas-fir that is of age and size to move into a moderate level of risk.
Western Spruce Budworm (Choristoneura occidentalis) is a defoliator which prefers to feed on true fir,
Douglas-fir, spruce and larch foliage. Observations in this analysis area indicate only true firs and
Douglas-fir are being attacked. The larvae mine the buds and old needles in the spring, and then
consume new needles as they emerge. After several years of heavy defoliation, branch dieback and top
kill, tree mortality can occur (USDA 2003). Mortality is rare for overstory trees as the larvae’s defense
against predators (birds) is to drop out of the tree via a silk thread to the lower canopy or understory
trees. If mortality occurs, it is more common in these understory trees. According to the Forest Health
Protection Annual Aerial Detection Survey of Western Spruce Budworm (WSB), intensity has varied
across the analysis area with larger areas affected in 2010 (many in the draw bottoms). Although some
understory tree mortality has been observed, few overstory trees have died. Stand conditions that are
conducive to the budworm are high density, multi-layered canopies of desired species – a common
characteristic in the riparian areas. Discussions with regional entomologists indicate that this outbreak
could be related to delayed effects of drought in the mid-part of this decade, and that a return to normal
moisture level may likely cause the budworm population to subside. The effects of WSB may weaken
the overstory trees and pre-dispose them to other insect and disease infestation.
Dwarf Mistletoe (Archeuthobium sp.) is an endemic parasitic plant that depends on a host species
(primarily western larch and LPP in this area) for water, carbohydrates and minerals. Effects on the host
tree are reduced height and diameter growth, weakening trees, decreasing cone and seed production, top
kill, which can lead to mortality. The typical lateral spread within the tree is 1-2 feet per year and seed
spread is up to 100 feet from an infected tree. On-the-ground observations show that dwarf mistletoe is
moderate in the western larch in some stands and as an occasional infection of LPP was found in the
analysis area.
Root Diseases. On May 17 and 18, 2011, a Plant Pathologist from the Coeur d’Alene Field Office visited
several proposed treatment areas across the analysis area with a special focus of identifying root
diseases. In general, a fairly low level of root disease was found in the areas visited. Considerable time
was spent in the proposed Fivemile Recreation Area due to the need to retain firm trees near campsites.
In the proposed recreation site, both Phaeolus schweinitzii root and butt rot and Armillaria root disease
were observed in Douglas-fir and western larch. The Armillaria root disease was isolated to one pocket
of Douglas-fir at the eastern end of the north side of the proposed recreation area. Phaeolus schweinitzii
is not usually considered an aggressive tree killer; rather it is relatively slow acting with the result in a
gradual expression of symptoms. Seedlings can be infected and occasionally killed. However, it is
generally in mature trees that root deterioration causes a measureable decline in tree vigor or increased
likelihood of windthrow. Phaeolus schweinitzii is a major concern in recreation areas with a significant
component of older Douglas-fir and western larch due to the high risk of windthrow and breakage.
Development of recreation sites with Phaeolus schweinitzii should focus on retaining the most vigorous
Douglas-fir and western larch, those exhibiting full crowns and good growth. After tree removal, it is
advisable to allow the area to go through a winter season, when most wind and storm events occur,
before the public is invited to camp. This should assist in determining the wind-firmness of the leave
trees.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 16 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

White Pine Blister Rust (Cronartium ribicola) was introduced to the west coast from Europe and Asia in
the early decades of the 20th century. It spread quickly throughout most of the range of five-needle
pines, where it has substantially reduced the populations of these pines throughout most their ranges in
the west. This is an exotic pathogen that has not co-evolved with its hosts, and because of the
importance of white pine to forest diversity, there is great interest in managing to re-establish rustresistant strains of this once widespread tree. Western white pine i not common in the analysis area.
Wind
Wind and the resulting windthrow is an important natural disturbance process in northwestern Montana
ecosystems. High-intensity windstorms can heavily impact whole stands. Lower intensity windstorms
destroy stands with a high percentage of defective or dead trees or those occupying particularly windprone sites. Wind throw resistance is somewhat similar to fire resistance, with certain species or
individual trees more susceptible than others. When trees grow within an open canopy forest, growth is
concentrated near the base of the tree as compared to a tree that is grown in closed conditions whose
growth is concentrated in height because they are forced to grow tall to compete for light. Growth at the
base of the tree results in increased strength against the forces of wind. Trees that have grown in dense
stands are particularly susceptible to wind-throw when surrounding trees are removed (Waring and
Schlesinger 1985). Trees growing in areas with shallow rooting zones (high water table or bed rock) are
more susceptible to wind throw than trees in soils with a deeper rooting zone.
Fire Ecology and Fire History
Fire has been a major influence on vegetation patterns, composition, structure, function, age and
development of both individual stands and the larger landscape (Habeck and Mutch 1973; Arno 1976;
Arno 1980; Fischer and Bradley 1987). The intensity and frequency of historic fires and the resulting
patch size and vegetation succession are predictable based on the biological, physical and climatic factors
of the landscape. Forest vegetation adapted to these disturbance processes. For example, fire adapted
species like western larch, Douglas-fir and PP have evolved thicker bark and a deeper root system that
allow them to withstand frequent fires of higher intensity more effectively than species with thin bark and
shallow roots such as LPP and true firs. Historically, stand-replacing fires often left the fire-adapted
species as single standing trees or groups with an open canopy (Smith and Fisher, 1997). These stands
would then reproduce under the open canopy, thereby perpetuating the seral fire-adaptive species.
Historically, the influence of fire created a mosaic of stands with a variety of vegetation species, sizes,
ages and structures, as well as variable patch sizes. Prior to European settlement of the western states, the
landscapes of western Montana were largely characterized by the natural and Native American induced
fire regime; influenced by varying moisture, temperature and vegetation composition. The availability of
seed from LPP with serotinous cones meant rapid restocking of burned sites – especially in the mid- to
upper elevations. Persistent, large diameter fire survivors of western larch, Douglas-fir and ponderosa
pine helped to maintain a mix of species.
Disruption of historic fire cycles and the associated increase in stand density and tolerate conifer species
(Douglas-fir, etc.) has likely contributed to increased incidence of insects and disease across the
landscape.
See Fire and Fuels Section for fire history for the East Reservoir analysis area.
Climate Change
Over the next 50 years, the United States, as a whole, is projected to be warmer and wetter. This could
lead to increased forest growth, density and competition, then consequently demand and stress during
water limited periods. Wildfires and insect outbreaks in the western United States are projected to
increase over the next 50 years. In the last 10 years, forest fires annually burned 0.9% of forested land in
the United States, with the largest fire year (2006), burning 1.3% . This corresponds to an overall average
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 17 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

return interval of 100 years for U.S. forest fires. If fires become more severe, especially where ecosystems
are not adapted to severe fire, the likelihood that fire would change forests to shrublands or meadows
would increase.
Intense fires and insect outbreaks over large areas would increase carbon losses. Long-term fire effects on
carbon stored in forests are minor; if the forest regenerates, regrowth recovers the carbon lost in the fire
and in decomposition if the trees are killed by fire. If fires convert forests to meadow or shrublands, losses
of carbon can be considerable (Ryan 2008).
Disruption of historic fire cycles combined with the predicted climate change, may also contribute to
accelerated insect and disease infestations. Warming climatic conditions appear to be accelerating
seasonal insect growth and development (Logan 2003). Northern and high-elevation species are expected
to experience greater effects than southern or low elevation ones (Logan 2003). The majority of research
on the effect of climate change on forest insect pests indicates that insect attacks will intensify in severity,
frequency and size (acreage) (Logan 2003). This result is logical because stressed trees are more likely to
succumb to insect and disease attacks, and climate change would likely result in stress to at least a portion
of the current forest. Current research on MPB, gypsy moth, spruce beetle and spruce budworm confirm
this prediction (Logan 2003).
Bark beetle outbreak dynamics are complex, but climate change is one factor that appears to be driving
the current bark beetle outbreaks. Temperature influences everything in a bark beetle’s life, from the
number of eggs laid by a single female beetle, to the beetles’ ability to disperse to new host trees, to
individuals’ over-winter survival and developmental timing. Elevated temperatures associated with
climate change, particularly when there are consecutive warm years, can speed up reproductive cycles and
reduce cold-induced mortality. Shifts in precipitation patterns and associated drought can also influence
bark beetle outbreak dynamics by weakening trees and making them more susceptible to bark beetle
attacks. Bark beetles respond to landscapes of drought-stressed trees, contributing significantly to the
widespread tree mortality. Because elevated temperatures potentially influence the number of generations
of these species reproducing in a single year, future outbreaks will occur as precipitation and temperature
patterns continue to shift (Bentz 2008).
Human Influences
Long fire return intervals, greater than 100 years, found across most of the analysis area have allowed
shade-tolerant species to become well established in the understory of stands, and generally allowed stand
biomass, ladder fuels and downed woody fuel loadings to increase in some areas beyond what these sites
likely experienced historically. It is important to emphasize the wide range of conditions in these forest
types, and extreme conditions are not unusual. These stands are more likely to experience high intensity
fires with greater mortality due to high biomass, less heterogeneity, increased ladder fuels and crown bulk
densities, and high down woody fuel loadings. Such densely stocked stands are also more susceptible to
insect and disease problems such as root disease, dwarf mistletoe and bark beetle mortality therefore more
susceptible to fire.
A big change in the analysis area over the last 100 years has been to the lower elevation dry sites (VRU2
and VRU3). Historic logging focused on removing the shade intolerant species (western larch and
ponderosa pine) and fire suppression efforts have affected these sites. Absence of non-lethal low severity
fires across the drier sites (VRU2 and VRU3), have altered insect and disease regimes, increased stand
density, and favored more shade tolerant and less disease resistant species such as Douglas-fir and grand
fir. Maturing stands dominated by Douglas-fir, PP and LPP become at risk as hosts to their respective
bark beetle pests of Douglas- fir beetle or MPB.
Substantial changes in the analysis area occurred with the MPB infestation of the late 1970s and early
1980s, and the timber harvest that followed. Thousands of acres of LPP in the analysis area were killed.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 18 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

The Dry Fork Fire of 1988 burned 13,000 acres of which 3,400 acres are within the analysis area. Salvage
of mortality from the MPB and fire killed timber resulted in harvest activities over 27% of the NFS land
within the analysis area from 1980-1999. Regeneration harvest occurred over 15% of the analysis area as
a result of these salvage activities. Most of these treatments occurred in the upper basins of the drainages
in the cool and moist types that carried a high percentage of lodgepole pine (Table 3.1).
EXISTING SPECIES COMPOSITION, FOREST DENSITY and SUCCESSIONAL STAGES
Fifty percent of the East Reservoir analysis area is dominated by moderately warm and dry and
moderately warm and moderately dry stands on the lower elevations of the analysis area. The moderately
warm and dry sites across the landscape are no longer dominated by open park-like stands. Many of these
areas have missed one to six periodic low severity fire disturbances causing an increase in density, ladder
fuels and a shift of species more toward Douglas-fir. Historically, there was a mix of PP, western larch
and Douglas-fir occurring on these sites. However, now Douglas-fir dominates these stands with a much
smaller portion of PP and western larch. Historic logging focused on the removal of mature western larch.
On the moderately warm and moderately dry sites, fewer fire disturbances have been missed, only one to
two fire cycles. Timber harvest has resulted in uniform, medium sized patches instead of a mosaic of
patch sizes that occurred with the mixed lethal fire regime. Currently, stand densities are high and there is
a predominance of Douglas-fir. Historically, these stands had a predominance of ponderosa pine and
western larch.
Twenty nine percent of the analysis area can be described as cool and moist, and is located at the upper
elevations. With past harvest activities, patches have become more uniform in size (30-40 acres). The
cool and moist areas experienced significant mortality in the LPP from MPB in the late 1970s and early
1980s. In addition, other stands have been salvaged, removing the dead LPP and retaining the remaining
stands. Currently, 39% of this VRU7 is in the early-successional stage. The mid-successional stage is low
(9%) as compared to the desired condition for the cool and moist VRU. The late-seral successional stage
is high (44 %) and the very late-successional is low when compared to the desired condition (Table 3.9).
The remaining area (moderately warm and moist; 10% of the area) is a transition zone between the lower
and upper elevations. The cool and moderately dry area (13% of the area) is located on the upper
elevation and ridge tops.
Vegetation Response Units (VRUs)
This section includes a brief summary of the VRUs, on FS lands, in the East Reservoir analysis area and
displays the difference between existing condition and reference/desired condition for these VRUs.
Comparing reference conditions of a given vegetation bio-physical unit such as a VRU to current
conditions can provide ecological insight into landscape management. During the analysis of the existing
conditions for this project area, vegetation management was identified as a need because the current forest
conditions have shifted away from historic conditions (or reference conditions). This issue was used to
develop the desired conditions by VRU (Table 3.7).
Table 3.7 displays the existing species composition by VRU in comparison to the desired condition
within the analysis area. The current species composition is based on the stand dominate forest type.
Information on Table 3.7 is from USDA Forest Service, 1999 and the FSVeg database.
Table 3.7 - Comparison of Current Condition Overstory Composition to Desired Conditions
VRUS

VRU2S
VRU3

CONDITION

desired
current
desired
current

OVERSTORY SPECIES COMPOSITION

50% PP; 20% WL; and 30% DF (approximately)
21%PP
6%WL
71%DF
2%LPP
Predominance of PP & WL w/lesser amounts of DF and GF
6%PP
32%WL 40%DF
22%LPP

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 19 of 410

% OF VRUS

23%
22%

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

VRUS

VRU4
VRU5
VRU7
VRU9

CONDITION

OVERSTORY SPECIES COMPOSITION

desired
current
desired
current
desired
current
desired
current

Predominance of WL, LPP, DF, PP w/lesser amounts of GF & WWP
2%PP
53%WL 37%DF
7%LPP
0%GF
WL, DF, WWP, LPP
47%WL 23%DF 22%LPP 0%WWP
2%WH
Predominance of WL, WWP, DF & LPP.
47%WL 12%DF 28%LPP 0%WWP
12%AF
Predominance of LPP with some DF, WL and AF.
27%WL 24%DF
37%LPP
0%WWP, 11%AF

% OF VRUS

10%
1%
29%
13%

Numbers highlighted grey indicates current conditions outside desired conditions.

In comparing the current and desired conditions, it is apparent that there is a desire to increase the amount
of ponderosa pine and western larch and decrease the amount of DF within VRU 2 and 3. Table 3.7 does
not display percentage levels for desired species for VRUs 5, 7 and 9, however it does display a desired
species present to compare to the current. For VRUs 5, 7 and 9, comparing current to desired conditions
there is a desire to increase western white pine and to decrease the amount of subalpine fir. The desire for
LPP is to keep at current levels. The species desired to increase are drought resistant and fire-tolerant,
with good resistance to insects and disease. The species desired to decrease are drought and fire-intolerant
with greater susceptibility to various insects and disease. Changing vegetation composition toward
desired levels would increase resistance and resiliency, reducing effects from drought, fire, insects,
disease and climate change.
Table 3.8 displays the stand density by VRU in comparison to the condition of all suitable land within the
analysis area. The current density by VRU is based on the total live square feet of BA per acre of the
stand within the analysis area. The desired condition densities by VRU are for mature stands. Information
in Table 3.8 is from USDA Forest Service 1999 and the FSVeg database.
Table 3.8 - Comparison of Current Condition Density Classes to Desired Conditions
VRUS

VRU2S
VRU3
VRU4N
VRU5
VRU7

CONDITION

desired
current
desired
current
desired
current
desired
current

1%
2%
2%
10%

desired
current

VRU9

UNDEFINED*

3%

desired
current

3%

DENSITY (square feet of basal area/acre)
<20
20- 50
51-80
81-120

>120

Densities ranged from 60-100 sq. ft./acre
12%
23%
36%
25%
Densities ranged from 80-120 sq. ft./acre
3%
29%
15%
27%
24%
Densities ranged from 80-200 sq. ft./acre
1%
23%
18%
30%
26%
Densities ranged from 150-200 sq. ft./acre
0%
27%
6%
34%
20%
Densities ranged from 80-120 sq. ft./acre
(open enough to encourage two to multi storied stands)
6%
37%
14%
18%
22%
Densities ranged from 80-120 sq. ft./acre
(open enough to encourage two to multi storied stands)
4%
28%
21%
23%
21%
2%

% OF VRUS

23%
22%
10%
1%
29%

13%

* “Undefined” are acres where no BA/acre was documented. Grey numbers indicates current conditions outside desired conditions.

The density of forest vegetation can influence everything from the health and vigor of individual trees in a
forest stand to the composition of plant species in the community, which affects whether or not the stand
is suitable for certain wildlife species. Tree density also affects the susceptibility of the trees to drought,
insects and disease, wildfires and other disturbance events, as well as influencing the rate of plant
succession. It is difficult to quantify historical forest densities, however general ranges can be made based
on the knowledge of historical disturbance regimes and forest succession. See Table 3.8 for desired
density ranges by VRU.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 20 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

In general, the denser the forest the greater likelihood that the fuel characteristics could support a fast
moving intense crown fire. The susceptibility of a forest to insect and disease is heavily influence by
density and its impact on tree vigor. As the density increases, a deficit of soil moisture develops and trees
lose their ability to withstand attacks by insects, diseases and parasites (Powell 1999, Safranyik et al.
1998). Density related tree mortality from insect, disease and competition leads to increased dead fuel
quantities and higher fuel hazards.
In comparing the current to the desired conditions, there is a desire to decrease density in VRU 2 and 3 on
the warmer and drier sites. There is also a desire to decrease density in lynx habitat (VRU 7) therefore
encouraging development of multi-storied lynx habitat within 20-50 years. Reducing density of these
stands would create an environment for regeneration to occur in varying stages moving the stand into
multi-storied condition in the future. Without reducing density on these heavily stocked stands they would
likely move into the stem-exclusion stage and then would not develop into a multi-storied condition
without disturbance.
Table 3.9 displays the existing successional class distribution in comparison to the desired successional
class distribution within the analysis area. The distribution of current successional classes is based on
stand data and year of origin and put into age classes. The desired ranges represent an approximation of
the historic range of successional stage distribution. Information in Table 3.9 is from USDA Forest
Service 1999 and the FSVeg database.
Table 3.9 - Comparison of Current Conditions of Successional Stage to Desired Conditions
VRUS

VRU2S
VRU3
VRU4N
VRU5
VRU7
VRU9

CONDITION

EARLY
(0-40 YRS)

MID
(41-100 YRS)

LATE
(101-150 YRS)

VERY LATE
(150+ YRS)

desired
current
desired
current
desired
current
desired
current
desired
current
desired
current

15-25%
5%
15-25%
5%
15-25%
20%
10-20%
31%
15-25%
39%
20-40%
27%

15-35%
20%
20-40%
17%
20-40%
16%
15-35%
9%
20-40%
9%
40-60%
11%

10-30%
47%
15-35%
45%
15-35%
57%
10-30%
54%
15-30%
44%
15-20%
50%

20-50%
23%
15-40%
10%
10-40%
7%
25-55%
5%
15-45%
8%
5-10%
10%

UNEVEN
AGED

4%

% OF
VRUS

23%
22%
10%
1%
29%
13%

Numbers highlighted grey indicates current conditions outside desired conditions.

In a comparison of the current to the desired conditions, it is apparent that there is a need to increase the
amount of very late (150+ years) successional stages and increase the mid-successional stages in all the of
the VRUs. There is a need to increase the distribution of acres in the early successional stages of the
warmer and drier VRUs and decrease the acres in VRU 5 and 7. In addition, in all VRUs the late
successional stage is high currently compared to the desired condition. Successional stages are more
difficult to trend toward desired in the short-term. Changing distributions of acres of successional stages
is a long-term goal to trend toward. Taking a closer look at the distribution of acres within the early
successional stage the majority of the acres are greater than 15 years and trending toward the midsuccessional stage. Increases in early successional stages in the cool and moist VRU (7 and 9) would have
a beneficial effect for lynx forage, providing a pulse of habitat for snowshoe hare.
VRU2S
Moderately Warm and Dry Habitats Settings with inclusions of VRU 1 (warm, dry), Fire Regime I
This vegetation response unit (VRU) is found on 18,314 acres of the analysis area. It is characterized as
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 21 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

moderately warm and dry, but is a transitional setting that includes warm, dry grasslands and moderately
cool and dry upland sites. Occurring primarily on south and westerly aspect, these dry, lower elevation
open sites are composed of mixed Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine in well stocked and fairly open grown
conditions. Moist, upland sites and dense draws also include WL and LPP, with lesser amounts of PP.
Tree regeneration occurs in patches and is largely absent in the understory (USDA 1999). The aspect in
this VRU, along with its associated habitat types, plays a role in this setting. The nonlethal fire regime is
representative of VRU2S on moderately warm dry sites (USDA 1999). Lodgepole pine is typically seral
on Douglas-fir/dwarf huckleberry habitats. Both lodgepole pine and western larch occur on moist sites.
Western white pine and grand fir are minor components on some mesic sites and not common over the
VRU. Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine are common serals on dryer sites.
Stand structure is a product of frequent low severity surface fires (every 0-35 years), and occasional
mixed (15-45 years) and non-uniform stand replacement events (+200 years). This VRU is generally
made up of a mosaic of stand ages and forest types. Multi-storied stands representing late successional
stages also occur as stringers in protected areas that burned less frequently. Patches of even-aged, single
storied stands develop after severe burning conditions within a dense understory or an overstocked pole
stand after a long fire-free period (USDA 1999). Historic patch sizes were less than five acres within 20
to 200 acre patches. Overall, these stands are a diverse mix of open stands with well-spaced trees (15-30
trees per acre (TPA) interspersed with larger openings and dense patches with multi-aged and 1-2 storied
stands. Desired basal area densities are 60 to 100 sq. ft./ac. in mid-to-late successional stage stands, and
65-150 on Douglas-fir/pine grass habitat types. Coarse woody material naturally occurs on these sites at
5-9 tons/acre in VRU2S.
Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: Effective fire suppression has basically
eliminated frequent low intensity (surface) fires and mixed lethal underburns in the analysis area. This has
altered the species composition and stand structure. Species composition has changed from primarily PP
and WL with DF to stands that are primarily composed of Douglas-fir with ponderosa pine and Western
larch being less of a component of the stand, (see Table 3.7). Stand structure has changed from open parklike stands of large PP and Douglas-fir to two to three storied stands composed of predominately DF. The
lower canopy is composed of a dense understory of smaller Douglas-fir. These high-density understories
can provide a fuel ladder to the crowns of larger trees, and increase the potential for lethal stand replacing
fires. The overall current densities average 120-130 BA, while historically mature stands carried 60-100
sq. ft. of BA, see Table 3.8. Factors of most influence are timber harvest and fire suppression, replacing
the frequent low intensity burns. Stands have a higher density of middle successional trees, with a more
closed canopy and uniform stand structure.
The effect of missed fire intervals is evident given a lack of early successional class in this VRU. A larger
percentage (47%) falls into the late successional class in this VRU as a result of the fires of the late 1880s.
During the early 1900s, the early logging focused on the removal of the large diameter older trees and left
the co-dominate trees leaving a smaller portion (23%) falling into the very late successional stages of this
VRU.
VRU 3
Moderately Warm and Moderately Dry Habitat Setting, Fire Regime III
VRU 3 occurs on 17,467 acres of the analysis area. This VRU occupies a moderately warm and
moderately dry habitat between the drier, warmer sites featuring the DF series (VRU 1, VRU 2) and the
moderately warmer and moist sites of VRU 4. This often occurring on moderately steep, northerly slopes
and some lower valley sites, VRU3 contains a highly variable assemblage of habitat types, reflective of its
wide environmental distribution (USDA 1999). Western larch, Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine are
dominant species at lower elevations and western larch, Douglas-fir and lodgepole pine dominate the
moist uplands. This VRU does include grand fir and lesser amounts western white pine and occasional
western redcedar.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 22 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

A combination of fire regimes, mainly low to moderate intensity (35-100+ years), has shaped VRU3.
These fires typically burn in a mosaic, creeping along the surface and occasionally flare up, killing trees
in patches and favoring the fire tolerant western larch and ponderosa pine. During fire-free periods, the
density of the more tolerant species would increase in the understory. The overstory trees become
susceptible to crown fires when this occurs, as the ladder fuels provide access to the crowns in an
otherwise surface fire. This condition can result in severe stand replacing fires. Fire has been an important
agent in shaping the species composition of this landscape. Characteristic low to moderate severity fires
favor western larch and ponderosa pine over Douglas-fir. The less common severe fires favored the
development of single species stands, especially LPP. The diversity of this transitional VRU is reflected
in the range of associated fire intervals and severities.
Stand structure is a product of mixed severity fires and occasional stand replacement events; this VRU is
generally made up of a mosaic of stand ages and forest types. Historic patch sizes were variable within 20
to 200 acre patches created by mixed and lethal fires. Structure is variable with gaps to large even-aged
single storied patches. Desired basal area densities are 80 to 120 sq. ft./ac. Coarse woody material
naturally occurs on these sites at 10-20 tons/acre.
Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: Frequent low and mixed severity fires,
and infrequent large-scale stand-replacing fires have been eliminated from this landscape for at least 200
years. The result is much denser stands (+120 square feet of BA) than the desired condition that have a
much higher species composition of DF and less of PP overstory (than the desired condition) with dense
thickets of Douglas-fir and grand fir to a lesser degree in the understory (see Tables 3.7 and 3.8). Stands
generally consist of even-aged or two-aged stands. A high buildup of ground and ladder fuels has
occurred over the majority of this type, due to mortality and the lack of mixed lethal fire.
Past timber harvest in this more productive VRU is shown in the high percentage (27%) of early
successional class in this VRU. A low percentage (10%) of very late successional is a result of this past
timber harvest and the 1889 burns. In addition, the early logging of 1910 and 1920s focused on the
removal of the large diameter older timber leaving the younger co-dominates. Currently 45% is in the late
successional stage in this VRU.
VRU4N
Moderately Warm and Moist Habitat Settings, Fire Regimes V
VRU 4N occurs on 8,133 acres of the analysis area. VRU4N is ecologically influenced by the moderating
effects of the inland maritime climate (USDA 1999). In this analysis area, it is typically bounded by
warmer and drier upland sites (e.g. VRU 2 and 3). Large valley bottoms were often composed of fairly
open grown, mature WL with younger LPP, Douglas-fir and grand fir in the understory. Upland sites had
a mixed species composition with a narrow age class distribution and few canopy strata (USDA 1999).
Grand fir is common in many areas of this VRU, however due to slower initial establishment and growth;
it is usually subordinate to Douglas-fir and western larch. Douglas-fir is a major seral on most sites.
Engelmann spruce and lodgepole pine occur on the wet, colder habitat types. Western larch occurs
sporadically other than where fire created desirable conditions. Western white pine and ponderosa pine
are scattered but are a minor component. Western redcedar and western hemlock appear as incidentals.
Historically, fires occurred as high severity, stand replacing fire, on a frequency of 200+ years with an
average fire return interval of 223 years. These fires typically kill more overstory than the mixed severity
burns, and average 77% stand replacement. High severity fires burn in a mosaic creating larger patches of
openings and leaving variable portions of the forest structure intact. Quite often, unburned patches occur
in predictable micro-sites. The function of high severity, non-uniform burns is to replace the existing
stand and move the vegetation back to the early seral stage. Fire suppression activity has resulted in little
disruption to the high severity fire regime in these areas. This VRU has a higher potential for insects and
disease outbreaks due to the longer fire free intervals and high densities of shade tolerant trees.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 23 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: Effective fire suppression and reduction
has altered the species composition and stand structure in some of the areas. The stand structure has
changed from mid and late development open stands of large WL and WWP to two to three storied stands
composed of predominately WL, DF, grand fir, hemlock, LPP and Engelmann spruce. The lower canopy
is frequently composed of an understory of smaller grand fir and hemlock with some western redcedar.
Based on FSVeg Stand data of stand in VRU4, there is currently minimal very late successional (7%,
151+ year old age class). There is 20% in the early successional due to past harvest and past fires. A
majority of the area, 57%, is represented by the late successional (between 101 and 150 year old age
class) and 16 % is mid-succession (40-100 year old class). Multi-storied stands do not occur due to fire
suppression eliminating the mixed severity fires. Western white pine is not common.
Fire, including moderately frequent mixed severity with infrequent, large scale stand-replacing events, is
the primary ecological process that developed patch size in this area. Populations of native plants and
animals have responded and adapted to this disturbance process, and associated patch size. Species
abundance and distribution are a result of these dynamic processes, and the resulting vegetation patterns.
Historic patch size varied from 100 to up to 10,000 acres. The higher patch size was generally on the
steeper slopes that maintained the lodgepole pine type. The majority of the harvest within this area on
NFS lands has fragmented the landscape due to the 40 acre opening limitation.
VRU5N
Moderately Cool and Moist Habitat Settings, Fire Regimes V
VRU5N occurs on 946 acres of the analysis area, at 1%, it occupies the second smallest percentage of the
analysis area. This VRU has some of the highest biological productivity on the Forest and occurs
commonly along benches, stream bottoms and many of the mid-slope settings. VRU5N is ecologically
influenced by the moderating effects of the inland maritime climate, and is typically bounded by more
moderate sites (VRU3 and VRU4) and some cooler sites (VRU7). The environmental conditions within
VRU5N and VRU5S are very favorable for vegetation growth, species diversity and habitat variety.
Species found in low elevation riparian zones and moist slopes found in VRU5N are: mature western
redcedar and western hemlock, with co-dominant Douglas-fir and western larch.
In general, fires in VRU5N can be characterized as non-uniform with infrequent but often extensive stand
replacing fires on an average frequency > 200 years. Historic patch sizes ranged from 100 to 300 acres or
larger. The more exposed upper slope ridges and the more protected riparian areas, north slopes, toe
slopes and benches are the areas with the highest likelihood of avoiding lethal fires (Zack 1994).
Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: Effective fire suppression and reduction
has altered the species composition and stand structure in some of the areas. The stand structure has
changed from mid and late development open stands of large western larch and western white pine to two
to three storied stands composed of predominately western larch, Douglas-fir, grand fir, hemlock,
lodgepole pine and Engelmann spruce. The lower canopy is frequently composed of an understory of
smaller grand fir and hemlock with some western redcedar. Multi-storied stands do not occur due to fires
suppression eliminating the mixed severity fires. Western white pine is not common.
Fire, including moderately frequent mixed severity with infrequent, large scale stand-replacing events, is
the primary ecological process that developed patch size in this area. Populations of native plants and
animals have responded and adapted to this disturbance process, and associated patch size. Species
abundance and distribution are a result of these dynamic processes, and the resulting vegetation patterns.
Historic patch size varied from 100 to up to 300+ acres. The higher patch size was generally on the
steeper slopes that maintained the lodgepole pine type. The majority of the harvest within this area on
NFS lands has fragmented the landscape due to the 40 acre opening limitation.
Based on FSVeg stand data, of the 946 acres of suitable timber in VRU5N there is currently and minimal
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 24 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

very late successional (5%, 151+ year old age class) and a high percentage in the early successional (31%,
0-40 year old age class). A majority of the area is represented by 54% mid-to-late-succession (9%,
between 101 and 150 year old age class).
VRU7
Cool and Moist Habitat Settings, Fire Regimes III and IV
VRU7 occurs on 22,453 acres of the analysis area. This VRU occurs in the upper basins of each of the
drainages. This landscape is typically bordered by warmer sites (VRU 5) and cool, drier subalpine sites
(VRU 9) and includes characteristics of each. Vegetation productivity is moderate to high due to the high
moisture-holding capacity and nutrient productivity of loess deposits, adequate precipitation and a good
growing season. The predominant conifer species are subalpine fir, lodgepole pine, Engelmann spruce,
with white pine, Douglas-fir and western larch.
Moisture and temperature gradients create a complex influence on the fire ecology and the vegetation
response in VRU7. Fires in this VRU generally burn non-uniformly and are more intense but less frequent
than that of VRU 9. Research demonstrates that infrequent stand replacement fires on a 100+ year fire
return interval (Arno and Davis 1980) were the most common, occurring within a mosaic of nonlethal and
mixed lethal burning. Well-drained upland sites experienced a higher percentage of stand replacement
fires.
Cool and moist conditions, coupled with broken topography and lush understories, undoubtedly limit fire
spread and create non-uniform conditions. With fuels drying out slowly, under most conditions, fires
either burn very small areas or burn large areas in a patchy pattern (Smith and Fisher 1997). However,
because much of this VRU is relatively narrow and is often flanked by riparian areas this fire regime is
strongly influenced by that of neighboring landscapes.
This VRU is a combination of Fire Regime IV and V. Fire Regime IV is a high severity, stand replacing
fire, on a frequency of 35 to 100+ years with an average return interval of 111 years. These fires typically
kill more overstory than the mixed severity burns. High severity fires burn in a mosaic creating larger
patches of openings and leaving variable portions of the forest structure intact. Fire Regime V is a high
severity, stand replacing fire, on a frequency of 200+ years with an average fire return interval of 223
years. These fires typically kill more overstory than the mixed severity burns, and average 77% stand
replacement.
Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: A huge impact in this VRU occurred with
the MPB infestation of the late 1970s and early 1980s and the timber harvest that followed. Many acres of
LPP in the acres were killed. Shortly following the infestation, the Dry Fork Fire of 1988 occurred in the
project acres in this VRU. Salvage of mortality from the MPB and fire killed timber resulted in 27% of
the NFS land being harvested during the 1980s to 1999, with 15% of the area resulting in a regeneration
harvest. Much of these treatments occurred in the upper basins of the drainages in this VRU that carried a
high percentage of LPP. Some current patterns of natural disturbance in the analysis area are consistent
with those described for desired conditions of the broader geographical area. However, the result from the
majority of the past timber harvests is a fragmentation of the landscape. FS policy and the NFMA
direction limiting opening size to 40 acres in areas that historically had patch size of up to 10,000 acres,
has resulted in a fragmented landscape with scattered openings that are much smaller than desired
conditions.
Uncharacteristic vegetation-fuel conditions in this VRU are generally the result of the mortality in the
LPP in areas that have not been harvested and lack of western white pine in the moister sites. The older
WL component in stands is decreasing due to age and mistletoe and the older DF component is also
decreasing due to Douglas-fir beetle and some root disease. Increases in subalpine fir and Engelmann
spruce with some grand fir increasing. Many of the western larch forest type stands are in plantations
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 25 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

ready for commercial thinning.
Based on FSVeg stand data, there are 22,453 acres in VRU7, of which there is currently a high percentage
(39%) in the early successional stages (0-40 year old age class), and minimal very late successional (8%,
151+ year old age class). Mid-succession (40-100 year old age class) is 9%. The majority of the area
(44%) is represented by the late successional (between 101 and 150 year old age class).
VRU9
Cool and Moderately Dry Habitat Settings, Fire Regimes III and IV
VRU 9 occurs on 10,252 acres of the analysis area. These sites are generally found on rolling ridges and
upper reaches of mountain slopes generally above 4,400 feet in elevation. This VRU occurs on all aspects
in the lower subalpine zone on gentle to moderately steep slopes. The climate is characterized by a short
growing season with early summer frosts. Soils are generally from loess overlying glacial tills. Vegetation
productivity is moderate to high depending on the aspect and soil moisture-holding capacity. These
settings are very suitable to lodgepole pine and subalpine fir, the most common conifers, with scattered
Douglas-fir and larch.
This VRU is a combination of Fire Regime IV and V. Fire Regime IV is a high severity, stand replacing
fire, on a frequency of 35 to 100+ years with an average return interval of 111 years. These fires typically
kill more overstory than the mixed severity burns. High severity fires burn in a mosaic creating larger
patches of openings and leaving variable portions of the forest structure intact. Fire Regime V is a high
severity, stand replacing fire, on a frequency of 200+ years with an average fire return interval of 223
years. These fires typically kill more overstory than the mixed severity burns, and average 77% stand
replacement.
Lethal and moderately severe fires often create pure even-aged stands of lodgepole pine, as did the fire of
1910. Patch size resulting from stand-replacement events were typically 5,000 to 100,000 acres (USDA
1999). The fire return interval for these large non-uniform fires ranged from 100 to 115 years. The mixed
severity, non-uniform fires ranged between 50 and 300 acres, on an fire return interval of 50-71 years.
Comparison of Current to Desired (Reference) Conditions: A big impact in this VRU occurred with
the MPB infestation of the late 1970s and early 1980s and the timber harvest that followed. Many acres of
LPP in the acres were killed. Shortly following the infestation, the Dry Fork Fire of 1988 occurred in the
project acres in this VRU. Salvage of mortality from the mountain pine beetle and fire killed timber
resulted in 27% of the NFS land being harvested during the 1980s to 1999. Of this 27%, 15% of the acres
within the analysis area resulted in a regeneration harvest. Some of these treatment occurred in this cool
and moderately dry VRU however a greater percentage of the LPP salvage occurred on the more
productive ground of VRU7. Some current patterns of natural disturbance in the analysis area are
consistent with those described for desired conditions of the broader geographical area. However, the
result from the majority of the past timber harvests is a fragmentation of the landscape. FS policy and the
NFMA direction limiting opening size to 40 acres in areas that historically had of up to 10,000 acres, has
resulted in a fragmented landscape with scattered openings that are smaller than desired conditions.
Stand structure is more uniform and less storied, with less shrub field development. Stands have fewer of
the large, old overstory trees due to insects, disease, and the fire of 1889. There is more homogeneity as
patch sizes are getting smaller and more isolated and there is more uniformity in size and age classes of
stands. Western spruce budworm is common, which is a typical result of dense stocking of shade tolerant
trees.
Based on FSVeg stand data, there are 10,252 acres in VRU9 of which there is currently 27% in the early
successional stages (0-40 year old age class) however, only 1% are in the 0-10 year age class. Currently
there is 10% in the very late successional (151+ year old age class) which is within the desired condition.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 26 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Mid-succession (40-100 year old age class) is 11%. The majority of the area (50%) is represented by the
late successional (between 101 and 150 year old age class).
Refer to NFMA Report in the project file for a desired future condition and restoration strategy by VRU.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
This section analyzes potential environmental effects related to proposed activities, and provides contrast
between the various alternatives described in Chapter 2 of this document. The successional conditions
predicted represent the most logical pathways given the existing conditions of stands in the analysis area.
Where the effects of the proposed treatments are very similar, the disclosures are combined. These
potential effects include direct, indirect and cumulative effects, in full compliance with the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and related law, regulation and policy. This section will also display
how each alternative addresses the purpose and need of the project and the major issues identified. The
effects of Alternative 1, the no-action alternative, are evaluated at the same level of detail as the action
alternatives, to provide a baseline for comparison. Cumulative effects are described and evaluated by
putting into context the effects of the proposed action with other past, present and reasonably foreseeable
actions.
Past Regeneration Treatments on NFS lands amount to approximately 20,325 acres or 26% of NFS
lands. This has created a mosaic of openings in a densely forested landscape. All of the regeneration
harvests are in a stand initiation stage, are fully stocked and include a component of intolerant species
consistent with VRU objectives. Due to the NFMA requirements that preclude openings in excess of 40
acres, combined with KNFP opening size standards, all existing treatment areas are less than 40-acre
openings. The average patch size of the regeneration openings and the location of these patches are not
consistent with historic patch sizes and distribution of openings. The effects of these openings are
increased amount of edge effect, and increased fragmentation from what would have occurred
historically.
Past regeneration harvest on Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC) lands (2,182 acres) and State of
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) (1,943 acres) have also created a
mosaic of openings, and reduced stand density in a densely forested landscape. Many of these are
connected, and are within the historic patch size on the moist types but on the drier VRU 2 and 3 the
patches are larger than historic.
Past Intermediate Harvest (14,742 acres) on NFS lands have changed composition, structure and
potentially function by removing the larger more intolerant species. Prior to the 1990s, most of the
intermediate treatment was a liberation harvest that removed the larger intolerant species and relic trees.
Changes in species composition and structure is trending to a higher than historic component of smaller
mid-tolerant to intolerant trees with increased ladder fuels. Despite the removal of the overstory, past
intermediate harvest on NFS lands have generally maintained more intolerant species than private lands.
In the 1990s most of the intermediate harvest was a commercial thin that retained the best quality of the
intolerant western larch, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir.
Past intermediate harvest on PCTC (3,543 acres) and DNRC (3,693 acres) has also changed stand
composition, structure and function by removing the larger intolerant trees as well as much of the codominant intolerant trees leaving stands that are often dominated by the mid-tolerant Douglas-fir and
intermediate western larch and ponderosa pine as well as a component of other tolerant species. These
stands are generally more open than the stands with intermediate treatment on NFS lands, and most are
regenerating to mid-tolerant and tolerant species in the understory.
Refer to the harvest by decade Table 3.1 of this report. This information has been incorporated into the
existing condition analysis.
Past Slashing and Underburning (16,030 acres): The effects of the slashing and underburning have
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 27 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

decreased the understory component of Douglas-fir, reduced stand density and restored fire on the
landscape. This treatment improved stand conditions and increased resilience to potential climate change
by reducing stocking, decreasing within stand stress, decreasing ladder fuels and increasing species
composition of intolerant ponderosa pine and western larch. This burning was the first step, but much of
the acreage is still overstocked with smaller Douglas-fir, and would take additional treatment to move the
stands to desired conditions. The majority of this burning was within VRU 2S and VRU 3, treating
approximately 43% of these dry VRU groups within the analysis area. These actions have been
incorporated into the existing condition analysis.
Weed Control: Spraying with herbicide to control weeds has been ongoing since the mid-1990s. The
effects of past herbicide treatments have reduced the existing noxious weed infestations, but have also
decreased native shrubs and forbs, and potentially increased native and non-native grasses. These effects
are primarily associated with roadside corridors. Approximately 183 acres were sprayed in the Cripple
Planning Unit (Weeds Project File) in 2010.
Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
DNRC: Table 3.3 shows the foreseeable activities within the next ten years on DNRC lands within the
East Reservoir analysis area. This information was requested from the DNRC when the analysis of this
project began. The planned 198 acres of regeneration harvest on DNRC lands are within the warm and
moist VRU 4. The regeneration harvest on DNRC lands is consistent with restoration objectives for
species composition, but may not be consistent in patch size.
Precommercial Thinning: Approximately 760 acres of precommercial thinning has been approved and
let out on contracts in the Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek drainages. This thinning would be on-going
over the next 5 years.
Forestwide Fuels: The three Forestwide Fuels (FWF) units (2001 Forestwide Fuels Reduction and
Wildlife Habitat Enhancement EA) that were slashed in 2011 would be underburned between 2013 and
2015 (910 acres). The effects of the additional underburning in the Forestwide Fuel units, would decrease
the understory component of Douglas-fir, reduce stand density, and restore fire at a moderate scale on the
landscape. This treatment would improve stand conditions and increase resilience to potential climate
change by reducing stocking, decreasing within stand stress, decreasing ladder fuels and increasing
species composition of shade intolerant ponderosa pine and western larch. Between the planned 980 acres
and the existing 16,030 acres, approximately 46% of the drier VRUs within this analysis area would be
treated. Additional burning or stand density reduction would be required on many of these stands to move
the stands to desired conditions.
Actions on Private Lands: Continued development of private lands within the analysis area is expected.
Development is expected to include commercial timber harvest, land clearing, home construction, road
construction, septic field installation, water well drilling, livestock grazing and stabilization of migrating
stream banks.
Fuel Reduction: Small fuels reduction projects may be authorized in the analysis area through separate
decisions.
Road Activities: Routine road maintenance is likely to occur as needed on existing roads in the analysis
area. The roads most likely to receive maintenance are those open yearlong to vehicle traffic. Typically,
these activities do not affect vegetation other than potential weed spread.
Fire Suppression Activities: If conditions are such that there are fire starts within the analysis area,
efforts would be made to suppress fires. It is important to clarify that not all fires are extinguished or
actively suppressed. Depending on conditions analyzed during a wildfire, some fires are monitored and
managed and allowed to burn in prescribed areas.
All alternatives include timber harvest units, precommercial thinning, natural fuel reduction units and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 28 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

other activities as described in Chapter 2. The various alternatives have been described in Chapter 2 and
this information will not be repeated here.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
The effects of the no-action alternative provide a baseline from which to compare the action alternatives
relative to fulfilling the purpose and need of the project. The following trends have been discussed
previously in the Affected Environment section.
No prescribed burns (except FWF units), tree harvest or fuels reduction would take place with this
alternative other than those described in reasonably foreseeable actions. Species composition, density and
successional stages would continue to trend away from desired conditions. Only natural processes and fire
suppression would occur, dramatically affecting the stand density, species composition and forest
succession and health as described previously. This alternative would not contribute to the purpose for
this project. Specifically, it would not create vegetation patterns and structure in-line with desired
conditions, reduce fuel near private land and promote fire-adapted species. Stands dominated by mature
Douglas-fir or LPP would not benefit from silvicultural treatments to reduce stand densities, improve
growing conditions and increase the diversity of tree species in the area. Nor would these stands benefit
from increased successional stage diversity in the analysis area, or improve forage production and quality
through the use of such treatments as commercial timber harvest, slashing and prescribed fire. Also, this
alternative would not meet the purpose and need to provide local employment related to forest
management and restoration activities and to supply forest products.
Fire Ecology and Forest Resiliency
With continued fire suppression and lack of prescribed fire understory trees would continue to grow into
the general canopy as well as expand in scope. This condition, with continued encroachment of fire
intolerant species, would potentially increase fire severity. The quality and quantity of wildlife forage
would continue to decline. It is important to clarify that not all fires are actively suppressed. Depending
on conditions analyzed during a wildfire, some fires are monitored and managed and allowed to burn
within prescribed areas.
The current outbreak of MPB (around the state) would continue to impact the immature and mature,
overstocked stands of PP and LPP that were not infested in the previous epidemic. Western larch would
not be restored to more historic levels in the lower elevations of the analysis area. Species diversity would
not increase without timber harvest and planting of western white pine, ponderosa pine and western larch.
Western spruce budworm would likely remain as an endemic insect in the analysis area. Defoliation of
understory trees would continue; but as stated earlier, little mortality is expected in the overstory of most
stands. Root disease would likely increase with increasing density; increasing competition and increasing
amounts of tolerant species.
Prescribed fire would not be implemented and managed and fire would not be used as a process to
improve ecological integrity. Dryland areas would continue to decline in forage quantity and quality, and
hiding cover would increase above desired conditions on the big horn sheep range.
Carbon Flux
Those forest stands not affected by recent disturbance events, such as trees killed by wildfire, insects or
diseases, are likely net carbon sinks at this point in their development. Under the no-action alternative,
they would continue as sinks until the next disturbance event occurs. Over the long-term (centuries), net
carbon storage is often zero if stands regenerate, because re-growth of trees recovers the carbon lost in the
disturbance and in decomposition of trees killed by the disturbance (Kashian et al. 2006).
Climate Change
The long-term health of ecosystems may be dependent on the resilience of ecosystems to potential climate
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 29 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

changes and the associated climate-related disturbances. Resilience to potential climate change is
generally compatible with maintenance of reference and identified desired conditions. But in addition to
maintaining resilience to fire, resilience to climate change may require increased forest structural
diversity. This would include maintenance of rare habitats and structures, which may potentially be
eliminated by climate change; maintaining connectivity for species movement to allow animals and plants
to relocate as suitable habitat moves north or south, or up or down in elevation; and increasing resilience
changes in natural disturbance processes. These processes could include increases in insects and disease,
larger fires, longer fire seasons, and fires in higher elevation areas.
Another potential ecosystem change as a result of changing climate is expansion of some vegetation types
or habitats and reduction of others. Even if maintenance of current native communities becomes
impossible with climate change, maintenance of regional biodiversity and ecosystem function is
important to promote resiliency on a larger scale (Fox 2007). An integrated ecological approach for
managing future landscapes using options that include enhancing resistance to climate change, promoting
resilience to change, and enabling ecosystems to respond to change, balanced with society’s demand for
resources may be required to create landscapes that are sustainable, ecologically viable, and acceptable to
society (Keane 2009).
The potential for increased insect levels in untreated stands with predicted climate change is high. Forest
pests are an important indicator species for assessing climate change. Assessing pest species response to
climate change indicates intensification in all aspects of outbreak behavior, particularly with mountain
pine beetle, gypsy moth, spruce beetle and spruce budworm (Logan 2003, pg. 135, 136).
Potential for Increased Insect and Disease Activity
Disturbances caused by insects and diseases occur in all terrestrial ecosystems. Insect and disease are
important causes of small to large gaps in forest canopies. They can affect major structural or species
changes in the ecosystem. FS reports have consistently shown insects and pathogens cause more loss than
any other damaging agent, including fire. Insects and pathogens often interact with each other as well as
with climate and fire. Past management practices may increase the frequency, intensity and extent of
many outbreaks. Such practices include harvest beyond historic rotation ages for a given species,
removing intolerant species and leaving tolerant species not removing diseased overstory trees and
suppression of fires. The widespread droughts of the late 1980s to present preceded and predisposed vast
areas in the west to insect and pathogen attack (Haack and Byler 1993). Fire suppression increased stand
densities that in turn indirectly increased insect and disease populations.
As untreated stands, within the East Reservoir analysis area, progress towards more shade tolerant
species, insect and disease occurrences are likely to increase. Grand fir and DF are more susceptible to
root and stem decays than are more shade-intolerant species such as WL and PP. On the warm and dry
sites, these shade tolerant species would likely be less resistant to insect and disease impacts due to
moisture stress during the warm periods of the year. On a given site, the tolerant species are more nutrient
and moisture demanding, thus more likely to be stressed on these lower productivity sites and during
times of drought. They are therefore predisposed to insect and disease attack due to stressed conditions.
Although it is difficult to quantify the increased risk and effects of defoliators, root disease, bark beetles,
etc., that would result in a tolerant stand on a given site, experience on the Boise National Forest, the
Idaho Panhandle and the Blue Mountains, shows that vast acres could be lost through insect and disease
followed by a high probability of catastrophic fire. Significant problems in these climax species stands
started within 60-80 years following fire suppression and harvest activities that increased the tolerant
species component.
Forest Ecology by Vegetation Response Unit
The following discussion highlights the changes that are expected to occur, without the proposed
silvicultural treatments, within the analysis area. The description of successional pathways outlines stand
development that would ordinarily follow natural disturbance processes that include wildfire, insect and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 30 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

disease impacts, blowdown, etc. The descriptions recognize the existence of mosaic or patchy conditions
that represent variation in species composition, forest types and stocking levels. Assuming that traditional
fire suppression would continue, the successional development that is described for the no-action
alternative would not be consistent with ecological processes and would continue the trend of moving
outside of reference ranges.
Moderately Warm/Dry and Moderately Warm/Moderately Dry Habitat (VRU2 and VRU3): These
forest settings have historically experienced frequent, low intensity and mixed severity fires as a
predominant natural disturbance. Forest species composition, density and succession are driven by
disturbance, which can influence ecosystem resiliency. Without disturbance to open the stand structure
for reintroduction, representation of ponderosa pine would continue to decline. Ponderosa pine would
become a smaller percentage of the species composition as the Douglas-fir and grand fir become more
established, especially with mortality from MPB. High densities on these sites would further reduce the
ponderosa pines vigor and resistance to attacks from mountain pine beetle. Western larch species
composition would remain very low as this species is not restored onto the site from historic logging.
Without fires or associated management actions that disturb portions of the landscape, the extent and
intensity of insects and pathogens would undoubtedly increase and result in a forest composition that is
less resilient. These consequences may lead to a reduction in site quality and continued shift in species
composition. In some stands, the grand fir and Douglas-fir have the physical characteristics that are
attractive to western spruce budworm and Douglas-fir beetle. This situation is often the result of
stagnated, overstocked and multi-storied conditions.
As this area and these conditions border private landowners and important wildlife winter ranges, the
importance of assessing the risks of no-action becomes all the more relevant. A decision not to take action
in these specific conditions would not enable the natural process of fire to be re-introduced onto the
landscape. Fuels reduction in the private land/forest interface would not be reduced. Habitat diversity
would not be enhanced, resulting in more continuous forest patches with less horizontal diversity.
Moderately Warm/Moderately Cool and Moderately Warm/Moist Habitats (VRU4 and VRU5): In
comparison with many of the other habitat settings, the influence of no-action and continued fire
exclusion on vegetation in many moist landscapes is less significant in the short-term, due to the
inherently long fire-free interval. Moist sites found in VRU4 and VRU5 are characterized as having
moderate frequency mixed severity fires, and infrequent stand replacement fires within a range that is
similar to desired levels. In time however, it is expected that no action and continued fire suppression
would promote larger stand replacing fires than typical as forest homogeneity increases.
No-action and continued fire suppression would continue to move Douglas-fir and grand fir composition
towards a greater proportion of mid-tolerant and shade tolerant species, which are not as adaptable to fire.
Insect and disease problems can become more significant as forest conditions age, particularly with root
disease, dwarf mistletoe and bark beetle.
The no-action alternative would limit the opportunity to restore impacted areas to a fire-adapted species
composition with greater resiliency to root disease, bark beetle and western spruce budworm. In the near
future, the stands at risk would likely be those currently in overstocked conditions where tree vigor is
typically low. As a result, overall landscape diversity could be reduced for some time due to less age class
diversity and more fuels continuity.
Dwarf mistletoe in western larch has become more significant in some areas with the absence of fire, the
age of the trees and continued infestation of mistletoe on understory western larch. Under Alternative 1
(no-action), these trends would continue and without restoration, these important cover types are at
considerable risk. Where loss of western white pine due to blister rust has occurred, reforestation with
genetically improved seedlings would not occur. In addition, western white pine is a generalist meaning
that it does not have specific elevational bands (climate bands) where it grows. Diversifying forests where
possible with western white pine provides flexibility for unknown environmental conditions such as
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 31 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

climate change. This diversification would not occur in the no-action alternative.
Cool and Moist Habitat (VRU 7): As with VRU4 and VRU5, vegetation trends do not appear as rapidly
as dry forest types due to the infrequent nature of stand replacing disturbances. As a result, the effects of
no action and continued fire exclusion would be gradual. No action and continued fire suppression would
minimize the extent of mixed severity fires, aiding the decline of stand structure variety and increased
proportion of fire-intolerant species. Intermediate sized western larch, Douglas-fir and some white pine
are usually favored in the mixed severity fires.
A gradual shift in species composition and higher stocking levels could result in insect and disease
problems due to low tree vigor. On sites where fire-resistant species are being replaced by shallow-rooted,
thin-barked species, there is the potential for a loss of shallow fine roots following a surface fire. This
increases the susceptibility to stress and direct entry of root and stem pathogens. Fire-resistant species
have lower susceptibility to long-term soil damage from fire as roots are deep and bark is thick. Root
disease is expected to continue being a cause of mortality in Douglas-fir and grand fir overstory.
Blowdown is more significant in root-disease affected areas and in spruce stands.
Reforestation with genetically improved seedlings would not occur. In addition, WWP is a generalist
meaning that it does not have specific elevational bands within species as with most other conifer species.
Diversifying forests where possible with WWP provides flexibility for unknown environmental
conditions such as climate change. This diversification would not occur in the no-action alternative.
Continued interruption of the natural fire cycle, particularly of mixed severity type, would result in higher
stand densities and more continuous, heavy fuel conditions across most of this setting. While not readily
apparent, this condition would lead to more intense stand replacement fires. In particular, heavily stocked,
pole-sized stands have a high crown fire potential (Davis et al. 1980). A high intensity fire would kill
almost all trees in this mid-seral development stage. This could result in a shift back to the herb/shrub
phase or facilitate the development of LPP stands. If an area experiences a re-burn within a relatively
short interval, the site may revert to a brush field, particularly habitat types such as mid- to upper
elevation subalpine fir stands. Neither western larch nor lodgepole pine would likely survive high severity
fires in the pole stage.
Cool and Moderately Dry Habitat (VRU 9): Under the no-action alternative, shifts in vegetation
patterns, increased fuel loadings and changes in species composition would continue to occur. Mature
LPP stands are prime targets for MPB infestation. Given the age of the current LPP stands and the
presence of MPB, the stands would continue to decline. This condition would greatly increase the
probability of a stand replacement fire, as fuel loadings would be significant. Between significant fire
events, lodgepole pine would be replaced by subalpine fir and Engelmann spruce that fill into open
growing space. Where it is not frost stunted, some low elevation sites would occasionally have Douglasfir persist as a seral dominant. The succession to climax dominated by subalpine fir is often very slow
either because of lack of seed source or apparent low vigor. With time, surviving lodgepole pine increase
in growth and become susceptible again to bark beetle attack.
Contributions to a Sustained Yield of Timber There would be no intermediate or regeneration harvest
or precommercial thinning on NFS lands if the no-action alternative is selected. Up to 49 million board
feet (MMBF) of timber would not be available for utilization by timber dependent industries or as
products for the general public. The long-term growth and health of timber on suitable management areas
would not be optimized, and the risk of loss through large scale insect and disease or fire would increase.
This alternative is not consistent with KNFP goals for timber or fuel management.
ACTIVITIES and FEATURES COMMON to ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Timber Harvest, Precommercial Thinning and Fuel Treatment Activities: See Chapter 2 and the
vegetation project file for harvest method by unit by alternative. Placement of harvest and stand
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 32 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

improvement treatment locations were designed with consideration to landscape and stand treatment
need, opportunity to restore desired species composition, opportunity to restore density to desired
condition levels, opportunity to improve stand and landscape resilience to disturbance including insect
and disease, fire and potential climate change and other resource needs. On the dry land, harvest and
improvement treatments focus on restoring desired conditions such as restoring resilient stands of
intolerant species, and buffering old growth, replacement old growth and important riparian habitat with
fuel treatments. On the moist forest types, harvest treatment locations were chosen by blocking areas
close to past harvests where feasible, restoring resilient stands of intolerant species, buffering old growth,
replacement old growth, and riparian areas with fuel treatments where feasible within other resource
needs. Through these considerations, all alternatives meet the objectives of restoring desired conditions
and resilient species and forest structures, increasing average patch size, maintaining forest connectivity,
reducing fragmentation and buffering important habitat with fuel treatments to some degree.
Stand Improvement (Intermediate Harvest): The improvement treatments are located in stands of
moderately warm Douglas-fir types within VRU 2, 3 and 4 that have higher than desired condition
density stocking or fuels. The moderately dry Douglas-fir types would be opened up to a BA of 50-70
square feet, and the moist VRU sites would be opened up to a BA of 70-90 square feet. An improvement
treatment would remove the majority of the tolerant trees, the smaller DF and grand fir and any insect or
disease infested trees. Co-dominant PP, WL and Douglas-fir overstory would be retained. Following
treatment, there may be pockets of openings, but these would not exceed 15-20% of the stand. Some
commercial harvest treatments in the drier VRUs may be followed by slashing and underburning.
Improvement Harvest with Shelterwood with Reserves: This treatment would occur in moderately dry
to moist stands that have higher than historic stocking and or fuels. These sites would be opened up to an
average BA of 40-50 square feet on the dry sites and 50-70 BA on the moist sites. The treatment would
remove the shade tolerant and mid-tolerant species, and insect and disease infested trees, the smaller
intermediate intolerant trees, and leave the majority of the co-dominant PP and WL. Up to 40% of the unit
may be in shelterwood openings (25-40 BA) within these units. Shelterwood openings would occur in
areas with stagnant DF, grand fir, hemlock, cedar or LPP that lack acceptable leave trees and areas with
heavy insect or disease infestations. These openings would be planted with ponderosa pine, western larch
or western white pine seedlings. The objective is to improve stand conditions and increase resilience by
reducing stocking, decrease within stand stress, decrease ladder fuels, decrease insect and disease and
increase the component of ponderosa pine and western larch through improvement and regeneration.
Future Management of Stands with Improvement Treatment: To meet the objectives of a fire
resilient landscape over time, continued stand tending activities would occur on these sites. Treatment
would include periodic slashing of tolerant in-growth to reduce natural fuels and fuel ladder conditions.
Periodic commercial harvest may be required to maintain the open stand conditions over time as the
residual stands increase in basal area and crown canopy. Depending on the health, vigor and species
composition of these stands some may be treated with a regeneration harvest within the next 20-40 years
and some of the stands with a good component of healthy intolerant species may be managed for future
old growth replacement.
Shelterwood Harvest with Reserves: The purpose of the treatment is to reduce natural fuels (including
heavy down LPP), initiate early successional conditions, restore PP, WL, WWP and improve stand and
landscape conditions consistent with desired condition processes. Approximately 20-40 feet of BA of
western larch, DF and PP would be retained for seed, structure, shade, genetic seed reservoirs, relic
overstory and future snag replacements. The shelterwood treatment would create a regeneration opening.
Planting of western white pine, ponderosa pine and or western larch is planned to restore these species,
increase stand resilience to potential climate change and assure regeneration on these sites.
Seed Tree with Reserves: The purpose of the treatment is to reduce natural fuels (including heavy down
lodgepole pine), initiate early successional conditions, restore ponderosa pine, western larch, western
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 33 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

white pine, and improve stand and landscape condition consistent with historic processes. Approximately
10-25 feet of BA (a minimum of 10 TPA) of western larch, Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine would be
retained for seed, structure, shade, genetic reservoirs, relic overstory and future snag replacements.
Planting of western white pine, ponderosa pine and/or western larch is planned to restore these species,
increase stand resilience to potential climate change and assure regeneration on these sites.
Clearcut with Reserves: The purpose of the treatment is to reduce natural fuels (including heavy down
LPP), initiate early successional conditions, restore ponderosa pine, western larch, western white pine and
improve stand and landscape conditions consistent with historic processes. While they would not be
retained to re-seed the stand, approximately 4-8 trees per acre of western larch, Douglas-fir and ponderosa
pine would be retained for structure, shade, genetic reservoirs, relic overstory and future snag
replacements. Planting of western white pine, ponderosa pine and or western larch is planned to restore
these species, increase stand resilience to potential climate change and assure regeneration on these sites.
Future Management of Stands Proposed for Regeneration Harvest: To meet the objectives of a fire
resilient landscape over time, continued stand tending activities would occur on these sites. Treatments
may include precommercial thinning at age 15-20, and periodic slashing of tolerant in-growth to reduce
natural fuels and fuel ladder conditions over the next 25-30 years. A commercial thinning may occur at
age 40-50 to maintain the desired stand conditions over time as the residual stands increase in basal area
and crown canopy. Depending on the health and vigor, and species composition of these stands, some
may be treated with a regeneration harvest within the next 100-120 years and some of the stands with a
good component of healthy intolerant species may be managed for longer rotations or future old growth
replacement.
Reforestation: Where regeneration harvest is proposed, planting would supplement the natural
regeneration that is anticipated and restore tree species that are presently not sustainable due to inadequate
seed source in the residual or adjacent stands. Planted conifer seedlings would assure timely reforestation
and contribute towards long-term desired forest conditions stand resilience. Tree species to be planted
include ponderosa pine, western larch and western white pine. These species have declined in total area
and stand dominance due to advancing succession, lack of natural fire, and insect and disease infestations.
Activity Fuel Reduction and Site Preparation: See Chapter 2 and the vegetation project file for specific
fuel treatment by unit by alternative. The primary method of activity fuel reduction and site preparation
would occur through yarding tops during harvest, and/or slashing of small diameter (un-merchantable
trees) and underburning 1-2 years following harvest. Periodic underburning would be planned every 1030 years on the dry sites to restore historic fire regimes and maintain fuel loading at desired levels. If
yarding tops does not remove the activity fuel on units with gentle topography that are not scheduled to be
underburned, activity fuel reduction and site preparation would be accomplished through machine
(excavator) piling, scarification and burning of those piles.
Natural Fuel Reduction through Slashing and Underburning: Proposed treatments would reduce the
amount of stagnant tolerant understory species, recycling nutrients and stimulating browse for wildlife
forage. The primary method of natural fuel reduction would be through slashing of small diameter, unmerchantable trees (6 inches in diameter and less) and underburning after allowing the slash to cure from
1-2 years. Periodic underburning every 10-30 years on the dry sites would restore and maintain historic
fire regimes, maintain historic intolerant species and maintain fuel loading at desired levels. This
treatment would improve stand conditions and increase resilience to potential climate change by reducing
stocking, decreasing within stand stress, decreasing ladder fuels and increasing species composition of
intolerant ponderosa pine and western larch.
Future Management of Stands with Improvement Treatment: To meet the objectives of a fire
resilient landscape over time, continued stand tending activities would occur on these sites. Treatment
would include periodic slashing of tolerant in-growth to reduce natural fuels and fuel ladder conditions.
Periodic commercial harvest may be required to maintain the open stand conditions over time as the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 34 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

residual stands increase in basal area and crown canopy. Depending on the health and vigor, and species
composition of these stands, some may be treated with a regeneration harvest within the next 20-40 years
and some of the stands with a good component of healthy intolerant species may be managed for future
old growth replacement.
Precommercial Thinning: Precommercial thinning is proposed in overstocked, sapling-size trees that
have been initiated in the past 15-25 years. This treatment is intended to reduce tree density, reduce crown
continuity, improve growing conditions, restore shade-intolerant species that are more resilient to fire
insect and disease, and improve growing conditions of the remaining trees by reducing competition for
light and nutrients. In the oldest stands with heavy stocking, some form of mechanized treatment, either
non-commercial removal of biomass or mastication to reduce fuel levels may be required to meet desired
conditions.
Future Management of Stands Proposed for Precommercial Thinning: To meet the objectives of a
fire resilient landscape over time, continued stand tending activities would occur on these sites.
Treatment may include periodic slashing of tolerant in-growth to reduce natural fuels and fuel ladder
conditions over the next 20-30 years. A commercial thinning may occur at age 40-50 to maintain the
desired stand conditions over time as the residual stands increase in basal area and crown canopy.
Road Access Changes: The activities associated with the proposed road access changes described in
Chapter 2 of the DEIS would have little or no effect to vegetation except as described in the Noxious
Weed Section and the Proposed, Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Plant Section.
Trail Access Changes: The activities associated with the proposed trail access changes described in
Chapter 2 of the DEIS would have little or no effect to vegetation except as described in the Noxious
Weed Section and the Proposed, Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Plant Section.
Road Storage: The activities associated with the proposed road storage listed in Chapter 2 of the DEIS
and have the potential to reduce linear fragmentation in the long-term. These activities would reduce
access for vegetation management, salvage and fire suppression activities due to economic cost of access.
Temporary Road Construction: There would be a minimal amount of vegetation fragmentation. This
should be mitigated in the long-term once the temporary roads are restored and native vegetation is reestablished. It would also affect vegetation as described in the Weed and Sensitive Plant Reports.
Best Management Practices (BMPs): The KNFP states that "Soil and water conservation practices as
outlined in the Soil and Water Conservation Practices Handbook (FSH 2509.22, May 1988) would be
incorporated into all land use and project plans as a principal mechanism for controlling non-point
pollution sources; meeting soil and water quality goals; and to protect resource values.” Implementation
of BMPs would not impact forest vegetation directly. These practices would benefit vegetation indirectly
through protection of soil and water resources.
Reserve Trees and Snags: All harvest prescriptions would emphasize retention and development of trees
to function as genetic seed reservoirs, relic overstory and future snag replacements. The number and
distribution of these trees would vary with existing stand conditions, safety considerations and site
specific resource objectives, but all harvest units would maintain a minimum of 8-10 reserve TPA. Where
quality snags are not present, or safety requirements mandate not leaving snags, the 8-10 reserve TPA
would serve as long-term replacement snags. Some of these reserve trees may be girdled to create snags
or, if they have high levels of mistletoe, they may be girdled to reduce the infection to the understory
trees. Whether reserve trees are girdled or not, these trees would eventually contribute to coarse woody
debris for future soil organic matter.
Damage to Residual Trees: Residual trees within harvest units are susceptible to damage from normal
logging operations. This damage is dependent on the number and distribution of leave trees, topography,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 35 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

species and logging system. The amount of damage to reserve trees would be minimized by favoring
intolerant species that are more resistant to diseases after basal scarring, utilizing designated skid trails
and utilizing a skyline system on cable ground.
Windthrow: Some leave trees are expected to die or blow down and provide additional snag and down
woody debris habitat. Management activities may increase the risk within treatment areas and adjacent to
them by opening up the canopy and increasing the wind to individual tree crowns. Landtypes 102 and 351
are both considered as being landtypes with moderate-to-high potential for windthrow. These landtypes
are located in proposed Units 4, 28, 51, 142, 147, 148 and COEF8.
Course Woody Debris (CWD): All harvest units would retain 8-33 tons/acre of downed coarse woody
material (or recruitment) greater than 4” in diameter to provide nutrient recycling and habitat for
mammals and invertebrates. The volume and distribution of material may be subject to specific site
conditions and VRU objectives and would be specified in the silvicultural prescription and incorporated
into the timber sale contract. The general tons retained by VRU are described in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10 – Coarse Woody Debris by VRU in Harvest Units
BIOPHYSICAL SETTING

TONS/ACRE; >4” IN DIAMETER

VRU 2
VRU 3, 7, 9
VRU 5

8-15
15-20
15-33

Regeneration within Five Years: All regeneration harvest would be designed to assure the units can be
satisfactorily restocked within five years after final harvest. Adequate stocking would be defined in the
silvicultural prescription and is based on VRU and Management Area (MA) objectives.
Contrasting Effects of Proposed Actions with Past Actions: The project objectives for the East
Reservoir analysis area include trending vegetation toward fire resilience in a variety of biophysical or
forest settings that have similar developmental and responses capabilities (VRUs).
The majority of the analysis area experienced stand replacing fire in the late 1800s and many of the
regenerated stands did not have volume and stand conditions that were conducive to or dictated
regeneration harvest until the 1970s and in the late 1980s in response to the MPB infestation. Because of
those conditions, there was minimal regeneration harvest prior to the 1970s. The majority of the
regeneration harvest in the 1980s and 1990s were designed to salvage MPB infested LPP stands or to
regenerate mixed species western larch, ponderosa pine, western white pine and DF stands. While these
harvest units restored desired species such as PP, WL and WWP, some of the older stands retained few
reserve trees and snags for structural diversity, genetic seed reservoirs and replacement snags; and many
machine scarification units had high disturbance and low retention of down woody debris. In addition,
because of the 40 acre regeneration opening limitation; big game forage opening size recommendations
and other issues, the average unit size during that period was 28 acres. Alternative 2 is designed to restore
historic patch size on many VRUs. Alternative 3 is consistent with past harvest unit size.
The regeneration treatments proposed in the East Reservoir Project also emphasizes restoration of
ponderosa pine, western larch, western white pine and aspen through retention of these species in the
overstory, and through natural regeneration and planting. In contrast, proposed regeneration treatments
retain a minimum of 8 reserve trees and/or snags per acre to function as genetic seed reservoirs, relic
overstory, current and future snags, and long-term coarse woody debris for future soil organic matter.
All prescribed site preparation would adhere to BMPs to retain soil productivity, and scarification or
mineral soil exposure would be to the minimum level required to meet regeneration objectives. In
addition, the harvest units are designed to restore the historic patch size to the degree possible within the
40 acre limitation, to reduce fragmentation, and to buffer important late seral and riparian habitat with
fuel treatments.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 36 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Prior to the 1980s, the majority of the intermediate treatments within this analysis area were liberation
harvests that removed the larger more intolerant species such as ponderosa pine and western larch, and
released the developing understory of primarily mid-tolerant Douglas-fir. These stands are trending
towards climax conditions at potentially a more accelerated rate than the untreated stands. Species
composition and structure are trending to a higher than historic component of smaller mid-tolerant to
tolerant trees with increased ladder fuels.
As compared with the past intermediate treatments, the proposed intermediate harvest in East Reservoir
analysis area are designed to maintain and improve the resilience, health and sustainability of forest
stands and the landscape by retention of the best quality dominant and co-dominant, intolerant fire
adapted species such as PP and WL (with some Douglas-fir), to retain the majority of the intolerant relic
trees that survived the late 1800s burn, and to retain desired amounts of coarse woody debris. In addition,
clumps and islands may be retained for diversity, wildlife and visual quality objectives.
Silvicultural treatments in the East Reservoir analysis area are expected to improve forest conditions and
to increase the stand or forest resilience. Areas or stands would be managed to restore intolerant species,
to reduce stand density, improve tree growth and vigor, and to promote more open stand structure that is
more resilient to fire, insect and disease and potential climate change. In addition, impacts to soil
productivity would be minimized through the adherence to BMPs and disturbance from fuel treatments
and site preparation would be to the minimum level required to meet objectives.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Refer to Chapter 2 for a description of the alternatives, and the project file for a comprehensive summary
table of each alternative.
Ecological Integrity
Ecological integrity can be described by comparing forest composition, density, structure, patterns and
function, to desired conditions, and analyzing landscape resilience to climate change and disturbances.
If ecological systems within a forested environment are operating within a range of desired condition
variability, it is assumed to be a healthy, sustainable system (USDA Forest Service, Region 1,
Sustaining Ecological Systems 1991; Lindermayer 2000). Analyzing resilience to climate change can
be done using current VRU objectives, since these are compatible with stand qualities necessary to
survive expected future disturbances. The effects to ecological integrity will be summarized by VRU
group as described in the affected environment.
Moderately Warm and Dry VRU 2S (21% of the analysis area)
Because fire return intervals have lengthened due to fire suppression efforts over the past 80 years,
particularly in this Fire Regime I (0-35 year low to mixed severity fires), the majority of this VRU is
not functioning within the range of desired conditions. Ecosystem sustainability can be promoted by
actions that decrease tree density and the Douglas-fir component, decrease natural and ladder fuels and
that disturb the existing ground vegetation, allowing a more diverse occupancy of the site by seral
grasses, forbs, shrubs, deciduous trees and conifer species. Current conditions are inconsistent with
desired conditions, and would not be resilient to potential warmer and drier climates.
Alternatives 2 and 3 would improve ecological integrity, resilience and forest resistance to insect and
disease mortality on the moderately warm and dry VRU 2S. Improvements would be accomplished by
reducing tree density, changing the early successional stages, reducing natural fuels, reducing ladder fuels
and restoring PP and WL, and early seral grasses, shrubs and forbs, through harvest, slashing, prescribed
fire and planting. In addition, composition and stocking, early successional stages and fuel reduction
would be improved through prescribed fire outside the harvest units. The amount of improvement can be
measured by determining the acres of reduced stand density, acres of fuel reduction and the change in
successional stages, through harvest and or prescribed fire and the acres of ponderosa pine and western
larch restoration. The IDT developed target stands that reflected desired conditions for the VRUs across
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 37 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

the East Reservoir Landscape, and these were refined by VRU groups for this analysis. More natural
conditions are restored and resilience is increased when the treatment is moving the stand towards the
VRU group target conditions, and reducing the departure from desired conditions as measured by the
indicators identified.
Increasing resilience based on natural conditions should also increase resilience and resistance to potential
climate change to warmer and drier or warmer and moister with higher frost free days, by favoring shade
intolerant species that are more resilient to drought, reducing vegetation density on a given site and
reducing the probability of a drainage-wide stand replacement in the event of a high severity fire.
Restoration of historic landscape patterns is more difficult to measure. The historic landscape condition
was a diverse mix of open park-like stands intermixed with larger openings and dense patches.
Restoration of density and species composition across the landscape would restore some of the natural
patterns. Due to small past harvest unit size, and the old growth designations within this VRU group, it is
not feasible to completely correct existing vegetation patterns with this entry. However, the treatment
proposed in the action alternatives would move the landscape toward the historic matrix of natural
openings, and open stands intermixed with dense patches, and would increase landscape heterogeneity.
Landscape function refers to the flow of mineral nutrients, water, energy or species across the landscape,
and how the compositional and structural elements of a landscape interact and operate. Landscape
function is difficult to quantify and it is hypothesized where community composition and structure, and
historic disturbance processes such as fire, occur within a desired range of conditions, the function of the
landscape community would also be maintained within its desired range. All action alternatives were
designed within desired composition, structure, function and patterns of vegetation.
Moving stands toward the desired conditions in the VRU would begin to restore desired condition species
composition, density, structure and function, and increase stand and landscape resilience. Refer to
indicators on page 9 (Chapter 3). Refer to Table 3.12 for a summary of treatments trending toward VRU2
desired conditions.
TABLE 3.12 - Treatments Trending Toward VRU 2S Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

ALT 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Intermediate harvest trending species composition
toward VRU desired condition that is more
resistant and resilient to disturbance insect and
disease infestations and uncertain environmental
conditions such as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending density toward VRU
group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance, insect and disease
infestations and uncertain environmental
conditions such as climate change.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired
condition

0
0

82
27

108
37

0
0

0
0

0

3,401

3,362

0

0

0

3,401

3,362

0

0

7,766

8,592

8,454

8,592

Units within this VRU 2S: Regeneration Harvest: Units 2, 3c, 16, 18, 44, 45b, 147, 170, 193, 207, 219, 220.
Intermediate Harvest Treatments: Units COE1-4, 1, 2b, 2c, 2d, 3a, 3b, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18a 19, 20, 27-32, 33, 34, 42, 43, 44,
45a, 49, 55, 56, 157, 174, 179, 183, 190, 194, 196, 203, 205 209, 219a, 190, 192, 194s, 194t, 196, 197, 305-307, 347
Fuels: Units COE 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, F1, 1OG, 12, 11OG, 13, 14OG, 15-18, 21, 45

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 38 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Table 3.13- Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 2 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

DESIRED
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
and ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

15-25
15-35
10-30
25-50

5
20
47
23

6
20
46
23

6
20
46
23

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.14 - Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU2S
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate
Fuels
Precommercial thin

109
3401
8,592
575

145
3362
8,454
570

The treatment alternatives have a slight, measureable effect on the successional stages (Table 3.13.).
Table 3.14 displays the acres of treatment in VRU2. These treatments would have a 1% increase in the
early-successional stage in both action alternatives for the analysis area. Late-successional stage would
decrease by 1% in both action alternatives. Successional stage most often does not change with
intermediate harvest or fuels treatment because the age class is determined from the portion of the stand
with the greatest basal area and many times this is the older and larger component of the stand. In these
treatments, the older trees are the trees that are retained from which the age class is determined. The
intermediate treatments would address the majority of departures from desired conditions in these dry
types by reducing density and restoring species composition toward desired conditions that are better
adapted to these dry sites and therefore improving the resiliency of this VRU.
In Alternative 2, 109 acres of regeneration are proposed and in Alternative 3, 145 acres of regeneration
are proposed. The small amount of regeneration acres proposed in this warm and dry VRU does not
significantly change successional stages. These acres are proposed for regeneration because their existing
condition consisted of mostly older small diameter Douglas-fir and the desired condition is a species
composition mix of western larch, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir. Regeneration treatments would
include planting of western larch and ponderosa pine to meet objectives.
Alternatives 2 and 3 are very similar for this warm and dry vegetation response unit. Alternatives 2 and 3
trend similar acres toward desired condition density and species composition through a combination of
intermediate harvest and regeneration treatment followed by reforestation of target species. The main
difference between Alternative 2 and Alternative 3 is that Alternative 2 includes natural fuels reduction
treatments in old growth. Implementation of Alternative 2 has the potential to increase the resiliency and
resistance of the greatest acres because it reduces overstocking and improves overall tree vigor and
resistance on the greatest number of acres. As a result of this increase in resiliency, Alternative 2 trends a
large amount of acres within the analysis area to a condition that is better adapted to climate change.
Alternative 2 and 3 both equally treat acres with species composition and density restoration therefore
trending equal acres toward the desired condition. Alternative 2 has the greatest number of acres of fuels
reduction however this has less impact on trending the VRU toward desired condition species
composition and density. Alternative 2 most effectively addresses ecosystem restoration in VRU2
because it addresses species composition and density reduction to the highest degree as it treats the most
overall acres.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 39 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Moderately Warm and Moderately Dry - VRU 3 (22% of the analysis area)
TABLE 3.15 - Treatments Trending Toward VRU 3 Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

0
0

242
362

200
301

0
0

242
362

0

1409

1279

0

1409

0

1409

1279

0

1409

0
980?

432

429

TREATMENT

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Intermediate harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate
change.
Intermediate harvest trending density toward VRU group
desired condition that is more resistant and resilient to
disturbance, insect and disease infestations and uncertain
environmental conditions such as climate change.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired condition

Units within this VRU3: Regeneration Harvests: Units 1A, 2, 3, 8, 16, 18, 44, 45B, 46, 47, 54, 69, 70, 72, 81, 80, 82, 141, 142,
143A, 144S, 144T, 159A, 170, 188, 207, 208, 214, 362, 363, 364, 365, 367, 367A, 368A, 368B, 368C.
Fuels Treatments: Units F1, 1A, 1og, 3og, 4, 5, 8, 12, 15og, 18, COEF12
Intermediate Harvests: Units 1, 2c, 3A, 3B, 5, 9, 10, 11, 18A, 19, 20, 21, 25, 31, 32, 33, 34, 45A, 49, 55, 56, 158, 173, 174, 179,
182, 183, 195, 205 209, 306, 307, 337, 340, 347, 349, COE6.

Table 3.16 - Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 3 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

REFERENCE
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
and ALT 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

15-25
20-40
15-35
15-40

27
17
45
10

30
17
42
10

30
17
42
10

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.17- Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU3
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate
Fuels
Precommercial Thin

604
1,409
432
2,832

501
1,279
429
2,832

The action alternatives would improve forest resiliency in the VRU 3 Group, by trending toward desired
condition species composition and densities. This would be done by restoring PP and WL through
regeneration harvest and planting, restoring species composition through intermediate harvest, restoring
desired condition density levels through intermediate harvest, restoring early successional stages of
conifers and early seral grasses, shrubs and forbs, through regeneration harvest and reducing natural fuels
through slashing and prescribed fire. These treatments are also designed to increase stand and landscape
resilience to potential climate change. The amount of improvement can be measured by determining the
acres of reduced stand density, fuel reduction and change in successional stages, through harvest and
prescribed fire, and the acres of planting ponderosa pine and western larch.
Restoration trending toward desired condition species composition and density would trend this VRU to a
condition that is better adapted and therefore more resilient and resistant. In particular, restoration of
desired condition density and species condition would improve the resistance to MPB infestations in the
PP by spacing the trees out and improving the tree and stand vigor and increasing the VRUs resistance to
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 40 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

MPB infestations. Increasing resilience based on natural conditions should also increase resilience and
resistance to potential climate change issues and stresses. Restoration of successional stages is more
difficult to restore due to past management, that removed the older component, but current treatments are
designed to retain acres in the late successional stage and trend more acres to the late successional stage.
Historic timber harvest that focused on selecting western larch, effective fire suppression and the
reduction in the mixed severity underburns have altered the species composition and stand structure in
many of these areas. The stand structure has changed from mid- and late-development open stands of
large ponderosa pine, western larch and Douglas-fir to single to two storied stands composed of
predominately Douglas-fir, or a higher proportion of Douglas-fir than would have occurred with more
frequent mixed severity fires. The lower canopy is frequently composed of a dense understory of smaller
Douglas-fir and grand fir. These high density understories can provide a fuel ladder to the crowns of
larger trees and increase the potential for high severity, stand replacing fires.
Fire, including frequent mixed severity fire and infrequent large-scale stand-replacing fire, is the primary
ecological process that developed patch size in this area. Populations of native plants and animals have
responded and adapted to this disturbance process, and associated patch size. Species abundance and
distribution are a result of these dynamic processes, and the resulting vegetation patterns.
In this VRU group, Alternative 2 most effectively addresses ecosystem restoration and resilience because
it treats and trends the greatest number of acres toward the desired condition. Alternative 3 is the second
most effective which treat the least acres in this VRU.
Moderately Warm to Moderately Moist - VRU 4 (10% of the analysis area)
TABLE 3.18 - Treatments Trending Toward VRU 4 Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Western White Pine Restoration through Planting.
Regeneration harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending species composition
toward VRU group desired condition that is more resistant
and resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations
and uncertain environmental conditions such as climate
change.
Intermediate harvest trending density toward VRU group
desired condition that is more resistant and resilient to
disturbance, insect and disease infestations and uncertain
environmental conditions such as climate change.
Number of patches created that are consistent with desired
condition patch size of 100-300 acres.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired condition

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

0
0
0

192
383
191

137
274
138

0
0
0

192
383
191

0

766

549

198
on DNRC
lands

964

0

948

820

0

948

0

948

820

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

3
349

Units within this VRU4: Regeneration Harvest: Majority located on the north aspects of Fivemile and Warland Creeks and
Boundary Mountain.
Intermediate Harvests: Majority located south of the Cripple Horse Road, lower in the Cripple Horse Drainage (Units 22, 23, 24,
25, 26).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 41 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Table 3.19 - Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 4 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

DESIRED
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
and ALT 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

15-25
20-40
15-35
10-40

20
16 (low)
57(high)
7(low)

29
14 (low)
51(high)
6(low)

27
15
52
6

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.20 – Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU4
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate
Fuels
Precommercial Thin

766
948
178
787

549
820
261
764

The action alternatives would improve forest resiliency in the VRU 4 Group, by trending toward desired
condition species composition and densities. This would be done by restoring ponderosa pine, western
larch and western white pine through regeneration harvest and planting, restoring species composition
through intermediate harvest, restoring desired condition density levels through intermediate harvest,
restoring early successional stages of conifers and early seral grasses, shrubs and forbs, through
regeneration harvest and reducing natural fuels through slashing and prescribed fire. These treatments are
also designed to increase stand and landscape resilience to potential climate change.
Restoration trending toward desired condition species composition and density would trend this VRU to a
condition that is better adapted and therefore more resilient and resistant. In particular, restoration of
desired condition densities and species composition would improve the resistance to MPB infestations in
the ponderosa pine by spacing the trees out and improving the tree and stand vigor.
Alternative 2, proposes treatment patches (Unit 170; unit 73T, 75 and 188; and units 80 and 36) that
would be consistent with the 100-300 acre mixed historic patch size therefore this alternative most
effectively mimics historic conditions. It is assumed that natural conditions are restored where treatment
is moving the stand toward the VRU target conditions and these conditions will be best adapted for future
environments.
The larger treatment areas that mimic natural processes proposed in Alternative 2 best address
connectivity and fragmentation to the extent possible within these other resource and social needs, and
would move the landscape toward the historic matrix of seral stages. In addition, Alternative 2 also treats
and trends the greatest number of acres toward historic species composition and therefore trending the
greatest number of acres to be more adapted to future environments. Alternative 3 is the second most
effective.
Complete restoration of historic landscape patterns was not be feasible due to existing vegetation patterns,
past harvest design, old growth designations, 40 acre NFMA opening size limitation and associated public
concerns and other resource and social needs. However, the treatments proposed in Alternative 2 address
connectivity and fragmentation to the extent possible within these other resource and social needs, and
would move the landscape toward the historic matrix of seral stage with the greatest number of acres
treated.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 42 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Moderately Warm to Moderately Moist - VRU 5 (1% of the analysis area)
TABLE 3.21 - Treatments Trending Toward VRU 5 Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Western White Pine Restoration through Planting.
Regeneration harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Number of patches created that are consistent with desired
condition patch size of 100-300 acres.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired condition

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

0
0
0

22
100
52

23
59
35

0
0
0

22
59
52

0

174

117

0

174

0

167

142

0

167

0

3

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

Units within this VRU 5: Regeneration Harvests: Units 147, 148, 149 (all in Fivemile Ck).
Commercial Thinning: Units 311,343, 344.

Table 3.22 - Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 5 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

DESIRED
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
And ALT 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

10-20
15-35
10-30
25-55

31
9
54
5

50
9
36

44
9
42
5

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.23 - Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU5
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate
Fuels
Precommercial Thin

174
167
0
60

117
142
0
60

The action alternatives would improve forest resiliency in the VRU 5 Group, by trending toward desired
condition species composition. This would be done by restoring ponderosa pine, western larch and
western white pine through regeneration harvest and planting, restoring species composition through
commercial thinning, and by restoring early seral stages of conifers and early seral grasses, shrubs and
forbs, through regeneration harvest. These treatments are also designed to increase stand and landscape
resilience to potential climate change by regenerating the species best adapted to the VRU desired
conditions. Restoration of successional stages is more difficult to restore due to past management. The
majority of acres proposed for regeneration harvest in this VRU 5 group would not trend toward late
successional stages due to their current stand conditions. For example, (Units 147, 148, 149) over 50% of
the stand is dead and down due to MPB mortality leaving this area in an understocked condition. In other
areas, small stagnant conditions exist such as small diameters averaging seven inches DBH at 135 years
old. These stagnant condition would not likely progress into the late successional stages because they are
overstocked and unraveling. Alternative 2, proposes treatment patches that would be consistent with the
100-300 acre mixed historic patch size therefore this alternative most effectively mimics historic
conditions. It is assumed that natural conditions are restored where treatment is moving the stand toward
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 43 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

the VRU target conditions and these conditions will be best adapted for future environments.
The larger treatment areas that mimic natural processes proposed in Alternative 2 best address
connectivity and fragmentation to the extent possible within these other resource and social needs, and
would move the landscape toward the historic matrix of seral stages. In addition, Alternative 2 also treats
and the greatest number of acres toward historic species composition and therefore trending the greatest
number of acres to be more adapted to future environments. Alternative 3 is the second most effective.
Landscape Function: Moving stands toward the desired conditions in this VRU group would begin to
restore historic density, composition and function, and address the potential climate change. Refer to
Table 3.21 for a summary of treatments trending toward VRU 5 desired conditions. In this VRU group,
Alternative 2 most effectively addresses ecosystem restoration and resilience because it treats and trends
the greatest number of acres toward the desired condition.
Cool and Moist - VRU 7 (29% of analysis area)
TABLE 3.24- Treatments Trending Toward VRU 7 Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Western White Pine Restoration through Planting.
Regeneration harvest trending species composition
toward VRU group desired condition that is more
resistant and resilient to disturbance insect and disease
infestations and uncertain environmental conditions such
as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending species composition
toward VRU group desired condition that is more
resistant and resilient to disturbance insect and disease
infestations and uncertain environmental conditions such
as climate change.
Number of patches created that are consistent with
desired condition patch size of 5,000-100,000 acres.
Natural fuels reduction trending toward desired
condition

0
0
0

0
199
300

0
117
176

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

499

293

0

499

0

423

423

0

423

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0

Units within VRU7: Units located on the upper elevations, south slopes of Fivemile and Warland Creeks.
Regeneration Harvest: Units 39, 40, 41, 59, 61, 62, 64, 64A, 64B, 150, 151, and 365, 366
Intermediate Harvest: Units 317, 318, 319, 327, 328, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 343, 344, 345, 346.

Table 3.25 - Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 7 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

DESIRED
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
and ALT 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

15-25
20-40
15-30
15-45

39
9
44
8

41
9
42
8

40
9
43
8

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.26 - Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU7
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate

499
423

293
423

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 44 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Fuels
Precommercial Thin
Western White Pine Daylight Thin

0
2,140
212

0
1,173
0

The action alternatives would improve forest resiliency in the VRU 7 Group, by trending toward desired
condition species composition. This would be done by restoring western larch and western white pine
through regeneration harvest and planting, restoring species composition through commercial thinning,
and by restoring early seral stages of conifers and early seral grasses, shrubs and forbs, through
regeneration harvest. These treatments are also designed to increase stand and landscape resilience to
potential climate change by regenerating the species the best adapted to the VRU desired conditions.
Restoration of successional stages is more difficult to restore due to past management. However in
Alternative 2, three of the regeneration harvests (Units 62, 40 and 150) are proposed as over 40 acre
regeneration but do not mimic the large historic patch size of 5,000 to 100,000 acres. Units 62, 40 and
150 are placed adjacent to past harvest that are recovered but are within the early-successional stage. By
these units being blocked up with other early-successional stages this larger block mimics historic
conditions and would move into the future as a connected patch of interior forest. Because target stands
for each VRU were developed to mimic historic conditions, it is assumed that natural conditions are
restored where treatment is moving the stand toward the VRU target conditions.
Many of the stands proposed for regeneration in VRU 7 are in the late successional stage (100 to 150
years). Many of these stands have had past MPB mortality resulting in understocked stands. Currently,
the late-successional stage is high (44%) compared to the desired condition of 15-30% but the very late
successional stages is low (8%) compared to the desired condition of 15-45%. The majority of the 44% of
the late-successional would move into very late successional stage, all but 1-2% (depending on the
alternative) would move into the early-successional stage. Also, taking a closer look at the early
successional stage age class breakdown, 13% are in the 0-20 age class, 22% are in the 21-30 age class
(years) and 4% in the 31-40 age class (years). Depending on the alternative, these regeneration treatments
increase the early successional stages by 1-2%, however the majority of this age class would be moving
into mid-successional within 10-15 years. Increases in early successional stages in this cool and moist
VRU has a beneficial effect for lynx forage, providing a pulse of habitat for snowshoe hare. Both
Alternatives 2 and 3 treat 423 acres with a commercial thinning harvest, a type of intermediate treatment.
These thinning treatments have the potential to develop into multi-storied lynx habitat within 20-50 years.
Thinning the stand would create an environment for regeneration to occur in varying stages moving the
stand into multi-storied condition in the future. Without commercial thinning of these heavily stocked
stands, they would likely move into the stem-exclusion stage and then would not develop into a multistoried condition without disturbance.
Complete restoration of historic landscape patterns may not be feasible due to existing vegetation
patterns, past harvest design, old growth designations, 40 acre NFMA opening size limitation and other
resource and social needs. However, the treatments proposed in the action alternatives address
connectivity and fragmentation to the extent possible within these other resource and social needs, and
would move the landscape toward the historic matrix of seral stages.
Landscape Function: Moving stands toward the desired conditions in this VRU group would begin to
restore historic density, composition and function, and address the potential climate change. Refer to
Table 3.24 for a summary of treatments trending toward VRU 7 desired conditions.
In this VRU group, Alternative 2 most effectively addresses ecosystem restoration and resilience because
it treats and trends the greatest number of acres toward the desired condition. Alternative 3 is the second
most effective in this VRU.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 45 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Cool and Moist– VRU 9 (13% of analysis area)
TABLE 3.27 - Treatments Trending Toward VRU 9 Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Western White Pine Restoration through Planting.
Regeneration harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending species composition toward
VRU group desired condition that is more resistant and
resilient to disturbance insect and disease infestations and
uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Number of patches created that are consistent with desired
condition patch size of 5,000-100,000 acres.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired condition

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

0
0
0

0
188
188

0
150
151

0
0
0

0
188
188

376

301

0

376

55

26

0
0

0
0

0

0
0
0

55

0
0

0

0

0

Units within this VRU 9: Intermediate Harvests: Units 62A, 62B, 317, 327, 346.
Regeneration Harvests: Units 47, 61, 62, 64A, 362, 363, 364, 369

Table 3.28 - Successional Stage Redistribution in Post-Harvest for Alternatives in VRU 9 (%)
SUCCESSIONAL
STAGES

AGE CLASSES
(YEARS)

DESIRED
CONDITION

CURRENT CONDITION
and ALT. 1

ALT
2

ALT
3

Early-successional
Mid- Successional
Late- Successional
Very Late Successional

0-40
41-100
101-150
150+

20-40
40-60
15-20
5-10

27
11
50
10

31
11
47
10

30
11
48
10

Numbers highlighted in grey indicate conditions outside desired conditions.

Table 3.29 - Acres of Treatment by Action Alternative for VRU9
TREATMENT TYPE

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Regeneration
Intermediate
Fuels
Precommercial Thin

376
55
0
198

301
26
0
130

The action alternatives would improve forest resiliency in the VRU 9 Group, by trending toward desired
condition species composition. This would be done by restoring western larch and western white pine
through regeneration harvest and planting, restoring species composition through commercial thinning,
and by restoring early seral stages of conifers and early seral grasses, shrubs and forbs, through
regeneration harvest. These treatments are also designed to increase stand and landscape resilience to
potential climate change by regenerating the species best adapted to the VRU desired conditions.
Restoration of successional stages is more difficult to restore due to past management.
Moving stands toward the desired conditions in this VRU group would begin to restore historic density,
composition and function, and address the potential climate change. Refer to Table 3.27 for a summary of
treatments trending toward VRU 9 desired conditions. Restoration of successional stages is more difficult
to restore due to past management. However, in Alternative 2, one of the regeneration harvests (Unit 362)
is proposed as over 40 acre regeneration but do not mimic the large historic patch size of 5,000 to 100,000
acres. Unit 362 is placed adjacent to past existing harvests that are recovered but are within the earlysuccessional stage. By blocked up these units with other early-successional stages this larger block
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 46 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

mimics historic conditions and would move into the future as a connected patch of interior forest.
Because target stands for each VRU were developed to mimic historic conditions, it is assumed that
natural conditions are restored where treatment is moving the stand toward the VRU target conditions.
Increases in early successional stages in this cool and moist VRU has a beneficial effect for lynx forage,
providing a pulse of habitat for snowshoe hare. Both Alternatives 2 and 3 treat 26 acres with a
commercial thinning harvest, a type of intermediate treatment. These thinning treatments have the
potential to develop into multi-storied lynx habitat within 20-50 years. Thinning the stand would create an
environment for regeneration to occur in varying stages moving the stand into multi-storied condition in
the future. Without commercial thinning of these heavily stocked stands, they would likely move into the
stem-exclusion stage and then would not develop into a multi-storied condition without disturbance.
Landscape Function: In this VRU group, Alternative 2 was developed to address landscape ecology and
resilience. Alternative 2 trends the greatest number of acres toward desired conditions. Alternative 3 is the
second most effective in this VRU.
Moving stands toward the desired conditions in this VRU group would begin to restore historic density,
composition and function, and address the potential climate change.
TABLE 3.30- Treatments Trending Toward all VRU Desired Conditions (acres)
(Species Composition and Density Changes by Alternative)
TREATMENT

Ponderosa Pine Restoration through Planting
Western Larch Restoration through Planting
Western White Pine Restoration through Planting.
Regeneration harvest trending species composition
toward VRU group desired condition that is more
resistant and resilient to disturbance insect and
disease infestations and uncertain environmental
conditions such as climate change.
Intermediate harvest trending species composition
toward VRU group desired condition that is more
resistant and resilient to disturbance insect and
disease infestations and uncertain environmental
conditions such as climate change.
Acres treated with intermediate harvest trending
density toward VRU group desired condition that is
more resistant and resilient to disturbance, insect
and disease infestations and uncertain
environmental conditions such as climate change.
Natural Fuels Reduction trending toward desired
condition
Precommercial Thinning
Western White Pine Daylight Thinning

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

FORESEEABLE
ACTIONS

MAXIMUM
CUMULATIVE

0
0
0

538
1,259
731

468
938
491

0
0
0

538
1,259
731

0

2,528

1906

198
on DNRC lands

2,726

0

6,573

6,140

0

6,573

6,573

6,140

0

9,811

0

9,811

9,647

0

9,811

0
0

5,563
1,060

5,563
0

0
0

5,563
1,060

Discussion: Because the alternatives were designed to address ecosystem restoration needs, the
differences in ecological restoration between the alternatives are generally proportionate to the acres
treated. Alternative 2 most effectively addresses restoration of species composition and density because
this alternative treats more acres, moving more acres toward the desired condition.
Alternative 2 moves more acres toward the desired species and density levels therefore having a larger
impact on resistance and resiliency. Alternatives 2 reduces effects to the greatest degree from drought,
fire, insects disease and climate change as the desired species are drought resistant and fire-tolerant, with
good resistance to insects and disease. Alternative 3 is second most effective.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 47 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Alternative 2 most effectively addresses restoration needs to trend the greatest number of acres toward
desired conditions, therefore trending to a condition that is most adapted and resilient to disturbances
from insect and disease infestations and uncertain environmental conditions such as climate change.
Alternative 3 trends a large amount of acres toward desired condition species composition and density
levels therefore reducing the risk of mortality from MPB.
Alternative 2 most effectively addresses restoration at a landscape level by restoring historic patch size,
therefore most effectively mimics historic conditions. It is assumed that natural conditions are restored
where treatment is moving the stand toward the VRU target conditions and these conditions would be
best adapted for future environments. Alternative 3 is the second most effective, however this alternative
does not attempt to restore historic patch size.
Alternative 2 most effectively addresses increases in early successional stages in this cool and moist VRU
(7 and 9) which has a beneficial effect for lynx forage, providing a pulse of habitat for snowshoe hare.
Alternative 3 also creates a forage pulse for lynx however to fewer acres.
Both alternatives 2 and 3 treat 423 acres with a commercial thinning harvest, a type of intermediate
treatment. These thinning treatments have the potential to develop into multi-storied lynx habitat within
20-50 years. Thinning the stand would create an environment for regeneration to occur in varying stages
moving the stand into multi-storied condition in the future. Without commercial thinning of these heavily
stocked stands they would likely move into the stem-exclusion stage and then would not develop into a
multi-storied condition without disturbance.
Landscape Function: All alternatives were designed to address historic composition, structure and
patterns within other resource needs, and KNFP direction. All alternatives address the potential for
climate change and increase resistance and resiliency to the degree of planned treatments. Alternative 2
most effectively addresses landscape function due to the highest amount of treatment acres, and the
largest amount of intolerant species restored and restoration of historic patch size. Alternative 3 is the
next most effective
All planned and reasonably foreseeable actions combined with the proposed activities in Alternative 2 or
all harvest and prescribed fire would treat up to 24% of the analysis area.
HARVEST
Direct and Indirect Effects
Stand Improvement
Improvement harvests are proposed for stands that have higher than historic density and natural fuels.
These sites would be opened up to an average BA of 50-60 on the dryer sites, and 70-90 BA on the moist
sites. Ponderosa pine and western larch would be strongly favored for leave where they exist. There may
be pockets of open areas but they would generally not exceed 15% of the unit. During implementation,
units or portions of units may be dropped where BA reduction is not viable due to harvest economics or
lack of adequate leave trees. These residual basal area objectives are consistent with historic stand
densities and species composition resulting from mixed severity fire.
This intermediate treatment would not replace the existing stand and would improve the existing species
composition and forest health by removing less desirable DF, LPP, grand fir, hemlock, cedar and native
non-disease resistant western white pine, and some of the smaller western larch and ponderosa pine, and
insect and disease infested trees. The harvest treatment would retain the best Douglas-fir and most of the
ponderosa pine and western larch. The residual stand structure would vary in size and arrangement. The
remaining overstory would not be evenly spaced, but would be variable based on existing stand structure,
condition and species composition. Opening the stand would increase the growth and vigor of the residual
conifers and increased sunlight to the forest floor would stimulate growth of understory vegetation.
Prescribed fire or machine piling is planned to reduce natural down and ladder fuels for some units.
Spring underburning or grapple piling would reduce the amount of natural fuels, interrupt the succession
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 48 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

of the more tolerant species, and help the ponderosa pine and western larch maintain dominance in these
stands. Fire would also move the understory shrubs, grasses and forbs back to their early seral stages and
increase forage amount, nutrition and palatability. Prescribed fire may be deferred if there is unacceptable
risk of killing more than 10-15% of the leave trees either through the fire directly or by stressing the trees
and increasing the risk of insect attack.
Yarding tops without prescribed fire or machine piling is planned in units that are too steep to pile, and do
not have sufficiently large residual trees that would survive prescribed fire.
Commercial Thinning treatments are prescribed to reduce stand density (of trees) primarily to favor
desired species and improve growth and improve forest health. Commercial thinning is prescribed in many
stands with ponderosa pine that are at high risk for losses from MPB as they are currently overstocked and
at high risk for mortality. To accomplish these objectives, this treatment would focus on thinning the
stands and removing excess and/or poor-quality trees, mid-tolerant or intolerant tree species such as
Douglas-fir and grand fir, and smaller diameter trees that are less tolerant of fire. The intention of leaving
the best quality tree and the needed spacing of those trees is to produce a more resilient stand condition
that are less susceptible to MPB and represent a fire-tolerant tree species and reduced ladder fuels. These
units would be whole tree yarded. Several units would require winter logging so as not to exceed the 15%
maximum detrimental soil disturbance.
On the cool and moist vegetation types (VRU 7) these thinning treatments have the potential to develop
into multi-storied lynx habitat within 20-50 years. Thinning the stand would create an environment for
regeneration to occur in varying stages moving the stand into multi-storied condition in the future.
Without commercial thinning of these heavily stocked stands, they would likely move into the stemexclusion stage and then would not develop into a multi-storied condition without disturbance.
Improvement with Shelterwood Harvest
Improvement harvest with shelterwood openings would occur in stands that have higher than historic
stocking. These dry DF types would be opened up to an average BA of 40-60 square feet per acre.
Ponderosa pine and WL would be strongly favored for leave where they exist. Up to 50% of the unit may
be in shelterwood openings (25-40 BA) within these units. Shelterwood openings would occur in areas
with stagnant DF that lack acceptable leave trees and areas with heavy insect or disease infestations.
These residual basal area objectives are consistent with historic densities and species composition. This
intermediate BA reduction treatment would not replace the existing stands, but would improve the
existing species composition and forest health by removing less desirable DF, retaining the best DF and
most of the PP and WL. Stand composition would vary from 80-90% DF in the stands with little available
ponderosa pine or western larch. The residual structure would vary in size and arrangement. Overstory
trees would not be evenly spaced, but would be variable based on existing stand structure, condition and
species composition. Opening the stand density would increase the growth and vigor of the residual
conifers and increased sunlight to the forest floor would stimulate growth of understory vegetation.
The shelterwood openings would replace the existing stand, but would retain the large overstory trees
consistent with historic disturbance patterns. Stand structure would change from mid-late seral conifers to
early-seral conifers with reserve mature overstory of Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine and western larch, with
BA of 25-40 square feet. Opening the canopy would encourage regeneration of early seral understory
vegetation and increased sunlight would stimulate growth and vigor of existing understory vegetation.
Prescribed fire to reduce natural down and ladder fuels is planned for all units. Spring underburning
would reduce the amount of natural fuels, interrupt the succession of Douglas-fir, and help the ponderosa
pine and western larch maintain dominance in these stands. Fire would also move the understory shrubs,
grasses and forbs back to their early seral stages and increase forage amount, nutrition and palatability
and stimulate any aspen clones within the units.
Natural seeding is expected in these treatment units, but supplemental planting of ponderosa pine would
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 49 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

ensure that this species is restored.
Shelterwood with Reserves Harvest
Shelterwood harvest would retain 20-40 BA of mid-late seral overstory to function as a seed source,
shade and stand structure, as well as genetic seed reservoirs, relic overstory trees and future snags.
Ponderosa pine and western larch would be favored for leave where they exist. In their absence, the
larger, most vigorous Douglas-fir would be retained.
These regeneration openings would replace the existing stand, but would retain the large overstory trees
consistent with the historic pattern of mixed lethal to lethal fire. Stand structure would change from midlate seral conifers to early-seral conifers with a reserve mid-late seral overstory of ponderosa pine,
western larch and Douglas-fir. The residual overstory would vary in size and arrangement. They would
not be evenly spaced, but would be variable based on existing stand structure, condition species
composition and visuals and other resource objectives.
The opening of the canopy would encourage regeneration of early seral understory vegetation and
increased sunlight would stimulate growth and vigor of existing understory vegetation.
Site preparation would be through prescribed fire or machine scarification. Spring underburning would
reduce the amount of natural fuels, prepare the sites for regeneration, interrupt the succession of Douglasfir and help the ponderosa pine and western larch establish dominance in these stands. Fire would also
move the understory shrubs, forbs and grasses back to their early-seral stages and increase forage amount,
nutritional value, and palatability, and stimulate any aspen clones within the site.
Some natural seeding of WL, lodgepole pine and Douglas-fir is expected in these treatment units, but
supplemental planting of ponderosa pine and western larch would ensure that these species are restored.
Seedtree with Reserves Harvest
Seedtree harvest would retain 10-25 square feet of BA of mid-late seral overstory to function as a seed
source, and stand structure, as well as genetic seed reservoirs, relic overstory trees and future snags.
Ponderosa pine and western larch would be favored for leave where available. Where ponderosa pine and
larch are not available, the larger, most vigorous Douglas-fir would be retained. A minimum of 10 leave
trees per acre would be retained.
These regeneration openings would replace the existing stand, but would retain the large overstory trees
consistent with the historic pattern of fire. Stand structure would change from mid-late seral conifers to
early-seral conifers with a reserve mid-late seral overstory of ponderosa pine, western larch and Douglasfir. The residual overstory would vary in size and arrangement based on existing stand structure,
condition, species composition and visual or other resource objectives.
The opening of the canopy would encourage regeneration of early seral understory vegetation and
increased sunlight would stimulate growth and vigor of existing understory vegetation.
Site preparation would be mostly through prescribed fire in the spring or fall with some grapple piling to
prepare the sites for regeneration, interrupt the succession of tolerant to mid-tolerant species, restore
ponderosa pine, western larch, or western white pine to a dominant component in these stands. Site
preparation through prescribed fire or grapple piling would also move the understory shrubs and grasses
back to their early seral stages and increase forage amount, nutritional quality and palatability, and
stimulate any aspen clones within the site.
Natural seeding is expected in these treatment units, but supplemental planting of western larch,
ponderosa pine, rust resistant western white pine, and potentially aspen on appropriate sites would ensure
that these species are restored.
Clearcut with Reserves Harvest
Clearcut harvest would retain 10-15 square feet of BA of mid-late seral overstory to function not as a seed
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 50 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

source, but for stand structure, genetic seed reservoirs, relic overstory trees and future snags. Ponderosa
pine and western larch would be favored for leave where they exist. Where western larch and ponderosa
pine are not available to meet the minimum of 4-8 trees per acre, the largest or most vigorous Douglas-fir
would be retained. A minimum of 4-8 leave trees per acre would be retained.
These regeneration openings would replace the existing stand, but would retain the large overstory trees
consistent with the historic pattern of mixed lethal to lethal fire. Stand structure would change from midlate seral conifers to early-seral conifers with a reserve mid-late seral overstory of ponderosa pine,
western larch and Douglas-fir. The residual overstory would vary in size and arrangement based on
existing stand structure, condition and species composition.
The opening of the canopy would encourage regeneration of early-seral understory vegetation and
increased sunlight would stimulate growth and vigor of existing understory vegetation.
Site preparation would be mostly through prescribed fire in the spring or fall and some grapple piling to
prepare the sites for regeneration, interrupt the succession of tolerant to mid-tolerant species, and restore
ponderosa pine, western larch or western white pine to a dominant component in these stands. Site
preparation through prescribed fire or grapple piling would also move the understory shrubs and grasses
back to their early seral stages and increase forage amount, nutritional quality and palatability.
Some natural seeding is expected in these treatment units, but planting of western larch, ponderosa pine,
rust resistant western white pine, and potentially aspen on appropriate sites would ensure that these
species are restored, and the sites are adequately stocked.
Combinations of Seedtree/Shelterwood Regeneration Harvest
Regeneration mosaics are proposed for units that vary between a seed tree and shelterwood, depending on
the location within the unit. Overall effects would be most similar to a seed tree harvest as described
previously.
Harvest Treatments Individually and Collectively
Harvest treatments individually and collectively would create openings between residual trees, retain
larger fire resistant trees and reduce fuel loads. These treatments would increase within unit survival rates
in the event of a large scale fire, would decrease the likelihood of a crown fire, and to some degree buffer
areas on the leeward side of the treated stand. Collectively, the treatments would allow the landscape to
sustain itself in the aftermath of a wildfire (Skinner 2008).
Reducing stand density, treating fuels, and maintaining or restoring intolerant and mid-tolerant species
such as WL, PP, rust resistant western white pine, Douglas-fir and aspen, combined with the buffering
effects, would increase stand and landscape level resistance and resilience to predicted climate change.
NON-HARVEST TREATMENTS
Direct and Indirect Effects
Stand Density-Hazard Fuel Reduction, through a Combination of Slashing and Prescribed Fire
Density reduction and hazard fuel reduction is proposed for stands that have conifer stocking, natural
fuels and ladder fuels that are higher than would occur within historic fire regimes. The dry to moderately
dry Douglas-fir types would be opened up to an average BA of 40-60 square feet per acre, and the moist
VRUs would be opened up to 60-120 BA through a combination of slashing, and prescribed fire.
Ponderosa pine and western larch would generally not be slashed. The residual basal area objectives are
consistent with historic densities.
This treatment would not replace the existing stands, but would improve the existing species composition
and forest health by removing less desirable Douglas-fir and other tolerant species, while retaining the
larger thick barked Douglas-fir and most of the PP and WL. Stand composition would vary based on
existing stand conditions, but would generally retain 70-80% intolerant to mid- tolerant fire resistant
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 51 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

species such as western larch and ponderosa pine. The residual stand structure would be variable based on
existing stand structure, condition and species composition. There would be inclusions with BA as low as
20 and as high as 140, but the overall averages would be consistent with the objectives described
previously. Opening the stand density would increase the growth and vigor of the residual conifers and
increased sunlight to the forest floor would stimulate growth of understory vegetation.
Prescribed Fire
Prescribed fire, following harvest or without harvest, would reduce natural fuels, prepare the site for
regeneration of intolerant conifers, interrupt the succession of Douglas-fir and help the ponderosa pine,
western white pine and western larch maintain or establish dominance on these sites.
Prescribed fire without harvest treatment would open the canopy through mortality in the smaller trees
and the larger tolerant to mid-tolerant conifers, and prepare the site to encourage regeneration of early
seral understory vegetation. The increased sunlight, combined with the consumption of older plant
material, would move the understory shrubs and grasses back to their early seral stages and increase
growth, vigor, forage amount, nutrient quality and palatability. Species that are maintained by fire
disturbance such as aspen, redstem ceanothus and willow may become common across the dryer portions
of this landscape, and willows, maples, alder, huckleberry and other shrubs may be common in the drier
VRUs.
Prescribed fire may increase susceptibility of ponderosa pine to MPB beetle attack through this additional
disturbance. Depending on the site, the prescribed burning would be delayed after the harvest disturbance
to reduce susceptibility
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities would continue in the analysis area. Composition of the vegetation in untreated
areas, including forbs, shrubs and trees, would continue to shift toward a more tolerant, climax condition.
This functionally disrupts both the vegetation and animal species that have evolved to depend upon
landscape components historically present within the desired condition range of variability. In these areas,
natural events such as wind and insects would continue to set the stage for stand replacing fire. The
decision to allow natural fire to burn within the analysis area, rather than suppress fire, is beyond the
scope of this project.
Precommercial Thinning
Precommercial thinning would occur in overstocked, sapling-size trees that have been initiated in the past
15-25 years. This treatment would reduce tree density, reduce competition, reduce crown continuity,
improve growing conditions, restore and favor shade-intolerant species such as PP and western larch and
mid-tolerant western white pine, which are more resilient to fire insect and disease, and improve growing
conditions of the remaining trees by reducing competition for light and nutrients.
This type of thinning occurs when stands are typically 15-20 years old. The purpose of the treatment is to
improve species composition, growth and vigor on the residual crop trees. Trees with poor form and
insect and pathogen problems would be removed. Thinning would select for desirable trees with
resistance to insects and pathogens. Daylighting of blister rust resistant white pine is proposed in
Alternative 2.
Precommercial thinning increases seral species composition of ponderosa pine, western larch and western
white pine.
Daylight Thinning of Western White Pine
White pine precommercial thinning and pruning (~ 212 acres) would be done on plantations that are in
lynx habitat but have planted rust-resistant western white pine trees. White pine precommercial thinning
(daylighting of white pine) clears competing vegetation adjacent to planted rust-resistant western white
pine trees at a fixed radius. Daylighting removes competing trees greater than 2 feet in height around
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 52 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

desired trees within a 10-12 foot radius circle. Pruning removes the lower branches of WWP trees.
Branches infected by blister rust or near enough to the ground to be highly susceptible to infection are
removed to prevent spread of the disease to the tree stem. Pruning is done to reduce the potential for
mortality caused by blister rust. White pine precommercial thinning is intended to improve the chances of
the WWP trees reaching maturity. By daylight thinning and pruning, the white pine would compete better
with surrounding vegetation of the stand and maintain lynx habitat. Only 20% of each stand would be
thinned in order to be in compliance with the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (NRLMD).
Prescribed Fire Treatments Individually and Collectively
Prescribed fire treatments individually and collectively would create openings between residual trees,
retain larger fire resistant trees and reduce fuel loads. These treatments would increase within unit
survival rates in the event of a large scale fire, would decrease the likelihood of a crown fire, and to some
degree buffer areas on the leeward side of the treated stand. Collectively, the treatments would allow the
landscape to sustain itself in the aftermath of a wildfire (Skinner 2008).
Reducing stand density, treating fuel and maintaining or restoring intolerant and mid-tolerant species such
as western larch, PP, rust resistant western white pine, DF and aspen, combined with the buffering effects,
would increase stand and landscape level resistance and resilience to predicted climate change.
Planting
Enabling plantations to respond to potential climate change would be addressed by planting a minor
component (up to 25%) of the seedlings from a lower elevation seed lot to address the predicted climate
change, while ensuring the survival of plantations within the context of historic conditions. This is one
strategy to maintain resilient forests for projected future climates of an upward shift of species. Managers
need to think of planting stock that would survive now, but still grow well into the future (Fox 2007). All
seedlings would be sown from local seed sources and a minimum of 75% of the planted stock would be
suitable and adapted to the existing site conditions. Planting rust resistant western white pine would
increase the presence of this species on the landscape measurable by the number of acres planted. While
the proposed acres are small, they would incrementally increase the presence of this key species. Also
planting ponderosa pine and western larch, trending toward desired conditions that are best adapted to
disturbance would increase site resiliency.
Effects of Silvicultural Treatment on Genetic Diversity
Genetic diversity is the basis of all biodiversity, because it provides raw material for the adaptation,
evolution and survival of species and individuals, especially under changed environment and disease
conditions (Rajora 1999). Forest management practices and natural disturbances such as fire can impact
genetic variability. Genetic diversity has been measured for various reforestation methods. Naturally
regenerated lodgepole pine was found to have slightly lower heterozygosity than planted and unharvested
stands (Thomas 1999). Rajora found genetic diversity of natural regeneration to be comparable to old
growth, and that plantations had less diversity primarily because the genetic base for reforestation was
relatively narrow in white spruce (Rajora 1999). Genetic implications of natural and artificial regeneration
following shelterwood and clearcuts were analyzed in coastal Douglas-fir and found that harvesting
followed by either natural or artificial regeneration resulted in little alternation of genetic diversity.
Artificial regeneration had significantly greater levels of genetic diversity than natural regeneration
(Thomas 1999). It appears the consequences of even-age silvicultural systems would have little change in
the genetic diversity of forest tree populations at least in one generation because we are retaining leave
trees on site and we have seed collection and tree improvement guidelines to ensure we maintain a broad
genetic base and meet genetic diversity objectives in our reforestation program (FSH 2409.26f). There is
some concern that phenotypic selection for certain qualities that are prescribed in the intermediate harvest
could reduce the genetic diversity within a stand. Increased pollen dispersal and edge effect could reduce
this potential impact. Retaining relic trees, uncut patches and a second layer of trees as prescribed in the
silvicultural treatments should help to maintain the natural gene pool.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 53 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Potential for Increased Insect and Disease Activity
Disturbances caused by insect and diseases occur in all terrestrial ecosystems. Insect and disease are
important causes of small to large gaps in forest canopies. They can affect major structural or species
changes in the ecosystem. FS reports have consistently shown insects and pathogens cause more losses
than any other damaging agent, including fire. Insects and pathogens often interact with each other as well
as with climate and fire. Past management practices may increase the frequency, intensity and extent of
many outbreaks. Such practices include harvest beyond historic rotation ages for a given species,
removing intolerant species and leaving tolerant species, not removing diseased overstory trees and
suppression of fires. The widespread droughts of the late 1980s preceded and predisposed vast areas in
the west to insect and pathogen attack (Haack and Byler 1993). Fire suppression increased stand densities
that in turn indirectly increased insect and disease populations.
As untreated stands within the East Reservoir analysis area progress towards more shade tolerant species,
insect and disease occurrences are likely to increase. Grand fir, subalpine fire, hemlock and Douglas-fir
are more susceptible to root and stem decays than are more shade-intolerant species such as western larch
and ponderosa pine, and western white pine. On the warm and dry sites, these shade tolerant species
would likely be less resistant to insect and disease impacts due to moisture stress during the warm periods
of the year. On a given site, the tolerant species are more nutrient and moisture demanding, thus more
likely to be stressed on these lower productivity sites and during times of drought. They are therefore
predisposed to insect and disease attack due to stressed conditions.
Although it is difficult to quantify the increased risk and effects of defoliators, root disease, bark beetles,
etc., that would result in a tolerant stand on a given site, experience on adjacent National Forests such as
the Idaho Panhandle, the Lolo, Helena, etc., as well as the Boise National Forest, and the Blue Mountains,
shows that vast acres could be lost through insect and disease followed by a high probability of
catastrophic fire. Significant problems in these climax species stands started within 60-100 years
following fire suppression and harvest activities that increased the tolerant species component.
The potential for increased insect levels in untreated stands with predicted climate change is high. Forest
insect and disease species are an important indicator species for assessing climate change. Assessing
insect and disease species response to climate change indicates intensification in all aspects of outbreak
behavior, particularly with MPB, gypsy moth, spruce beetle and spruce budworm (Logan 2003, Pg. 135,
136).
Unless weather patterns change to ones more favorable to their host and less conductive to beetle survival
and population expansion, or management activities reduce availability of hosts, MPB populations would
continue until few susceptible hosts remain in many stands (USDA FS 2007). Western spruce budworm
has been recorded on the KNF over the past few years. The only other time defoliation from budworm
was recorded on the KNF in the past 59 years was in the late 70s (USDA FS 2007). There are close to two
million acres of Douglas-fir in the state of Montana that are relatively susceptible to Douglas-fir beetle.
Preventive management is the key to reducing the outbreak potential (USDA FS 2007). Recent
observations in heavily defoliated stands suggest there may be a relationship between heavy defoliation
by western spruce budworm and Douglas-fir beetle attack (USDA FS 2007).
Stands proposed for density reduction or regeneration would decrease in susceptibility to most insect and
diseases in the long-term due to favoring intolerant species and reducing stress on residual trees through
reduction of competition for moisture, light and nutrients. All vegetation treatments in this project are
designed to restore historic composition, density, structure and function consistent with historic
disturbance processes; therefore the treated areas should be more resilient to insect and disease
infestations with or without climate change than the untreated areas.
In the short-term, susceptibility to MPB, Douglas-fir beetle and other secondary insects may be increased
following fire induced stress on residual trees.
Partial harvest in Douglas-fir dominated stands may increase the susceptibility of residual trees to root
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 54 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

disease. Douglas-fir is more susceptible to root and stem decays than other species such as western larch,
ponderosa pine and lodgepole pine. In general, Douglas-fir is not the priority species to retain, but there
would be a mix of Douglas-fir within the partially harvested stands.
Windthrow
Proposed treatments may increase windthrow above existing conditions, particularly in areas where
regeneration openings are larger than 10 acres, where the unit is topographically unprotected, where
density reduction is adjacent to an existing opening, or where leave trees have defective root systems due
to root disease or over maturity. Units on more susceptible landtypes (Landtypes 101, 112, 152) have a
higher risk of windthrow. Refer to the Landtype summary in the Soils Section of this document. All
proposed treatments would open up the existing stand and may increase the risk of windthrow because the
winds would move down closer to the ground. Windthrow is not expected to exceed 10-15% of the stand
unless there are unusual circumstances.
Other Activities
A combination of additional activities is included in the action alternatives. These include road storage,
implementation of BMPs, road reconstruction, recreation improvements and trail construction. These
activities would not contribute a measurable effect to forest vegetation because they have a minimal effect
on vegetation and ecology.
Forest Carbon Storage
Recent literature shows that regeneration and young stands are generally a carbon source until new trees
are established, and their carbon uptake exceeds emissions from decomposing dead organic material. As
the stands develop, the carbon sink would increase until peaking at an intermediate age and then would
gradually decline. Young dense stands (9-23 years) have a low carbon source, which increases through
about 95-106 years and is again low in old stands (Law et al. 2003). Precommercial and commercial
thinning may initially decrease the carbon storage by reducing stand density, and by releasing carbon
from decomposition of the slash. However, thinning would accelerate the stand growth and should
provide a carbon source sooner than an un-thinned stand. Regeneration harvest would reduce on-site
carbon storage until such a time that the stand has regenerated and is occupying the site at a similar
capacity of the pre-harvested state. There is a potential beneficial role in reducing greenhouse gasses
when the treatment reduces the threat of wildfire released carbon or when carbon can be stored in wood
products or be used to offset fossil fuel use (Finkral 2008).
Thinning and release are often proposed as forest management practices to increase forest carbon
sequestration. Some growth simulation models have indicated that controlling competing vegetation at an
early age helps to maximize stand growth and carbon storage in some stands and does not increase carbon
storage in other stands and species. However, thinning dense young stands may increase carbon storage
over the life of the stand in most stand types (Schroeder 2006). The author also noted that thinning may
increase the loss of soil carbon, by reducing canopy cover and disturbing the surface and thus accelerating
decomposition rates (Schroeder 2006). In contrast, release in a southern pine ecosystem was found to
increase total carbon storage over the life of the stand, and to promote soil carbon storage. Thus, forestry
practices that reduce vegetative competition apparently increase carbon sequestration in some
circumstances, but not in others, limiting generalizations about their potential for increasing carbon
sequestration (Schroeder 2006).
For the mastication fuel treatments, most of the biomass (and carbon) would remain on site, but carbon
release would be accelerated because the biomass would decompose more quickly.
Spot grapple piling treatments would only pile the larger slash material in concentrated areas and would
leave roots, limbs, leaves or needles, and other advanced decay woody material. Carbon would continue
to be released as this material decomposes but at a slower rate than the material that is piled.
Many research studies presume that the carbon from slash is released within a year of the harvest; others
presume that it is quickly absorbed by new growth resulting from the treatment. Data on the extent of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 55 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

various slash treatments and on the carbon impacts of the various treatments are sparse (Gorte 2007).
Fires in forests can significantly affect the carbon cycle. Fire is a self-sustaining chemical process that
quickly mineralizes organic matter; in minutes, fires convert organic matter into its components minerals, water vapor and CO2. The likelihood, extent, and/or frequency of wildfires may be exacerbated
by expected climate change (Gorte 2007). Reducing the potential fire severity through fuel reduction is
consistent with carbon storage objectives.
There is little literature on forest and forest soil carbon. It is speculated that forestry activities that disturb
soils, would likely reduce soil carbon levels (Gorte 2007).
Carbon Flux
A comment received on past projects mentioned that forest management should shift from logging to
carbon storage. The comment also cites eight published papers to support the assertion that “this type of
management has the potential to double the current level of carbon storage in some regions.”
Management of the NFS does not emphasize “logging.” Rather, management of all National Forests,
including the KNF, emphasizes multiple-use as prescribed by the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of
1960 and the NFMA. Accomplishment of these statutory objectives is defined in the KNFP. Neither the
principal statutes nor the KNFP require or suggest that carbon storage supersede the statutorily defined
purposes of national forest management.
Although not a statutorily defined purpose of NFS management, forests provide a valuable ecosystem
service by removing carbon from the atmosphere and storing it in biomass. The KNF currently stores an
estimated 171.1 (± 3.9) million metric tons (Mt) of carbon 2. This represents about 0.004 % of the total of
approximately 42,654 Mt of carbon in forests of the coterminous US (US EPA 2008). Preliminary
estimates indicate that the KNF is a net carbon sink, removing from the atmosphere approximately 31
metric tons of carbon per acre per year.
Sustaining forest productivity and other multiple-use goods and services requires that land managers
balance multiple objectives. The long-term ability of forests to sequester carbon depends in part on their
resilience to multiple stresses, including increasing probability of drought stress, high severity fires and
large scale insect outbreaks associated with projected climate change. Management actions, such as those
in the East Reservoir Project, that trend vegetation to a fire resilient landscape, maintain the vigor and
long-term productivity of forests, reduce the likelihood of high severity fires and insect outbreaks, and
store carbon in harvested wood products, increases the capacity of the forest to sequester carbon in the
long-term. Thus, even though some management actions may in the near-term reduce total carbon stored
below current levels, in the long-term they improve the overall capacity of the forest to sequester carbon,
while also contributing other multiple-use goods and services.
Contribute to a Sustained Yield of Timber
The desired condition is to provide forest products within the sustainable capability of the ecosystem.
One of the purposes provided by Congress for the management of NFS land is to “furnish a continuous
2

This estimate is based on data collected in the 1990S on 351 Forest Inventory and Analysis plots and stored in the Forest Inventory and
Analysis database (USDA Forest Service 2006). Calculations are from the Carbon On-Line Estimator (http://ncasi.uml.edu/COLE). The estimate
includes total above ground carbon (bole and crown of live trees, bole and crown of aboveground standing dead trees, coarse woody debris,
understory vegetation, and forest floor detritus) and below ground carbon in soil and roots.
These estimates are preliminary because two or more directly comparable forest surveys are not yet available for the KNF. In the late 1990s the
Forest Inventory and Analysis Program switched from periodic sampling to annual sampling, and established a nationally consistent sampling
and plot design (Gillespie 1999; Bechtold and Patterson 2005). A complete cycle of annualized inventory has not been completed yet for the
KNF. The reported estimates are calculated by the GForest software program of the National Council of Air and Stream Improvement, Inc., based
upon comparison of the annual inventory “panels.” The standard error varies by year, and ranges from 1.37 to 2.56 on the KNF. The GForest
software program can be accessed at http://ncasi.uml.edu. These estimates are expected to change over the next 5 to 10 years with the completion
of repeat inventory of individual plots.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 56 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

supply of timber for the use and necessities of the citizens of the United States” (Organic Act, 16 USC
475). One of the objectives of the KNFP is to provide a sustained yield of timber volume responsive to
national and regional needs, scheduled to encourage a stable base of economic growth in the dependent
geographical area (KNFP page II-1): KNFP management area goals also call for a programmed yield of
timber (KNFP, pages II-1, III-43, III-48, III-64, III-69, III-74). There is a need to supply wood products in
response to societal demands and contribute to local jobs and income.
Table 3.31 - Harvest Volume and Acres Harvested by Alternative
INDICATOR

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3 (MMBF)

Volume Removed
Acres Harvested

0
0

49 (MMBF)
8,845

30
5,817

Volume figures do not include roundwood volume.

Cumulative Effects
Cumulative effects of the alternatives that would affect vegetation and ecology include past activities and
recurring management activities on private lands; and past actions, and pre-approved activities on NFS
lands, such as, noxious weed treatments, road maintenance and fire suppression. All the past management
activities have been incorporated into the existing conditions discussion on vegetation. All planned and
reasonably foreseeable actions would be incorporated into the alternatives as cumulative effects.
Table 3.31A - Cumulative Potential Vegetation Treatment Summary (acres)
TREATMENT

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

ONGOING
ON NFS

DNRC
LANDS

Regeneration Harvest
Intermediate Harvest
Fuel Treatment by Prescribed Fire
Precommercial Thinning
*Western White Pine Daylighting
Total Treatment Acres

0
0
0
0
0
0

2,528
6,573
15,102
5,653
905
31,661

1,906
6,140
13,205
1,695
0
22,581

0
0
1,080
760
0
1,670

198
0
0
0
0
198

MAX
CUMULATIVE
(CUM AND PA)

2,726
6,573
16,182
5,653
1,123

Harvest on DNRC lands are based on harvest information that the state provided for 2012 and beyond.
*= 20% of the total acres that would be treated.

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
National Forest Management Act (NFMA) of 1976
In accordance with the NFMA of 1976, timber harvest and regeneration practices shall be designed to
assure lands are satisfactorily restocked within five years after final harvest. Restocking is satisfactory
when the harvest area contains the minimum number, distribution and species composition of
regeneration as specified in a site-specific silvicultural prescription written or reviewed by a certified
silviculturist. Five years after final harvest means five years after clearcutting; five years after final
overstory removal in shelterwood cutting; five years after seedtree removal cut in seedtree cutting or five
years after selection cutting.
In order for a harvest area to be certified as stocked, it must meet the following criteria defined in the FS
Silvicultural Practices Handbook, Chapter 2 - Reforestation (FSH 2409.17, 2.72-2):
a. Establishment. Established regeneration, both planted and natural regeneration must have survived at
least three growing seasons and be healthy with good buds and leaders.
b. Quantity. The number of established seedlings on the stand meets stocking levels including tree
numbers and distribution described in the silvicultural prescription.
c. Future Treatments. The silviculturist has determined that the stand requires no further regeneration
treatment or regeneration exams. Seedlings are free to grow and there are no conditions that would
affect stocking levels.
In addition, the Kootenai National Forest has reforestation stocking guidelines that identify minimum
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 57 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

acceptable stocking (KNF 2010).
Regeneration survey records have been analyzed for each habitat type group affected by proposed units in
the project. The results demonstrate assurance that these sites can be adequately restocked within the
required timeframes. (Refer to the project file for a summary of past regeneration success on the District
by habitat type groups.)
Biodiversity
The NFMA requires that Forest plans "preserve and enhance the diversity of plant and animal
communities... so that it is at least as great as that which can be expected in the natural forest" (16 U.S.C.
1604(g)(3)(B)). In order to ensure that viable populations would be maintained, habitat must be provided
to support at least a minimum number of reproductive individuals. The habitat must be well distributed so
that those individuals can interact with others in the planning area.
The East Reservoir Project ensures that biological diversity is maintained by managing stands, VRUs and
the landscape consistent with historical disturbance processes and an assessment of potential future
environments.
All conifer planting would use local seed sources and all seeding of roads, landings, etc. would be seeded
with short duration annual weed-free certified seed mixes, an approved native seed mix from local seed
sources, or the Standard Kootenai Mix, which has been determined to be a non-invasive mix of annuals,
biennials and perennials.
Land Suitability
As a precursor to the diagnosis process, each stand is examined to determine its current condition and to
provide a basis for silvicultural decisions. Suitability was determined for each stand in the analysis area in
accordance with the KNFP. This determination found each stand proposed for treatment as suitable for
timber management based upon the following:
1) Each stand meets the definition of forestland as described in the KNFP.
2) Technological feasibility exists to ensure soil productivity and watershed protection. All sites
considered for treatment would use established harvesting and fuel reduction methods. In combination
with resource protection standards in the KNFP and applicable BMPs, these methods would be
sufficient to protect soil and water resource values.
3) There is reasonable assurance that lands can be restocked within five years of final harvest. Historical
records on the Libby Ranger District in this area indicate that most of the stands treated with a final
regeneration harvest have either met or are on the proper stocking trajectories to meet specified
stocking levels for land management objectives within five years.
4) The stands proposed for treatment have potential growth (cubic/feet/acre/year) that classifies them as
suitable for timber harvest in accordance with NFMA Findings - Uneven-age vs. Even-age, Optimality
of Clearcutting.
NFMA Findings - Uneven-age vs. Even-age, Optimality of Clearcutting
Target stands as described in the KNF Habitat Type Groups and Target Stands (USDA 1999), and
supplemented by the target stands for VRU 1 and 2 in the project file, provide the basis for considering
uneven-aged management. If an uneven-aged stand is ecologically feasible on the site and will benefit
allocated resources, this target is described and compared to the existing stand.
If uneven-aged management is not ecologically feasible or will not provide forest conditions that benefit
allocated resources, an uneven-aged alternative should not be carried forward as a viable alternative.
Uneven-aged management in the areas proposed for harvest, is not consistent with the historic range for
these sites. Uneven-age harvest would perpetuate regeneration of Douglas-fir, grand fir, subalpine fir,
hemlock and cedar, retain the unnaturally high stocking and fuel conditions, and increase the probability
of large-scale high-severity fire. Multi-age stands were common on some of the driest sites due to the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 58 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

periodic fire but the classic uneven-age stand is not within historic conditions. Based on this analysis, no
uneven-aged management was proposed for this analysis area.
Optimality of Clearcutting
A diagnosis was completed for each proposed unit that considered the historic conditions and target stand
for the appropriate VRU. On the sites that even-age or two-age management was the target, a seedtree or
shelterwood system was the first option that was considered. Clearcutting was only proposed for units or
portions of units that did not have adequate seed trees to regenerate some of the desired species to meet
target stand objectives. These units would still have a minimum of 10 overwood trees retained for
structure, relic trees and future snags, but these trees would not be relied on for seeding the unit; therefore
the appropriate silvicultural system is a clearcut. Refer to the diagnosis matrix in the project file that
addresses the process of determining the appropriate silvicultural system and the determination of
optimality of clearcutting.
Effects of Exotic Vegetation and Noxious Weeds
Refer to the Noxious Weed Section for additional information.
Effect to Special Communities-Pacific Yew Populations
In 1992 guides were established to ensure the long-term viability of pacific yew. Although there are other
sources of yew for extraction, we still continue to disclose possible effects to yew populations. Yew is
typically found within Habitat Group D, Warm and Moist VRUs. VRU group 4 and 5 is suitable and as
some pacific yew populations primarily associated with riparian areas. No substantial quantities of pacific
yew have been noted within any treatment units primarily due to the stand replacing fire in 1910 and the
late seral stage that pacific yew is generally associated with.
Effects on Residual Trees and Adjacent Stands (windthrow)
See discussion on page 3-35 of this document.

CONSISTENCY with FOREST PLAN DIRECTION
Proposed harvest treatment areas are within Management Areas (MAs) 10 (Big Game Winter Range), 11
(Big Game Winter Range/Timber), 12 (Big Game Summer Range/Timber), 13 (Designated Old Growth),
15(Timber Management), 16 (Timber/Viewing), 17 (Viewing/Timber), 18 (Minimum Use due to
Regeneration Concerns), 19 (Minimum Use Steep Slope), 5 (Viewing Areas), 6 (Developed recreation)
and 24 (Low Productivity).
Regeneration harvest is generally proposed within MAs that are suitable for timber management. In
Alternative 2, regeneration treatments are proposed in MA 16 and 17. These treatments are designed to
mitigate for visual concerns; treatments in all action alternative (2and 3) are designed to improve
recreation opportunities
All treatments are designed to restore ecological conditions by moving stands and the landscape toward
the VRU target conditions, while improving forest health, resiliency and reducing natural fuels. All
actions considered in depth were designed to manage vegetation consistent with big game habitat, and
social objectives, and address the potential for climate change.
KOOTENAI NATIONAL FOREST PLAN GOALS and OBJECTIVES
Effects of the Alternatives on Producing a Programmed Yield of Timber
Alternative 2 would harvest and utilize almost 39 million board feet of green and dead timber. Alternative
3 would harvest nearly 34 million board feet. Roundwood volume would be in addition to this estimated
sawlog volume. In addition to the amount of volume harvested, the ability to sustain a programmed yield
of timber is dependent on good forest management practices. All harvest of green trees is designed to
move stands toward VRU target conditions.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 59 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
VEGETATION RESOURCE

Openings Greater than 40 Acres
Alternatives 2 would create openings greater than 40 acres. Alternative 2 would initiate or contribute to
an existing early successional patch, 6 openings for a total of 1,118 acres. The purpose of designing large
treatment areas is to mimic natural processes of large patch sizes in VRU 4, 5, 7 and 9 that occurred
historically. Openings created by Units 36, 73T, 75, 80, 170 and 188 are in VRU 4: Units 147, 148 and
149 are in VRU 5; Units 40, 62 and 150 are in VRU 7 and unit 362 is in VRU 9.
UNIT
#

HARVEST
METHOD

#62

Seedtree

#147
#148
#149
#150

Seedtree

#170

Seedtree

#73T
#75
#188
#80
#36

Seedtree/
Shelterwood

#40

Seedtree

#362

Clearcut with
Reserves

STAND ID

STAND
ACRES

ACRES of EXISITING
OPENING

TOTAL OPENING
ACRES

RECOVERY
PERIOD

55702014
55702021
55702022

23
40
14

0

77 acres

5 years

55701013
55701014
55701017
55701086
55701013
55701016
55701010
55701027
55701087
55701018
55701034
55701071
55701074
55701083
55701088

28
42
22
1
3
74
6
57
2
17
5
20
24
8
29

0

338 acres

5-15 years
depending on
MA

97

5 years

55802061
55802062
55802099
56004016
56006020
56006022
56006023
56006026
56006101
56203011
56203043
56203112
56203113
56203046
56203042
56203016
56307045
56307070
56307044
56307062
56307071
56307046
56307036

39
41
17
21
0
40
49
45
82
21
22
11
25
0
47
25
11
15
22
20
46
0
14
23
37
30
Total Acres = 1,118

258
5-15 years
depending on
the MA

156

5 years

192

15 years

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 60 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

SOILS RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
This section discloses the results for the soils resource in the East Reservoir Project analysis area on soil
productivity. Field surveys regarding soils for this project were conducted in 2010 and 2011 using the R1
Soils Protocol (USDA FS 2011a).

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The regulatory framework pertaining to soils is summarized here. For additional information, please refer
to the Soil and Water Regulatory Framework in the Soil and Water Project File.
STATE and FEDERAL LAWS and REGULATIONS
The regulatory framework providing direction for protecting a site's inherent capacity to grow vegetation
comes from the following principle sources:
The Multiple Use-Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (Federal Law) - The Multiple Use-Sustained Yield Act
of 1960 directs the Forest Service (FS) to achieve and maintain outputs of various renewable resources
in perpetuity without permanent impairment of the land's productivity.
The National Forest Management Act of 1976 (NFMA) (Federal Law) - Section 6 of the NFMA
(Section 6(g)(3)) states that harvest cuts shall be “carried out in a manner that is consistent with the
protection of soil resources” and that “soil, slope, or other watershed conditions will not be irreversibly
damaged”. To comply with NFMA, the Chief of the FS has charged each Forest Service Region with
developing soil quality standards for detecting soil disturbance and monitoring long-term productive
potential.
Regional Soil Quality Standards (2554.03-R1 Suppl. 2500-99-1) - The Regional 1 Soil Quality
Monitoring Supplement (R-1 Supplement 2500-99-1) provides soil quality standards to assure the
statutory requirements of NFMA are met. Manual direction recommends maintaining 85% of an
activity area’s soil at an acceptable productivity potential with respect to detrimental impacts, including
the effects of compaction, displacement, rutting, severe burning, surface erosion, loss of surface organic
matter, and soil mass movement. This recommendation is based on research indicating that a decline in
productivity would have to be at least 15% to be detectable (Powers, 1990). In areas where more than
15% detrimental soil conditions exists from prior activities, the cumulative detrimental effects from
project implementation and restoration should not exceed the conditions prior to the planned activity
and should move toward a net improvement in soil quality. These standards do not apply to
infrastructure and intensively developed sites such as permanent roads/landings, mines, developed
recreation and administrative sites.
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) and Soil and Water Conservation Practices Handbook
(FSH 2509.22 R-1/4 Amendment No. 1 Effective 5/88) - The KNFP states that soil and water
conservation practices (SWCPs) as outlines in Water Conservation Practices Handbook R-1/R-4
Amendment No. 1 (FSH 2509.22) will be incorporated into all land use and project plans as a principle
mechanism for controlling non-point pollution sources and meeting soil and water goals, and to protect
beneficial uses. Activities found not in compliance with soil and water conservation practices or State
standards will be brought into compliance, modified, or stopped (Volume 1 p II-23). Best Management
Practices (BMPs) consist of state-of-the-art practices that fulfill KNFP objectives and are designed to
minimize soil disturbance during harvest and road construction activities.
The KNFP states that effects on soil productivity will be evaluated for all projects involving heavy
equipment and that the total area allocated to concentrated equipment travel should be minimized.

Objectives
Ground-disturbing activities such as road construction, road reconstruction and timber harvest will be
accompanied by mitigation measures to prevent or reduce increases in sedimentation and stream
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 61 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

channel erosion. The amount of harvest allowed will depend on the rate of recovery after hydrologic
recovery after timber has been removed (Volume 1 P II-7).
Each project plan for which the use of heavy equipment is required shall evaluate the effect of operating
that equipment on soil productivity. When it is determined that equipment operation is a hazard to soil
productivity that project shall:
• Establish a standard for how much of the project will be allocated to skid trails, landings, temporary
roads, or similar areas of concentrated equipment travel. The standard shall minimize the area
allocated to those uses to the extent practical.
• Consider the potential hazard to soil productivity before planning the practices requiring the operation
of equipment off established roads and skid trails. Practices such as dozer piling of brush or
mechanical site preparation shall not be planned without considering the feasibility of limiting the soil
conditions under which these practices are applied or alternative practices that do not require the use
of equipment (Volume 1 P II-7).

ANALYSIS AREA
The direct and indirect effects of the alternatives will focus on individual activity areas as defined by the
Forest Service Manual (R-1 Supplement No. 2500-99-1):
“Activity Area: A discrete land area impacted by a management activity to which soil quality
standards are applied. Activity areas include harvest units within timber sale areas, prescribed
burn areas, and grazing areas or pastures within range allotments. Inclusion of system roads
within the activity area is dependent on the analysis objectives. System roads are often evaluated
separately; however, temporary roads, landings, and skid trails are included within an activity
area. Riparian and other environmentally sensitive areas may be monitored and evaluated as
individual activity areas within larger management areas.”
For this analysis, activity areas are the proposed harvest, fuel treatments and stand improvements. All
temporary roads, landings and firelines within activity units are considered in evaluating the effect to the
soil resource. System roads are not a part of the soils activity areas.
ANALYSIS METHODS

Existing Condition
Existing condition for the soils resource were determined using timber stand records, aerial photography,
GIS data and on-the-ground visits. Landtypes and hazard ratings were gathered from landtype
descriptions and characteristics found in the Soil Survey of Kootenai National Forest Area, Montana and
Idaho (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995).
All units containing evidence of existing soil disturbance related to past management activities received a
full qualitative field survey using R1 Soil Survey Procedures. Field soil surveys consisted of random
stratified transect/sample point methods with confidence intervals at or above 80% ± 5% with the
majority of surveys being 95% ± 5%. Completed soil surveys can be found in the Soil Project File and/or
District Files. Existing detrimental soil disturbance numbers are a result of all currently measureable
effects of past actions in each activity area, including but not limited to timber harvest (trails and
landings), temporary road construction, management related burns, cattle grazing, off highway vehicles,
natural disturbances, firewood gathering, etc. These methods provide data that is used in the analysis to
determine if KNFP and Regional Soil Quality Standards would be met.
Field Sampling Procedure
In order to determine the severity and aerial extent of existing soil disturbance from previous forest
management activities, randomly selected soil transects were conducted across representative portions of
the proposed activity areas (proposed harvest polygons, temporary roads, and landings). Every other step
is considered a sample location and sampled using common tile spade shovel to determine the resistance
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 62 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

of penetrating into the soil. Physical resistance to penetration was found to correlate quite well with
altered soil conditions related with past management activity. In areas displaying the strongest properties
of past management an activity, the shovel blade is only capable of penetrating a short distance into the
soil and with great effort.
Field sampled transect points were placed in one of three categories: 1) no disturbance; 2) disturbance
present but not detrimental; and 3) detrimental soil disturbance (DSD). The detrimental disturbance
category is considered detrimental as defined in FSM 2550 and Region 1 Supplement 2500-99-1. As a
result, DSD is defined as the proportion of an activity area that may be subject to displacement,
compaction, rutting, erosion, or severe burning due to past management activity (such as harvest, fuels
treatment, temporary road construction), exclusive of dedicated resources (such as system roads).
Detrimental Soil Disturbance (DSD)
The soils in an activity area are considered detrimentally disturbed at a given sample point when one or a
combination of any of the following attributes listed below is present due to past forest management
activities:
a. Compaction: A 15% increase in natural bulk density. Soil compaction reduces the supply of
air, water and nutrients to plants. Roading, ground based yarding, dozer and grapple piling
activities are the major contributors to compaction.
b. Soil Ruts: Machine-generated soil displacement having smeared the soil surface in a rut.
Wheel ruts at least 2 inches deep in wet soils.
c. Displacement: Removal of one inch or more surface soil continuous area greater than 100 sq.
feet which often consists of the O and A soil horizons. Displacement removes the most
productive part of the soil resource. Temporary roads, skid trails, ground-based yarding,
dozer piling and cable corridors are the major contributors to displacement.
d. Surface Erosion: Indicated by rills, gullies, pedestals and localized soil deposition.
e. Severely Burned Soils: Physical and biological changes to the soil resulting from highintensity burns of long duration as described in the Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation
Handbook (FSH 2509.13).
f. Soil Mass Movement: Any soil mass movement caused by management activity.
The potential detrimental soil disturbance (DSD) values were calculated based on a summation of past
monitoring of soil productivity (KNF 1988-present date) within the Kootenai National Forest (KNF)
(Table 3.32). The percentage were developed as an average soil disturbance level and equated to harvest
equipment type, fuel treatment methods and season of operation as calculated from soil monitoring data
collected (2000-2005). Timber removal had always occurred prior to the “post-harvest field surveys” and
includes mechanical fuel abatement activities such as excavator piling activity if present. The end DSD
figure is a composition of all disturbances and does not separate each category of disturbance values
where present within each unit. Thus, the value of 8% DSD for summer tractor is a “statistical summary”
which takes into account all activities such as skid trails but temporary roads, mechanized piling and
firelines if present within the units being surveyed at that time and date. New temporary roads are
considered 100% detrimentally disturbed through the removal organic matter, displacement and/or
compaction while re-opening an existing temporary road is considered to have 0% additional detrimental
disturbance as such roads are considered to be disturbed for greater than 50 years. Temporary roads yield
an average 2 acres of DSD per mile of road. These would be the direct and indirect effects to the soils.
Soils Table 3.32 - Monitoring Results of DSD from Management Activities on the KNF
(Kuennen 2007a)
CATEGORY

SEASON OF OPERATION

DSD COEFICIENTS (%) 2

Skyline
Tractor
Tractor

NA
Summer
Winter

1
8
4

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 63 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

1

2

3

4

5

CATEGORY

SEASON OF OPERATION

DSD COEFICIENTS (%) 2

Forwarder
Forwarder
Feller Buncher 3
Helicopter
Excavator Piling 1
Fire line Construction 1 5
Grazing 1
Tractor 2ndary entry
Tractor 2ndary entry
Forwarder 2ndary entry
Forwarder 2ndary entry

Summer
Winter
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Summer
Winter
Summer
Winter

4
2
2
0
2
1
2
45
25
25
15

DSD percent is not necessarily additive to other activities. This is because the percentages presented for each management activity included
some units with excavator piling, fire line construction, and/or grazing in the data set. In addition, disturbance from these activities within
harvest units usually overlaps at least a portion of the skidding disturbance.
The numbers for this document were based on percentages from the last five years. Previous documents have used eighteen year averages.
Typically the larger data set is more accurate, but because the eighteen year data set included practices that are not used anymore (i.e. dozer
piling) it was deemed more appropriate to use the more accurate information pertaining to modern harvest and slash disposal methods.
Feller Buncher must be operated straight up and down the fall line on slopes not exceeding 45%. Where such harvest activities occur on
skyline units an additional 2% DSD is expected to occur.
Fire line construction prior to 1995 included dozer activity while data collected following 1995 generally included handline construction or
excavator bucket-width activity. As a result there has been a significant reduction of fire line disturbance in a given unit.
In proposed secondary entry harvest units which currently are equivalent or exceed 8% current DSD the proposed ground based harvest
activities are proposed as having approximately a 50% disturbance value compared to similar harvest activities in currently undisturbed soils
(Louis Kuennen pers. comm. 2011). This reduction in the anticipated DSD values only applies to ground based harvest operations. It is
assumed that units containing less than 8% DSD are more historic in nature and are on a recovery trend as displayed by revegetation of historic
skid trails and second-growth stand conditions. As a result the reduction in secondary entry values will not apply to such stands.

Generally, detrimental effects on soils are not permanent and depend primarily on soil texture, parent
material, aspect and level of disturbance, i.e. compaction. Recovery begins once activities cease on the
site (Kuennen 2007b). However, vegetative recovery time may take approximately 30 to 70 years as the
second growth timber becomes established in and around the disturbed areas (Dykstra and Curran 2002;
Froehlich and McNabb 1983; Froehlich and others 1983 and 1985). In areas where soil displacement
mixes or moves the volcanic ash surface layer and reduces moisture holding capacity and productivity
may continue to be impacted far beyond the 70 year timeframe.
Indirect effects may include the reduction of site productivity due to the removal of vegetation and
nutrients. Large woody debris (woody residue >3” diameter) and finer organic material are essential for
maintenance of sufficient microorganism populations and long-term site productivity. Design features
(Table 2.34) are incorporated into the activities to manage large woody debris (LWD) and organic matter
as detailed in the research guidelines contained in Graham and others (1994). Where feasible, smaller
woody material such as tree tops, foliage and branches would be left to over-winter before fuels
treatment, which allows nutrients to leach out of these materials and into the soil.
Cumulative effects include the combination of direct and indirect effects from past, present and
reasonably foreseeable activities. Direct, indirect and cumulative effects on soils are measured within
each activity area. Existing system roads and designated landings on the National Forest System (NFS)
transportation system are considered dedicated lands and are not part of the cumulative effects.
Assumptions and Limitations
The potential detrimental disturbance numbers for each proposed harvest unit are based on empirically
derived coefficients that were obtained and averaged from numerous monitored sites throughout the KNF
(Kuennen 2003; Kuennen 2007c). The assumptions are limited to the harvest and slash disposal methods
for which coefficients have been determined, and its coefficients assume that BMPs will be implemented.
The predicted values do not account for changes in soil type, the recovery of soils over time, or existing
conditions.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 64 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

Evaluation of cumulative effects to soil productivity does not require an integrated “watershed scale”
assessment because that is not considered an appropriate geographic area. Soil conditions are sitespecific. Loss of soil productivity in one treatment unit would not lead to a loss in soil productivity in an
adjacent stand. Soil productivity can vary from one square foot to the next with each area functioning
independently. Thus, the highly variable and independent nature of soil productivity requires site-specific
analyses to maintain the proper context. Assessments of cumulative effects on soil productivity is retained
at the site specific boundary scale since analysis at the watershed scale for soils misrepresent management
activity effects by masking and/or diluting site-specific effects across a larger area. In contrast, soil
processes such as erosion regime and hydrologic functions occur at a watershed scale and have been
analyzed as such in Water Resource Reports.
Scientific Uncertainty and Controversy
Soil productivity relies on complex chemical, physical, and climatic factors that interact within a
biological framework. For any given site and soil, a change in a key soil variable (i.e. bulk density, soil
loss, nutrient availability, etc.) can lead to changes in potential soil productivity. The intent is to prevent
extensive detrimental soil disturbance that would result in a measurable decline in timber productivity for
a site. The Region 1 supplement requires that DSD should be limited to 15% of an activity area. The
value of 15% is based on the assumption that soil quality and productivity would be maintained if less
than 15% of an activity area is detrimentally impacted after disturbance (Page-Dumroese et al. 2000).
Currently the effects of soil disturbance on soil quality are being studied across North America by a
cooperative research project called the North American Long Term Soil Productivity Study (LTSP). The
study began in 1990 and is currently ongoing in order to provide the best available science to forest
managers. Results over the past ten years indicate that there is little evidence of adverse effects of surface
organic removal or soil compaction on productivity as measured by total biomass production, and the
growth and vigor of planted trees (Powers et al. 2004).
Additional controversy surrounds the use of the term ‘irreversible’ in NFMA. NFMA has guidelines that
“insure that timber will be harvested from NFS lands only where soil, slope, or other watershed
conditions will not be irreversibly damaged.” The DSD described in this analysis does not necessarily
result in permanent or irreversible damage. Detrimental soil damage is reversible if the processes (organic
matter, moisture, top soil retention, soil organisms) are in place and time is allowed for recovery.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
SOIL REFERENCE CONDITIONS
The analysis area is underlain by metamorphic sedimentary rock known as the Belt Formation. These
rocks were formed approximately a billion years ago from metamorphosed sea beds. These deposits were
changed into hard dense rock formations as a result of combined pressure and heat over time. This
geologic formation forms a relatively stable foundation which is not prone to failure.
The majority of the land area on the KNF was influenced by glaciers. The glaciation generally scoured the
ridge tops and noses and filled the side-slopes and valley bottoms creating a more subdued landscape than
had existed prior to the historic glacial activities. Generally, major ridge divides and smaller ridge tops
were scoured leaving exposed, scraped rock. The scoured soil material was pushed around and tended to
fill in topographic lows (drainage bottoms, etc.). The scouring of the ridge tops and filling of drainage
bottoms gave the landscape a rounded appearance. Slopes are gentle within the Analysis Area, ranging
from five to 30 percent in the lower elevations to much steeper slopes (30-60 percent) occurring at higher
elevations within the Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse, Canyon and Dunn Creek drainage basins.
Glacial ice retreated from the area 12,000 to 15,000 years ago. The soil material left in place was
composed of silts, fine sands and rounded gravels and boulders. As the ice melted, more landforms were
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 65 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

created, consisting of outwash terraces, eskers, kames and lacustrine terraces. Most of these landforms
were created in and/or adjacent to the drainage bottoms. The glacial till contains 35 to 45 percent subrounded rock and has a light-gray color. The fines within the till are mostly coarse silt.
Those areas not affected by glaciation and/or the scoured ridge tops consist of soils that are weathering
"in place” and are referred to as residual soils. The amount of rock present in residual soils is much higher
than that associated with a glacial till soil and rock shape is strongly angular.
Approximately 7,700 years ago (Zdanowicz et al. 1999) Mt. Mazama erupted in southwestern Oregon and
deposited a layer of volcanic ash-influenced loess over northwestern Montana forming a topsoil horizon
in many local areas. This layer is present on all northerly and easterly aspects and the higher elevations
(generally 4500 feet or greater) of the southerly and westerly aspects and is important since it increases
soil productivity and provides the best rooting environment within the soil profile. The ash cap is light
and feathery and ranges from four to 14 inches thick. The uppermost ash is usually enriched with organic
matter and has been incorporated into the local soil system. The high soil productivity in the ashinfluenced areas is a result of the low bulk density surface soil layer combined with the high waternutrient holding capacity of the “ash cap” soils. Generally speaking the sub-soil horizons are not as fertile
as the surface horizons.
Between the eruption of Mt. Mazama to the early 1900s, the soils were relatively undisturbed.
Naturally occurring surface erosion and small-scale landslides probably occurred on occasion, but the
overall magnitude of such activities would have been insignificant in terms of long-term soil productivity.
Soil recovery in such areas was attained when the slope reached a stable angle and/or naturally
revegetated. Soil productivity was maintained over the long-term as vegetative matter slowly decomposed
or burned in low intensity wildfires.
Historically, the most prevalent large-scale disturbance was wildfire. Stand replacing fires varied in
frequency from 50-300 years, depending on vegetation type and location. Once fire passed through an
area, erosion increased, especially on steep slopes in headwater swales where most vegetation was
removed, until sufficient forest floor and canopy vegetation had recovered. Soils may have developed
hydrophobic conditions following severe fires. However, soils on the KNF have shown little
hydrophobicity following wildfires in recent decades, even when those fires burned very intensely;
therefore, it is unlikely that this condition was common in the past. More frequent, low-intensity
underburns are presumed to have had little effect on soils due to the short contact time and lower
temperatures with these fires.
EXISTING CONDITION
Existing condition is the result of the past management activities (temporary road and landing
construction, timber harvest, prescribed burning, etc.) and natural events (wildfire, floods, landslides, etc.)
that occurred in the analysis area. These activities and events provide baseline conditions for the affected
environment in the analysis area.
Soils are the basic support system of forest ecosystems, providing nutrients, water, oxygen, heat and
mechanical support to vegetation. Any environmental stressor that alters the natural function of the soil
has the potential to influence the productivity, species composition, and hydrology of forest systems.
Maintenance of soil quality is dependent upon the protection of surface layers from erosion, displacement,
and compaction, as well as the continual cycling of nutrients and organic material. Soil quality refers to
the capacity of a soil to function within ecosystem and land use boundaries, to sustain biological
productivity, maintain environmental quality, and promote plant and animal health (Doran and Parkin
1994). Various factors influence soil quality. Although management activities do not affect factors such
as climate and soil parent material, they can affect physical, chemical, biologic, and hydrologic soil
properties.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 66 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

Three criteria were used to assess existing condition for soil resources:
• Kootenai National Forest Landtypes;
• Identification of Sensitive Soils; and
• Site conditions in the activity area in which proposed activities would occur.
LANDTYPES
Landtypes are units based on soil types. There are 50 recognized landtypes on the KNF. Landtype
classification is based on landforms, geology, soils, vegetation, climate and drainage type. They describe
inherent conditions and do not change as a result of management. The landtypes were compiled in
Kuennen and Nielson-Gerhardt (1984), and published in Soil Survey of Kootenai National Forest Area,
Montana and Idaho (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995). Landtype classification helps determine equipment
operating limitations, and the production potential of the landscape. It is an important tool for protecting
soils during resource management activities. The landtype map is generally quite accurate; however, field
verification may indicate some site variability. Refer to Soils Map 1: Landtypes, in Soils and Water
Project File for spatial representation of the landtypes in the analysis area. The landtypes in the East
Reservoir analysis area were broken down into five generalized groupings or series which include the
following:
• Water influenced Landtypes (100 Series): Present in very low relief topography which is highly
water influenced.
• Steep topography Landtypes (200 Series): Exist in very steep topographic lands (60% plus). Such
landform areas are usually rocky slopes and may be convex or linear in shape.
• Glaciated Landtypes (300 Series): Exists in areas of past glacial deposits and shaped through time
by several glacial advances that occurred throughout the KNF. The most recent, the Cordilleran Ice
Sheet retreated from the area several thousand years before present. These landtypes includes
glaciated slopes, drumlins, and moraines.
• Alpine till Landtypes (400 Series): Such landtypes exist in very steep alpine or subalpine locations
and consist of glacial cirque headwalls or trough walls.
• Mid-elevation Landtypes (500 series): Such landtypes are residual in nature and developed on site
and are typically mid-slope in elevation.
The landtypes in the analysis area and their implications are displayed in Soils Table 3.33.
Table 3.33 - Landtypes in the Analysis Area (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995)
LANDTYPE

ACRES

1012
1022
103
1052
1062
1082
1102
2012
2512
2522
3012
3022
3032
3242
3292

452
524
212
342
848
909
626
2721
1103
2980
2879
7542
4882
819
2014

TIMBER MANAGEMENT
TRACTOR
SEDIMENT
OPERATORS
HAZARD

Soil Damage
Soil Damage
Soil Damage
N/A1
Soil Damage
Soil Damage
Soil Damage
N/A1
Slope, Rock
Slope
None
Slope
Rock
None
Soil Damage

Severe
Moderate
Severe
N/A1
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
N/A1
Severe
Severe
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate

ROAD CONSTRUCTION/ MAINTENANCE
CUT AND
NATIVE
SEDIMENT
FILL SLOPES
SURFACE
HAZARD
MATERIAL

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sloughing
Sloughing
None
Sloughing
Sloughing

Erosion
Rutting
Erosion
None
Erosion
Rutting/Erosion
Rutting
Large Stones
Large Stones
Rock Fall
Erosion
Erosion
Large Stones
Erosion
Erosion

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 67 of 410

Severe
Severe
Severe
Moderate
Moderate
Severe/Moderate
Severe
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Slight
Moderate
Moderate

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

LANDTYPE

ACRES

3512
3522
3532
3552
3572
3602
3652
5102
999

731
28538
4547
26910
1560
6752
207
522
0

TIMBER MANAGEMENT
TRACTOR
SEDIMENT
OPERATORS
HAZARD

Slope
Slope
Soil Damage
Rock
Slope
Rock
Slope
Complex Slope
1
2

Severe
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Severe
Slight
Severe
Severe

ROAD CONSTRUCTION/ MAINTENANCE
CUT AND
NATIVE
SEDIMENT
FILL SLOPES
SURFACE
HAZARD
MATERIAL

Landslides
Sloughing
None
None
Landslides
None
Landslides
None

Erosion
Erosion
Large Stones
Large Stones
Large Stones
Large Stones
Erosion
None

Severe
Moderate
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Slight
Severe
Slight

Not applicable because landtype has only scattered stands of trees.
Landtypes present within proposed harvest or fuel treatment units.

Of the 50 recognized landtypes on the KNF, 23 of these landtypes are found in the analysis area.
Management activities on each landtype are designed to be comparable to the risk associated with the
landtype.
SENSITIVE SOILS
Sensitive soils are identified based on one of three characteristics: 1) landtypes of concern, 2) riparian/
wetland areas; and 3) low productivity soils. Sensitive soils comprise 14,809 acres or 16% of the entire
analysis area. Sensitive soils are best addressed through avoidance, BMPs, buffers, and/or through design
criteria.
Landtypes of Concern
There are seven designated “landtypes of concern” on the KNF that should be given additional
consideration prior to the introduction of management activities. These are landtypes 102, 112, 325, 351,
365, 370 and 520 (Kuennen 2007). Within the East Reservoir analysis area only four landtypes of concern
are present and consist of 1,462 acres or less than 2% of the entire analysis area scale. These are landtypes
102 and 351 and 365. When viewed at the discrete unit-specific scale, only landtypes 102 and 351 are
present which make up roughly 304 acres or approximately 3% of the soils analysis area. It should be
noted that landtype 365 is only present in proposed Fuels and Wildlife (FW) units.
Riparian/Wetland Areas
There are scattered riparian corridors and small patches of wetland areas in the analysis area. Riparian and
wetland soils are considered sensitive due to high moisture levels all or most of the year, and moist soils
are more prone to compaction, displacement, rutting and puddling. Harvest and road construction
activities would avoid wetland areas.
Low Productivity Soils
Soil productivity as defined by Brady and Weil (2002) is “the capacity of a soil for producing a specific
plant or sequence of plants under a specified system of management.” The most productive part of the soil
occurs near the surface, at the contact between the forest litter and the mineral soil. Here the litter has
been decomposed into an organic rich layer containing most of the soil nitrogen, potassium and
mycorrhizae that must be present for a site to be productive. However, this is also the part of the soil that
is easiest to disturb by management activities.
Soil productivity levels for each landtype on the KNF are classified as low, moderate or high in Kuennen
and Gerhardt (1995). It is important to look at soil productivity to properly assess the effects of potential
actions on a specific area. For instance, if timber harvest is proposed on a given area of land that was
considered as having low soil productivity, additional actions may need to be taken to insure a fully
stocked stand after harvest. Table 3.34 displays soil productivity by landtype in the analysis area.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 68 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

Table 3-3 Soil Productivity in the Analysis Area (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995)
LANDTYPE

101

2
2

102
103
105
106
108
110
201
251
252
301
302
303
324
329
351
352
353
355
357

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

360
3652
2

510
999

ACRES

FOREST VEGETATIVE GROUP

RELATIVE
PRODUCTIVITY

452

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

524
212
342

Dry to Moist, Mixed Forest
Moist, Mixed Forest
Non-Forested

High
High
N/A1

848

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

909

Moist, Mixed Forest

Moderate

629

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

2,721

Rocky Subalpine to Dry Mixed Forest

Low

1,103

Open-grown forest

Moderate

2,980

Moist, Mixed Forest

Moderate

2,879

Dry, Mixed Forest

Moderate

7,542

Dry, Mixed Forest

Moderate

4,882

Open-grown forest

Low

819

Dry, Mixed Forest

Moderate

2,014

Dry, Mixed Forest

Moderate

731

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

28,538

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

4,547

Rocky Subalpine to Moist, Mixed Forest

Low

26,910

Moist, Mixed Forest

Moderate

1,560

Moist, Mixed Forest

High

675
207
522
0
1
2

Sub-alpine Forest
Sub-alpine Forest
Open-grown forest
N/A
TOTAL TREATED ACRES = 92,546

Low
Moderate
Low
Null

Not applicable due to landtype having only scattered stands of trees
Landtypes present in the Soils Analysis Area

Of the 23 landtypes within the analysis area, 22 have proposed management activities under at least one
of the action alternatives and are thus included as being in the soils analysis area. The majority of the
analysis area has moderate to high soil productivity. However, landtypes 201, 303, 353, 360 and 510 are
all rated as having low soil productivity from a Forestwide aspect. This equates to 13,347 acres or 14% of
the entire analysis area. Management activities proposed on each landtype are designed to be compatible
with the risks associated with that landtype. Application of appropriate management precautions (BMPs)
such as avoiding timber harvest in wet seasons, maintaining buffer zones below open slopes, and skidding
over snow or frozen ground can decrease negative impacts to soil productivity.
SITE CONDITIONS in the ACTIVITY AREAS
Site conditions are considered for each activity area in the effects analysis portion of this assessment.
Past activities in the analysis area have resulted in impacts that persist today. Past activities affecting soils
include, but are not limited to, road construction, timber harvest (including skid trails and landings),
prescribed wildfires, cattle grazing, firewood gathering and off-highway use. Percent DSD is defined by
agency directives for Soil Quality Monitoring found in FSM R-1 Supplement No. 2500-99-1. The
following are the categories of detrimentally disturbed soils identified in FSM R-1 Supplement No. 250099-1: Compaction, Rutting, Displacement, Surface Erosion, Severely Burned Soil and Mass Movement
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 69 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

(Landslides). All types of detrimental soil disturbance listed in FSM 2554.1.1 will be considered in the
examination of the existing condition and the analysis of the environmental effects.
The four factors that have had the most impacts on soils in the analysis area are:
• Road Construction
• Timber Harvest
• Fire Impacts
• Livestock Grazing
Road Construction
Common impacts to soils from road construction are displacement, compaction, and erosion (road-related
runoff). Road construction affects soils by displacing topsoil layers from the road prism and compacting
the road surface and shoulders. The road surface will not support trees and other forest vegetation as long
as the road is used and maintained. Trees and shrubs will grow along the road bank, but site productivity
is less than in unaffected soils in similar productivity zones.
Roads also disrupt hydrologic processes that occur within the soil profile. The cut slope intercepts
subsurface flow and the compacted road surface reduces precipitation infiltration. As long as roads
remain on the landscape, the impacts to soils persist. When road use ceases, soils gradually begin to
recover. Implementation of BMPs reduces erosion and the rerouting of water associated with roads. It
should be noted that a number of the lower basin FS roads were constructed where early railway timber
rail-lines previously existed.
Roads are categorized as “National Forest System Roads” (NFSR) (dedicated under the are transportation
plan) or “Undetermined” which are non-dedicated roads that are not the road miles which fall into the
category of being dedicated roads (FS, State, Private) are not calculated as contributing to soil disturbance
as these are “permanent structures” and therefore have no relation to the 15% detrimental soil disturbance.
This is due to the road system not being considered part of the suitable timber land base. However, the
proposed temporary roads, excavated skid trails and landings do contribute towards the 15% standard.
Implementation of BMPs reduces erosion associated with such roads.
There are approximately 439 miles of existing road in the analysis area. Of the total, 324 miles are NFSR
55.4 miles are Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC) or other private ownership roads, 18 miles are State
Highway, 9.8 miles are State lands, 11.6 miles combined Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) and
Army Corps of Engineers (COE), and 20 miles of undetermined roads. Refer to the Transportation
Section for further information.
Timber Harvest
Early harvest activities on FS lands included hand-fall and dozer skidding harvest activities in low relief
land areas while later in time harvest activities was altered to skyline and rubber tire skidders and
handcut/clipper cutting in land areas further up the drainage system. Two of the more important impacts
to soils are detrimental soil disturbance (compaction, displacement, rutting, etc.) and removal of organic
matter. Soil disturbance as a result of timber harvest and fuels reduction is usually associated with
mechanized activity (Kuennen 2007a). Timber harvest activities can physically alter soils and reduce soil
organic matter, which can lead to reduced site quality and soil productivity (Heninger et al. 2011).
Detrimental soil disturbance is defined in FSM 2500-99-1 and typically is the result of compaction,
displacement and rutting. Soil compaction results from the packing together of soil particles due to
increased pressure on the soil surface. Compaction associated with equipment is often accompanied with
formation of ruts, which collect and concentrate runoff, thus increasing erosion. The loss of surface
organic matter through mechanical removal or burning can cause nutrient and carbon cycle deficits and
negatively affect physical and biological soil conditions (Harrison et al. 2011).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 70 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

Soil compaction impacts recover over time due to freeze/thaw activity, burrowing by animals, plant root
growth and the action of soil microbes. Soil erosion and displacement are impacts that require a longer
timeframe to recover since the rate of soil formation is very slow. Long-term soil processes are influenced
by fire, mass wasting, wind-deposition and weathering of parent material at the rate of one inch of topsoil
formed every 300-1000 years (Thurow 1991). Timber harvest such as regeneration, intermediate and
liberation has taken place on 47,067 acres of the analysis area.
Fire Impacts
Wildfire is a natural component in forest watersheds and has influenced forest soils for thousands of
years. Records of historic wildfires enforce that the potential for future wildfire remains, especially if a
fire ignites in untreated areas under dry weather conditions. Approximately 285 smaller “spot-fires” have
been recorded in the analysis area since the early 1900s. Most of these fires are believed to have been
caused by lightning but a significant portion which occurred between the 1900s until about 1930 are
believed to have been human-related. These small spot fires are believed to have only impacted very
small areas of land.
Approximately 22 large fires ranging in size from 50-1,000 acres have been recorded since 1872.
Historically, the larger fires occurred on south, southeast and southwest slope aspects as related to drier
vegetative stand compositions. The largest fire on record occurred during 1872 and burned a significant
portion along the eastern boundary of the analysis area. Between 1910 and the 1920s, approximately 15 of
the 22 large fires occurred. The next significant fire was the Dry Fork fire of 1988 which burned
approximately 15,000 acres. The two more recent large fires were the 1994 South Fork Cripple Horse Fire
(approximately 600 acres) and the 2000 Warland Fire (approximately 50 acres). Refer to Fire/Fuels
Section for more detail.
Many fire effects on soil are not observable with the naked eye (Kuennen 2007b). Severe deteriorating
effects that wildfires have on soils include loss of organics and nutrients and a reduction of water
infiltration (Wells et al. 1979). Burns that create very high soil surface temperatures, particularly when
soil moisture content is low, may result in an almost complete loss of soil microbial populations, woody
debris and the protective duff and litter layer over mineral soil. Soil erosion increases following fire is
often directly proportional to fire intensity (Megahan 1990), the removal of ash-capped surface soils as
related to soil disturbance could reduce soil productivity. As a result, many of the nutrients present in
surface organics and large woody debris can also be lost to the atmosphere through volatilization and
removed from the site in fly-ash (DeBano 1991; Amaranthus et al. 1989).
Depending on fire severity and activity characteristics, many plants would survive and re-initiate growth
soon after a fire. However, the ability of surviving plants to reestablish, thrive and reseed in subsequent
years is greatly affected by the presence of invasive plants and weeds (Goodwin and Sheley 2001).
Burned areas can contain high initial nutrient levels, exposed ground surfaces, and low shade with high
light conditions which all directly favor colonization of invasive plant species. Invasive plant survival
coupled with fire disturbance can cause rapid expansion of invasive plant growth. As a result, values such
as wildlife habitat, watershed stability and water quality often deteriorate.
The scenario of a wildfire occurring on sites with accumulated fuels could result in areas of high burn
severity and hydrophobicity (water repellant soils). This impact is greatly amplified by increased burn
severity (Huffman et al. 2001). The heat of a fire vaporizes hydrophobic compounds in the organic matter
and moves them into the soil layer where they condense and form a water repellant coating on the soil
particles. Soil hydrophobicity usually returns to pre-burn conditions in no more than six years (DeBano
1981; Dyrness 1976) and other studies have documented a much more rapid recovery of one to three
years (Huffman et al. 2001). However, before water infiltration rates improve, increased overland runoff
and sediment movement may occur. The primary risks for erosion and mass failure during this timeframe
is related to roads, especially near stream crossings. It should be noted that soils within the analysis area
currently do not display hydrophobic concerns. Table 3.35 displays historic fire activity by decade on
sensitive soils.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 71 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

Table 3.35 - Burns by Decade on Sensitive Soils
ACTIVITY

Broadcast Burning
Activity Fuels (human
related, 1960s-1990s)
Jackpot Burning
Activity Fuels (human
related, 1980s-1990s)
Jackpot Burning
Activity Fuels (nonhuman related, 1990s)
Underburn Low
Intensity (human
related, 1970s-2000s)
Underburn Low
Intensity (non-human
related -1990s-2000s)
NF Stand Modifications
with Underburn Low
Intensity (1990s-2000s)
NF Wildfire Burn with
Underburn Low
Intensity (1970s-2000s)
GRAND TOTAL

LANDTYPE of
CONCERN1
351

360

GRAND
TOTAL
(acres)

% BURN on
SENSITIVE
SOILS

201

303

353

2

51

104

42

60

259

<1%

0

0

75

0

0

75

<1%

30

463

8

1

0

502

1%

18

55

8

54

29

164

<1%

0

595

137

170

0

902

1%

0

1,415

319

404

72

2,210

2%

12

1,336

1,898

506

145

3,897

4%

62

3,915

2,549

1,177

306

8,009

9%

LOW PRODUCTIVITY SOILS2

1

Landtype 102 is also considered to be a landtype of concern but has no recorded past burns recorded to match Soils Table 3-4 categories.
2
Landtype 510 is also considered to be a low productivity soil but has no recorded past burns recorded to match Soils Table 3-4 categories.

Disturbance from fire suppression of small natural wildfires is usually limited to hand tools which result
in only minor (insignificant) impacts to the soil resource. During fire suppression, closed roads may be
reopened for access and incorporated as fire lines. As part of the post-fire work, the areas of disturbance
are rehabilitated and the roads returned to the previous conditions in most cases.
Livestock Grazing
Livestock grazing impacts generally occur in localized areas where cattle tend to congregate season after
season (areas offering good forage). Generally, these areas include riparian zones (water sources), harvest
units, road corridors and meadows. Stream bank trampling/shearing occurs when cattle cross a stream and
collapse the banks. This can lead to increase in bank scour during high flows. Compaction and stream
bank trampling/shearing are among the most common soil disturbances resulting from grazing (Thurow
1991; Kaufman and Krueger 1984). Within the analysis area, historic grazing impacts tend to be
discontinuous and localized. There is one active range allotment within the analysis area which is the
Fivemile Creek Allotment. A maximum of 17 cow/calf pairs are allowed in the Fivemile Creek Allotment
from June 1 to October 15. This allotment is dominantly restricted to privately owned lands and portions
of the Fivemile Creek drainage system. Although the Warland Creek Grazing Allotment has been inactive
for over 6 years it will be maintained as a vacant allotment with the potential for grazing in the
foreseeable future.
Two other grazing allotments are present in the analysis area include the Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek
allotments. Both of these grazing allotments have been closed through the administrative closure process
due to declining transitory range, lack of demand and riparian area concerns. Grazing activities associated
with the analysis area are not expected to have significant impacts on soils conditions and as a result this
factor will not be carried forward in the Soils Report.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 72 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Three alternatives were developed for the analysis area. These alternatives are discussed in this
environmental consequences section. It should be noted that some of the key difference between
alternatives is related to different target acres for harvest and road construction agreements. The proposed
alternatives are as follows:
• Alternative 1 – No Action
• Alternative 2 – Proposed Action
• Alternative 3 – Forest Plan Action
The Soils report will analyze in full content the impacts of the action alternatives (2 and 3) as compared to
Alternative 1, the no-action Alternative. Both Alternatives 2 and 3 are the alternatives that were
developed to respond to public comments. Alternative 3 was developed to meet KNFP requirements.
Measurement Indicators
No significant issues were identified for soil resources during the scoping process. Therefore, law
regulation, and policy drive the effects analysis, specifically:
• Compliance with NFMA;
• Compliance with KNFP Standards.
Effects of the alternatives on soil resources will be analyzed in terms of:
• Activities on Sensitive Soils;
• Detrimental Soil Disturbance and the 15% Standard;
• Prescribed Fuels Treatments;
• Changes in Nutrient Cycling.
SENSITIVE SOILS
Recall that when viewed at the discrete unit-specific scale Landtypes (LT) 102, 351 and 365 are
considered landtypes of concern and make up roughly 1,462 acres or slightly more than 1% of the soils
analysis area. Table 3.36 displays the acres of management activities with potential heavy equipment on
sensitive soils by alternative.
Soils Table 3.36 - Unit Acres on Sensitive Soils
SENSITIVE SOILS

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

Harvest Unit Acres on Sensitive Landtypes (102, 351, 365)
Commercial Thin Acres on Sensitive Landtypes (102, 351, 365)
Fuel Treatment on Sensitive Landtypes (102, 351, 365)
Acres PCT on Sensitive Landtypes (102, 351, 365)
Fuels and Wildlife Units on Sensitive Landtypes (102, 351, 365)
% Harvest Acres on Landtypes of Concern (102, 351, 365)
% of Proposed PCT on Landtypes of Concern (102, 351, 365)
% Fuels Acres on Landtypes of Concern (102, 351, 365)
% Fuels and Wildlife Acres on Landtypes of Concern (102, 351, 365)
Harvest Unit Acres on Low Productivity Soils (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
CT Acres on Low Productivity Soils (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
Acres PCT on Low Productivity Soils (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
Acres FW Treatments on Low Productivity LT (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
% of Harvest Acres on Low Productivity Soils (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
% of CT Acres on Low Productivity LT (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
% PCT on Low Productivity LT (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
Fuel Treatments on Low Productivity LT (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
% Fuel Treatments on Low Productivity Landtypes (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)
% FW Treatments on Low Productivity LT (201, 303, 353, 360, 510)

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
300^
0
6

150
0
95
71
1
2
1
5
<1
322
6
389
5,390
5
<1
7
47
3
53

131
0
38
71
1
2
1
3
<1
365
6
389
5,390
6
<1
7
54
4
53

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 73 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE
SENSITIVE SOILS

Total Acres of Commercial Thin per Alternative
Total Acres Precommercial Thin per Alternative
Total Acres Fuel Treatment per Alternative*
Total Acres of Fuels and Wildlife Vegetative Management
Total Acres of Vegetative Management for timber productivity

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0
0
765
0

2,257
5,687
1,378
10,049
6,596

1,875
5,687
1,309
10,049
5,817

*Includes Fuel treatments where mechanical fuel treatments may occur
^An estimated 300 acres of low productivity soils would be treated under Alternative 1 and would occur if the DEIS never gets signed.
PCT = Precommercial Thin CT = Commercial Thin FW = Fuel and Wildlife LT = Landtype

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Alternative 1 does not propose any new timber management, commercial thin, precommercial thin or
fuel treatments activities on sensitive soils. Therefore, no direct, indirect or cumulative effects to sensitive
soils would result from Alternative 1. However, if Alternative 1 is selected, there would still be
approximately 765 acres of Forestwide Fuels treatment acres in Units FWF545, FWF536, FWF52403 and
FWF589 (Chapter 3 DEIS, pg. 5). Such activities would not involve heavy equipment and thus is not
expected to impact soils.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Landtypes 102, 351 and 365 are all considered as being landtypes of concern here on the KNF. Under
Alternative 2, a total of 150 acres (2%) of proposed harvest and activity is located on these landtypes in
proposed Units 4, 28, 51, 142, 147 and 148. Similarly, Alternative 3 proposes 131 acres harvest (2%) on
landtypes 102 and 351 in Units 4, 28, 51, 142, 147, 148 and 158A. It should be noted that precommercial
thin activities are anticipated to have no impacts as such activities do not involve equipment operations.
Alternative 2 proposes approximately 95 acres (5%) of Fuel Treatment acres which are located on
landtypes 102 and 351 in Units F3, F4, F3OG, F14OG and COEF8. Alternative 3 proposes 38 acres (3%)
of Mechanical Fuel Treatment activities in such landtypes in Units F3, F4 and COEF8. Note that landtype
365 is not present in this treatment activity. Under both Alternatives 2 and 3, only 1 acre of combined
Fuels and Wildlife Treatments are proposed for landtypes 102, 351 and 365. Similarly, commercial
thinning activities would not involve landtypes 102, 351 and 365 under Alternatives 2 or 3.
The landtypes considered as being low productivity soils within the East Reservoir analysis area include
landtypes 201, 303, 353, 360 and 510; however, not all management activities include all five of these
landtypes. Landtypes 201, 303, 353 and 510 are all present in proposed harvest activities where
Alternative 2 proposes 322 acres (5%) harvest on such landtypes while Alternative 3 proposes 365 acres
(6%) harvest activity on such landtypes. Under Alternative 2 such landtypes are located in Units 1, 2, 2B,
2D, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18A, 42, 43, 150, 157, 158, 194T, 367, 367A and 368A, while Alternative 3
proposes harvest activities in such landtypes associated with Units 1, 2, 2B, 2D, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 42,
43, 157, 158, 158A, 194T, 367 and 367A. Landtypes 303 and 353 are the most widely spread and make
up 97% of the total acres of proposed harvest activities containing low productivity soils. For both
Alternative 2 and 3 only minimal amount (<1%) of commercial thin activities are proposed to occur on
low productivity soils. Alternatives 2 and 3 propose 389 acres or approximately 7% of precommercial
thin on low productivity soils. Such activities are not expected to impact soils as this will be completed
using hand cut procedures.
Of the proposed 1,378 acres of Fuels treatment units in Alternative 2, landtypes 201, 303, 353 and 510 are
all present as a low productivity concerns in proposed Units F1, F15, F15OG, F18 and COEF8 making up
a total of 47 acres (3%) of the Fuels treatment acres. Alternative 3 proposes 1,309 acres of Fuel treatments
of which approximately 54 acres (4%) consist of low productivity landtypes. In Alternative 3 those Units
consisting of low productivity soils include proposed Units F3, F15, F18, and COEF8. A number of the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 74 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCE

fuel treatment units are proposed to receive mechanical fuel treatment activities such as mastication.
Alternatives 2 and 3 propose nearly 53% of all Fuels and Wildlife Unit treatments occur on low
productivity landtypes (201, 303, 353, 360). These activities involve portions of all such units except
proposed management units FW50601, FW502, FW5109, FW511, FW5111, FW5122, FW516, FW521
and FW589. Such activities are expected to leave a fully stocked stand and do not involve heavy
equipment activities. This would allow for a continuous input of nutrients through needle-cast and coarse
woody debris and would maintain soil productivity. Potential indirect effects of harvest on low
productivity soils may include a slower vegetative return to harvested units.
No harvest activities are proposed in riparian areas or wetlands with Alternatives 2 and 3. Riparian and
wetland areas are protected under INFS RHCAs (USDA Forest Service, 1995). RHCAs are based on
direction laid out by INFS and include areas of specified widths that surround stream channels, riparian
areas and wetlands. By definition, RHCAs are more extensive than the riparian and wetland features they
protect (see Water Resource Section). RHCAs cannot be reduced to less than the SMZ boundary width
required by law. As a result, one indirect effect to riparian areas and wetlands could be an increase in
blow down trees or additional large woody debris from opening the stands in and around wet areas.
DETRIMENTAL SOIL DISTURBANCE (DSD)
Management activities including, but not limited to, road construction, off-highway vehicle use, timber
harvest (trails and landings), mechanical fuel treatments, firewood gathering and grazing are considered
to be potential sources of detrimental soil disturbance. Refer to the Soils Project File for spatial
representation of past harvest activities.
Table 3.37 displays existing, proposed and cumulative detrimental soil disturbance for each activity area.
Existing disturbance is based on field surveys. Predicting detrimental and foreseeable activity disturbance
is based on information from Kuennen 2003; 2007c; 2007e; and Gier et al. 2012 which includes a
summary of all KNF Soils Monitoring to date with recommendations for analysis based on field results.
Please refer to the Soil Project File to review these documents. The cumulative percent is derived by
adding the percentage of disturbance expected from proposed activities and reasonably foreseeable
activities to the existing disturbance percentage. All harvest activities, prescribed burning, skid trails,
landings, firelines, excavator piling and temporary roads are included in this analysis. Best Management
Practices (BMPs) would be followed (Appendix C of the DEIS), and additional design criteria have been
specified in order to minimize disturbance (refer to the Management Requirements in Chapter II of the
EIS). Complete soils survey data can be found in the Soil Project File at the Canoe Gulch (Libby) Ranger
District.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Under Alternative 1, timber harvest and others proposed with this project would not occur. However,
natural changes in climate and vegetation would continue to occur. Vegetation regeneration and stand
growth activities would continue to slowly recover over time on existing harvest units resulting in lower
compaction values due to tree root growth, freeze-thaw activities, and increased soil nutrients from the
decomposition of forest litter and CWD. Therefore, no direct, indirect or cumulative DSD would result
from Alternative 1.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 75 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

SOILS RESOURCE

Table 3.37 - Detrimental Soil Disturbance in Proposed Harvest Units of the East Reservoir Analysis Area

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

1*
1A*
2^*
2B^*~
2C*~
2D*~
3*^
3A*
3B~
3C~
4
5
6
7^*
8
9*
10*^
11*
12
13*^
14*^
14A
15*^
16
17*
18
18A

50/50
11/11
13/13
48/48
9/9
67/67
27/27
26/26
37/37
13/13
46/46
5/5
11/11
19/19
13/13
151/151
160/160
102/102
119/119
22/22
40/40
26/26
22/22
29/24
68/68
40/32
20/0

IMP/IMP
SW/SW
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
ST/ST
ST/ST
SW/SW
IMP/IMP
IRR-SW/IRR-SW
IMP/IMP
IRR-SW/IRR-SW
IMP/NT

SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SGP
S/S
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
GP/SUB
GP/GP
SGP/NT

WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
S/S
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
WT/WT
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
T/NA

1
1
10
9
7
7
8
4
5
4
2
<1
0
9
3
7
8
4
7
9
13
5
9
2
4
4
4

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/<1/<1
0/0/0
0/0/0

19

32/32

IMP-SW/IMP-SW

SGP/SGP

T/T

0

0/0/0

20
21
22
23
24*^
25
26*^
27
28*
29
30
31
32

41/41
76/76
83/83
146/146
40/40
139/139
29/29
45/45
31/31
54/54
62/62
698/698
75/75

IMP-SW/IMP-SW
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP

SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP

T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T

2
4
5
6
9
4
9
2
4
4
6
4
2

0/0/0
0/0/0
0/1/1
0/<1/<1

0/0/0
0/0/0

0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/<1/<1
0/0/0

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
DSD%
DSD FROM
POSTREHAB4 (%)
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/4/4
1/5/5
0/0
0/4/4
1/5/5
0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/4/4
7/11/11
0/0
0/4/4
7/11/11
0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
0/1/1
5/6/6
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/8/8
3/11/11
0/0
0/4/4
7/11/11
0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
7/15/15
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/2/2
13/15/15
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/0
4/12/4
0/0
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
5/14/14
0/0
0/8/8
6/14/14
0/0
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
0/0
4/12/12
0/8/8
0/8/8
6/14/14
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0

PREDICTED
HARVEST
DSD%

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 76 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
1/5/5
1/5/5
10/12/12
9/11/11
7/11/11
7/11/11
8/10/10
4/8/8
5/6/6
4/12/12
2/10/10
0/8/8
0/8/8
9/11/11
3/11/11
7/11/11
8/10/10
4/8/8
7/15/15
9/11/11
13/15/15
5/13/13
9/11/11
2/10/10
4/8/8
4/12/12
4/12/4

0/8/8
2/10/10
4/12/12
5/14/14
6/14/14
9/11/11
4/12/12
9/11/11
2/10/10
4/8/8
4/12/12
6/14/14
4/12/12
2/10/10

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

33
34
36
39
40
41
42
43
44
45A
45B~
46#
47
49
51
52A
53
54
55
56
59
61
62
62A
62B
64
64A
64B~
68#
69~
70
70T^
71
72
73T*^
74T*^
75#
80*^
81^
82
135
141#
142~

85/85
144/144
41/0
40/40
156/40
40/40
31/31
26/26
28/28
105/105
39/39
37/37
40/40
64/64
7/7
24/24
40/40
9/9
40/40
207/207
39/39
19/19
77/40
11/0
20/0
8/8
28/28
10/10
25/0
16/16
14/14
9/0
18/18
12/12
31/29
0/40
36/0
110/40
36/36
25/25
16/16
24/0
9/9

SSLV/SSLV
SSLV/SSLV
ST/NT
ST/ST
ST/ST
CCR/CCR
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
SW/SW
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
CCR/CCR
ST/ST
SSLV/NT
SSLV/NT
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
CCR/NT
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/NT
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
NT/SW
SW/NT
ST-SW/ST-SW
ST/ST
ST-SW/ST-SW
IMP/IMP
SW/NT
ST/ST

GP/GP
GP/GP
SGP/NT
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/GP
SGP/SUB
SGP/GP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
GP/NT
GP/NT
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/NT
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/NT
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
NT/SUB
SUB/NT
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SUB/NT
SUB/SUB

T/T
T/T
T/NA
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T&S/T&S
T/T
S/S
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T&S/T&S
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/NA
T/NA
WT/WT
T/T
T/T
S/NA
S/S
T/T
WT/NA
T/T
T/T
WT/WT
NA/WT
S/NA
WT/WT
WT/WT
T/T
T/T
S/NA
S/S

<1
5
4
<1
0
0
<1
1
2
0
0
0
1
6
2
<1
4
0
<1
7
3
<1
4
4
4
8
0
0
0
0
5
12
4
5
9
8
0
10
8
4
3
3
0

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/1/1
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/8/0
4/12/4
0/0
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
1/9/9
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/3/3
0/3/3
0/0
0/8/8
1/9/9
0/0
0/8/8
6/15/15
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
7/15/15
0/0
0/8/8
3/11/11
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/0
4/12/4
0/0
0/8/0
4/12/4
0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/3/0
0/3/0
0/0
0/1/1
0/1/1
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/2/0
12/14/12
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/0/2
8/8/10
0/0
0/3/0
0/3/0
0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
3/11/11
0/0
0/3/0
3/6/3
0/0
0/1/1
0/1/1
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 77 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/8/8
5/13/13
4/12/4

0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
1/9/9
2/10/10
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/3/3
1/9/9
6/15/15
2/10/10
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/8/8
0/8/8
7/15/15
3/11/11
0/8/8
4/12/12
4/12/4
4/12/4
8/10/10
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/3/0
0/1/1
5/13/13
12/14/12
4/12/12
5/13/13
9/11/11
8/8/10
0/3/0
10/12/12
8/10/10
4/12/12
3/11/11
3/6/3
0/1/1

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

143A
144S#
144T
147~
148~
149~
150~
151
157*
158*
158A*
159A*^
170#
173~
174~
176#
179
182
183*^
185
185N
188#
188S#
190*^
190A*^
192~
193
194S^#
194T*^
195
196*^
197
203
205
207
208
209
214
219
220
362
362A
362B

18/9
22/22
18/18
93/40
77/40
65/40
103/40
40/40
54/54
143/143
0/33
18/18
97/40
18/18
29/29
15/15
76/0
50/0
68/68
27/27
22/22
40/0
0/10
43/43
44/44
40/40
17/17
36/36
31/31
28/28
14/14
24/24
59/59
34/34
40/40
40/40
24/24
6/6
38/38
0/35
192/0
0/40
0/40

SW/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP-SW/IMP-SW
NT/IMP-SW
ST/ST
SW/ST
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/NT
IMP/NT
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
ST/ST
ST/NT
NT/ST
IMP/IMP
SSLV/SSLV
IMP/IMP
SW/SW
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
SSLV/SSLV
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
IMP/IMP
SW/SW
ST/ST
IMP/IMP
ST/ST
ST/ST
NT/CCR
CCR/NT
NT/CCR
NT/CCR

SGP/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP
SUB/SUB
SGP/SGP
NT/GP
SGP/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SUB/SUB
SGP/NT
SUB/NT
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SUB/NT
NT/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/PCT-GP
SUB/SUB
GP/GP
SUB/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SUB
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
SGP/SGP
NT/UB
SGP/NT
NT/GP
NT/UB

T/T
S/S
T/T
T&S/T&S
S/S
T&S/T&S
T&S/T
T/T
WT/WT
WT/WT
NA/WT
WT/WT
S/T
S/S
S/S
S/S
T/NA
T/NA
WT/WT
T/T
T/T
S/NA
NA/S
WT/WT
WT/WT
S/S
T/T
S/S
WT/WT
T/T
WT/WT
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
T/T
NA/T
T/NA
NA/T
NA/T

2
0
0
4
4
0
6
4
6
2
2
11
0
4
<1
2
5
0
9
4
4
2
2
10
10
1
2
14
14
2
12
2
5
1
2
2
2
1
5
4
2
2
2

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/1/2
0/0/0
0/<1/1
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/1/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/1/1
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/<1/0
0/0/0
0/0/1

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/3/3
0/3/3
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/1/1
4/5/5
0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
0/8/8
6/14/15
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/4/4
6/10/10
0/0
0/4/4
2/6/6
0/0
0/0/4
2/2/6
0/0
0/2/2
11/13/13
0/0
0/3/8
0/3/8
0/0
0/1/1
4/5/5
0/0
0/1/1
0/1/1
0/0
0/3/3
2/5/5
0/0
0/8/0
5/14/5
0/0
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
0/3/0
2/5/2
0/0
0/0/3
2/2/5
0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
0/1/1
1/2/2
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/3/3
14/17/17
2/2
0/2/2
14/16/16
1/1
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/2/2
12/14/14
0/0
0/8/8
2/11/11
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/8/8
1/9/9
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
2/10/10
0/0
0/8/8
1/9/9
0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
0/0/8
4/4/12
0/0
0/8/0
2/10/2
0/0
0/0/8
2/2/10
0/0
0/0/8
2/2/11
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 78 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
2/10/10
0/3/3
0/8/8
4/12/12
4/5/5
0/8/8
6/14/15
4/12/12
6/10/10
2/6/6
2/2/6
11/13/13
0/3/8
4/5/5
0/1/1
2/5/5
5/14/5
0/8/0
9/11/11
4/12/12
4/12/12
2/5/2
2/2/5
10/14/12
10/10/12
1/2/2
2/10/10
14/15/15
14/15/15
2/10/10
12/14/14
2/11/11
5/13/13
1/9/9
2/10/10
2/10/10
2/10/10
1/9/9
5/13/13
4/4/12
2/10/2
2/2/10
2/2/11

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

362C
363
364
365
366
367
367A
368
368A
368B
368C
369

0/39
40/40
33/33
25/25
6/6
38/38
40/40
0/40
10/0
6/0
7/0
40/40

NT/CCR
CCR/CCR
CCR/CCR
CCR/CCR
CCR/CCR
CCR/CCR
CCR/CCR
NT/CCR
CCR/NT
CCR/NT
CCR/NT
CCR/CCR

219A
305*^
306
307*^
311*^
317
318*^
319*^
327*^
328*^
330*^
331*^
332
333
334*^
335*^
337
339*^
340*^
343
344*^
345*^
346*^
347*^
348
349*^
350*^

26/32
43/43
57/57
305/304
9/0
63/63
131/131
17/17
46/46
31/31
9/9
16/16
10/10
14/14
22/22
20/20
272/0
89/89
266/266
100/93
73/64
45/45
11/11
520/520
14/14
21/21
26/26

CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/NT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/NT
CT/NT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT
CT/CT

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
PREDICTED
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
EXISTING
PREDICTED
TEMP
DSD%
DSD FROM
DSD (%)1
HARVEST
ROAD
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
DSD%2
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
NT/UB
NA/T
2
0/0/2
0/0/8
2/2/12
0/0
SGP/UB
T/T
4
0/0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
SUB/UB
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
SUB/UB
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
SUB/UB
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
SUB/UB
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
SUB/UB
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
NT/UB
NA/T
0
0/0/0
0/0/8
0/0/8
0/0
SGP/NT
T/NA
0
0/0/0
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/0
SGP/NT
T/NA
0
0/0/0
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/0
SGP/NT
T/NA
0
0/0/0
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/0
SGP/GP
T/T
0
0/0/0
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0
TOTAL ACRES by ALTERNATIVE: Alt 2 = 6,589 Alt 3 = 5,817
COMMERCIAL THINNING HARVEST OPERATIONS *Higher rehab acres
WTY/WTY
T/T
5
0/0/0
0/8/8
5/13/13
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
11
0/0/0
0/2/2
11/13/13
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
4
0/0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
8
0/0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
WTY/NT
WT/NA
11
0/0/0
0/2/0
11/13/11
0/0
WTY/WTY
T/T
3
0/0/0
0/8/8
3/11/11
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
13
0/<1/0
0/2/2
13/15/15
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
12
0/0/0
0/2/2
12/14/14
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
12
0/0/0
0/2/2
12/14/14
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
10
0/0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
14
0/0/0
0/2/2
14/16/16
1/1
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
14
0/0/0
0/2/2
14/16/16
1/1
WTY/WTY
T/T
4
0/0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
T/T
3
0/0/0
0/8/8
3/11/11
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
9
0/0/0
0/2/2
9/11/11
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
8
0/0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
WTY/NT
T/NA
7
0/0/0
0/8/0
7/15/7
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
10
0/0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
12
0/<1/<1
0/2/2
12/14/14
0/0
WTY/WTY
T/T
7
0/<1/<1
0/8/8
7/15/15
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
11
0/1/1
0/2/2
11/14/14
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
8
0/2/2
0/2/2
8/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
8
0/0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
11
0/0/0
0/2/2
11/13/13
0/0
WTY/WTY
T/T
4
0/0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
10
0/0/0
0/2/2
10/12/12
0/0
WTY/WTY
WT/WT
8
0/0/0
0/2/2
8/10/10
0/0
TOTAL CT ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 2,256 ALT 3 = 1,965
WHITE PINE DAYLIGHT THIN UNITS

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 79 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
2/2/12
4/12/12
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/8/8
0/0/8
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/8/0
0/8/8

5/13/13
11/13/13
4/8/8
8/10/10
11/13/11
3/11/11
13/15/15
12/14/14
12/14/14
10/12/12
14/15/15
14/15/15
4/12/12
3/11/11
9/11/11
8/10/10
7/15/7
10/12/12
12/14/14
7/15/15
11/14/14
8/12/12
8/10/10
11/13/13
4/12/12
10/12/12
8/10/10

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273

21/0
8/0
5/0
15/0
22/0
44/0
2/0
18/0
14/0
23/0
17/0
41/0
211/0
56/0
41/0
8/0
20/0
31/0
34/0
11/0
28/0
17/0
24/0
20/0
39/0
14/0
27/0
33/0
29/0
27/0
16/0
60/0
24/0
16/0
36/0
3/0
3/0

1
2
3
4

30/30
15/15
31/31
2/2

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
PREDICTED
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
EXISTING
PREDICTED
TEMP
DSD%
DSD FROM
DSD (%)1
HARVEST
ROAD
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
DSD%2
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
WPDT/NT
CSH/NT
NEq/NA
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
TOTAL WHITE PINE DAYLIGHT THIN ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 1,060 ALT 3 = 0
PRECOMMERCIAL THIN UNITS
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 80 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

3/3
20/20
29/29
21/21
19/19
21/21
29/29
11/11
24/24
15/15
14/14
15/15
22/22
11/11
19/19
6/6
7/7
7/7
2/2
2/2
38/38
51/51
25/25
11/11
26/26
42/42
25/25
48/48
6/6
12/12
7/7
6/6
11/11
12/12
14/14
28/28
6/6
57/57
13/13
7/7
20/20
42/42
44/44

PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT

CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH

NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq

DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 81 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93

55/55
11/11
18/18
16/16
11/11
5/5
32/32
73/73
27/27
63/63
74/74
7/7
3/3
3/3
12/12
9/9
8/8
37/37
7/7
13/13
43/43
2/2
28/28
85/85
15/15
3/3
63/63
53/53
34/34
24/24
26/26
11/11
31/31
35/35
40/40
49/49
35/35
39/39
11/11
3/3
16/16
19/19
6/6

PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT

CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH

NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq

DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 82 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137

10/10
3/3
8/8
2/2
48/48
30/30
24/24
46/46
4/4
19/19
31/31
11/11
9/9
15/15
18/18
12/12
30/30
24/24
4/4
45/45
14/14
9/9
16/16
39/39
27/27
22/22
16/16
32/32
4/4
47/47
9/9
4/4
12/12
7/7
25/25
19/19
16/16
23/23
27/27
14/14
12/12
14/14
6/6

PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT

CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH

NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq

DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 83 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180

6/6
15/15
4/4
20/20
23/23
28/28
5/5
4/4
1/1
43/43
27/27
5/5
8/8
39/39
24/24
30/30
14/14
18/18
7/7
62/62
13/13
81/81
1/1
15/15
6/6
4/4
6/6
7/7
5/5
5/5
29/29
12/12
32/32
24/24
24/24
27/27
16/16
16/16
5/5
13/13
29/29
13/13
19/19

PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT

CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH

NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq

DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 84 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223

12/12
27/27
23/23
38/38
38/38
24/24
46/46
47/47
37/37
24/24
39/39
19/19
31/31
23/23
44/44
38/38
49/49
19/19
21/21
9/9
51/51
63/63
47/47
26/26
41/41
32/32
22/22
12/12
109/109
37/37
20/20
28/28
20/20
40/40
15/15
32/32
29/29
48/48
40/40
50/50
17/17
46/46
25/25

PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT
PCT/PCT

CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH
CSH/CSH

NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq
NEq/NEq

DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
HARVEST
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 85 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
274
275

12/12
57/57
18/18
7/7
53/53
19/19
43/43
17/17
11/11
14/14
69/69
35/35
54/54
21/21
3/3

COE 1*
COE 3*
COE 4
COEF5
COE5T
COE 6^
COEF7
COEF8
COEF9
COEF10
COEF11
COEF12

41/41
181/181
22/22
47/47
6/6
11/11
37/37
25/25
23/23
12/12
8/8
8/8

F1
F1A
F1OG^
F2
F3
F3OG
F4
F8
F11OG
F12
F13
F13OG

174/174
17/17
38/0
116/112
17/17
20/0
17/17
52/52
54/0
11/11
24/24
5/0

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
PREDICTED
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
EXISTING
PREDICTED
TEMP
DSD%
DSD FROM
DSD (%)1
HARVEST
ROAD
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
DSD%2
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
PCT/PCT
CSH/CSH
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
TOTAL PRECOMMERCIAL THIN ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 5,563 ALT 3 = 5,563
US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERING
IMP/IMP
UB/UB
T/T
7
0/0/0
0/8/8
7/15/15
0/0
IMP/IMP
UB/UB
T/T
4
0/0/0
0/8/8
4/12/12
0/0
IMP/IMP
UB/UB
WT/WT
0
0/0/0
0/4/4
0/4/4
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
IMP/IMP
UB/UB
WT/WT
Est 4%
0/0/0
0/4/4
4/8/8
0/0
IMP/IMP
UB/UB
WT/WT
11
0/0/0
0/2/2
11/13/13
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
GP/GP
NEq/NEq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/2/2
0/6/6
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
TOTAL US ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERING ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 421 ALT 3 = 421
FUELS TREATMENT UNITS
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
6
0/0/0
0/2/2
6/8/8
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
MFT/NT
B/NT
MAeq/NEq
8
0/0/0
0/2/0
8/10/8
0/0
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
6
0/0/0
0/2/2
6/8/8
0/0
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
5
0/0/0
0/2/2
5/7/7
0/0
MFT/NT
B/NT
MAeq/NA
5
0/0/0
0/2/2
5/7/7
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
6
0/0/0
0/2/2
6/8/8
0/0
S/NT
B/NT
NEq/NA
4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
1
0/0/0
0/2/2
1/3/3
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
MFT/NT
B/NT
MAeq/NA
App. 4
0/0/0
0/2/0
4/6/4
0/0

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 86 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

7/15/15
4/12/12
0/4/4
0/0/0
4/8/8
11/13/13
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/6/6
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

6/8/8
0/0/0
8/10/8
6/8/8
5/7/7
5/7/7
0/0/0
6/8/8
4/4/4
1/3/3
0/0/0
4/6/4

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

F14OG
F15
F15OG
F16
F18
F19
F45

43/0
9/9
13/0
73/73
568/568
0/110
125/125

FW501
FW502
FW503
FW509
FW511
FW512
FW516
FW521
FW522
FW524
FW525
FW533
FW535
FW536
FW539
FW540
FW543
FW544
FW545
FW577
FW589
FW5109
FW5111
FW5122^
FW5125
FW50601
FW50602
FW51101
FW51102
FW51103
FW53401
FW53402
FW53403

281/281
159/159
215/215
32/32
34/34
51/51
39/39
41/41
642/642
484/484
84/84
214/214
142/142
307/307
121/121
538/538
215/215
576/576
429/429
147/147
335/335
170/170
46/46
112/112
14/14
294/294
913/913
575/575
272/272
743/743
596/596
581/581
646/646

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
PREDICTED
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
EXISTING
PREDICTED
TEMP
DSD%
DSD FROM
DSD (%)1
HARVEST
ROAD
POSTREHAB4 (%)
DSD%
DSD%2
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
MFT/NT
B/NT
MAeq/NA
App. 4
0/0/0
0/2/0
4/6/4
0/0
MFT/MFT
B/B
MAeq/MAeq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/2/2
4/6/4
0/0
MFT/NT
B/NT
MAeq/NA
App. 4
0/0/0
0/2/0
0/2/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
NT/S
NT/B
NA/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
B/B
NEq/NEq
0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
TOTAL FUELS ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 1,378 ALT 3 = 1,309
FUELS AND WILDLIFE UNITS
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
3
0/0/0
0/0/0
3/3/3
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
7
0/0/0
0/0/0
7/7/7
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
NT/NT
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
NT/NT
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
App. 4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
NT/NT
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
4
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
NT/NT
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
9
0/0/0
0/0/0
9/9/9
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
1
0/0/0
0/0/0
1/1/1
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
9
0/0/0
0/0/0
9/9/9
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
S/S
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
NT/NT
UB/UB
NEq/NEq
DNA
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0
TOTAL FUELS & WILDLIFE ACRES BY ALTERNATIVE: ALT 2 = 10,049 ALT 3 = 10,049

PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 87 of 410

TOTAL
POST
ACTIVITY
DSD (%)
4/6/4
4/6/4
0/2/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

0/0/0
3/3/3
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
7/7/7
4/4/4
0/0/0
4/4/4
4/4/4
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
4/4/4
4/4/4
0/0/0
4/4/4
0/0/0
0/0/0
9/9/9
0/0/0
1/1/1
9/9/9
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0
0/0/0

CHAPTER 3

UNIT #

ACTIVITY
AREA
(acres)
ALTS 2/3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED
VEGETATION
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

PROPOSED
FUELS
TREATMENT
ALT 2/3

CCR - Clearcut with Reserves (Regen.)
SW – Shelterwood with Reserves (Regen.)
ST – Seed Tree with Reserves (Regen.)
ST-SW – Seedtree with Shelterwood (Regen.)
IMP-SW – Stand Improvement with Shelterwood (Regen.)
IRR-SW – Irregular Shelterwood (Regen.)
IMP – Stand Improvement (Intermediate)
SSLV – Sanitation Salvage (Intermediate)
CT – Commercial Thin (Intermediate)
PCT – Precommercial Thin (Intermediate)
PCT-GP – Precommercial Thin with Grapple Piles (Intermediate)
OG – Old Growth
WPDT – Western White Pine Precommercial Thin
FUEL – Fuel Treatments
FW FUELS – Fuels and Wildlife Treatments
NT – No Treatment under this Alternative

PROPOSED
LOGGING
SYSTEM
ALT 2/3

EXISTING
DSD (%)1

GP – Grapple Pile
SGP – Slash with Grapple Pile
UB – Underburn
MFT – Mechanical Fuel Treatment
PPR – Potential Product Removal
B – Burn
S – Slash
SB – Slash and Burn
SUB – Slash with Underburn
WTY – Whole Tree Yarding

PREDICTED
TEMP
ROAD
DSD%2

SOILS RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVES POTENTIAL DSD 1/2/3
CUMULATIVE
REDUCED
TOTAL
PREDICTED
DSD%
DSD FROM
POST
HARVEST
4
POSTREHAB (%)
ACTIVITY
DSD%
HARVEST
ALTS 2/3
DSD (%)
T – Tractor
WT – Winter Tractor
S – Skyline
T&S – Combined Tractor & Skyline Harvest
Operations
HSS – Hot Saw Cut with Skyline
CSH – Chainsaw Hand
NEq – No Equipment Operations
MAeq – Mastication Equivalent
NA – No Activities
DNA – Does Not Apply
Null – Does not apply with this Alternative

Note: An existing condition of 0% DSD can mean either: 1) No disturbance is present or 2) there is some disturbance present but does not amount to 1%
1

The East Reservoir soil survey was conducted using the new Region 1 Soil Sampling Protocol which meets the R1 definition of detrimental soil disturbance, and therefore the pre-East
Reservoir activity conditions meet the R1 definitions. Field forms are present in the East Reservoir Soil files.
2
For determining temporary road soil disturbance an average width of 12’ has been applied for calculating area of DSD. Following harvest all temp roads and landings used for harvest
activities will be scarified at least 6-12” based on the depth. An average of 50% DSD has been used to calculate potential soil DSD values for existing tractor-dozer skid trails which
currently exist but are not on the roads database layer.
3
Predicted DSD has been calculated based on historical soil monitoring data collected in the field in post-harvest timber sale units. (Kuennen, 2007a). In units with combined
tractor/skyline harvest activity the anticipated DSD was calculated as related to the overall acreage of potential disturbance by harvest activity.
^In units where existing DSD is 8% or greater expect 50% less skidding disturbance as a result of using existing skid trails and landings. This reduction of anticipated DSD values only
applies to proposed ground-based harvest activities.
~Units most likely to be handsawed as compared to clipper cut in skyline Units.
#Units most likely to be hot-saw cut with skyline timber removal. If skyline Units are expected to be clipper cut an additional 2% DSD was added.
4
Reduction in percent DSD is expected to occur in 3 years following harvest activities within a given unit. This number varies based on the severity of restoration requirements and
mitigations in a given harvest unit. Such activities apply to Units 194S, 194T, 330, and 331 which exceeded 15% DSD following proposed harvest activities.
5
Units determined to have an additional 1% DSD due to fireline construction following harvest activity. Such impacts only apply to those areas where heavy equipment is suspected to
be used for such activities.
*Units 2, 2B, 3, 7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 24, 26, 64, 70T, 73T, 74T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196, 305, 307, 311, 318, 319, 327, 328, 330, 331, 334, 335, 339, 340, 344, 345, 346,
347, 349, and 350 require harvest Winter Tractor operations in winter based on soil concerns. Similarly, Winter Tractor operations are recommended in Units COE1 and COE6 to
avoid exceeding 15% DSD following harvest activities. Units 1 and 1A also require WT operations based on Archeology concerns for all proposed Action Alternatives while Units
2C, 2D, 3A, 9, 11, 17, 28, 157, 158, and 306 all have weed concerns and thus require winter harvest operations under Alternatives 2 and 3.
WT Units with GP requirements may require provision C64.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 88 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
The percent detrimental soil disturbance (DSD) is the measurement indicator of soil compaction for this
analysis. Direct impacts on soils from management activities could include compaction, rutting and
displacement. Typically, these impacts take place as a result of vehicles/equipment traversing areas within
proposed units such as skid trails, landings and temporary roads. Soil compaction is most common where
heavy equipment makes repeated passes over the same ground, particularly during times of high soil
moisture (Kuennen 2003). Soil compaction can change slope hydrology and lead to overland flow of
water during precipitation or snowmelt events. Compacted soils can also reduce soil productivity. These
are some general direct effects that can occur with all timber harvest activities. For this analysis, all units
expected to receive heavy equipment activities were reviewed to determine the currently existing soil
conditions. Table 3.37 identifies the extent of these impacts for each unit for both Alternatives 2 and 3.
Note that harvest procedures can result in very minimal impacts to soils where proposed units are likely to
be cut using handsaw activities on steeper hill slopes and removed using skyline activities.
Regeneration harvest activities would require one entry to reach the desired silvicultural objective.
Related post-harvest unit entry over time would be for thinning and scheduled to occur several decades
later. This being said, units proposed for intermediate silvicultural objectives such as commercial thinning
or stand improvement operations are more subjective to higher detrimental soil disturbance than that of a
regeneration prescription based on the needs for multiple entries over a similar time period.
The construction of a fireline directly impacts soils by removing (displacing) the organic layer down to
mineral soil for 2-3 feet wide around the perimeter of the units. Some compaction along the fireline could
occur from foot, all-terrain vehicle and/or heavy equipment traffic. The effects of soil compaction
associated with fireline construction only apply to those units where machinery may be involved in such
lines. The bulk of units would have firelines constructed by hand.
Fuels treatments may also include mastication equivalent activities using machinery that may impact
soils. The effects of mastication are included in the figures identified in Table 3.37. The direct effects of
mastication with heavy equipment operations are discussed in the fuels section. Because mastication
equivalent activities are reducing the amount of woody material within a unit, it can also affect nutrient
cycling. Nutrient cycling is discussed in depth later in this section. In proposed units where existing soil
compactions were found to be higher, recommendations to limit machinery activities outside of skid trails
used for harvest practices is suggested. In Alternatives 2 and 3, grapple piling on COE lands is only
proposed in Unit COEF9 for fuel concerns. All other fuel treatments involve either underburns or handslash-burn prescriptions. Where grapple piling is proposed, a 2% DSD has been applied to the existing
field data to estimate the cumulative DSD values.
Indirect impacts from management activities could include erosion from surface water runoff channeled
into ruts, fire lines, and/or along temporary roads within units. With less vegetation a conversion from a
drier soil environment to a slightly moister site would occur. Less vegetation would mean a thinner
canopy and more soil interception from rainfall above. These impacts are anticipated to be minimized by
implementing BMPs (Appendix C of the DEIS) and the following specific management requirements and
design criteria.
Recommendations to Minimize DSD from Ground-Based Activities
Under Alternative 2, elevated levels of legacy soil compaction (8% or greater) in proposed ground based
harvest regeneration or intermediate harvest units are present in Units 2, 2B, 2C, 2D, 3, 3A, 7, 10, 12, 13,
14, 15, 24, 26, 70T, 73T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196 and COE6. In Alternative 3, the
legacy soil compaction (8% or greater) for ground based units is present in Units 2, 2B, 2C, 2D, 3, 3A, 7,
10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 24, 26, 73T, 74T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196 and COE6.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 103 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

Similar concerns are also present in a number of commercial thin units. In Alternative 2, those units
containing legacy soil compaction (8% or greater) is present in Units 305, 307, 311, 318, 319, 327, 328,
330, 331, 334, 335, 339, 340, 344, 345, 346, 347, 349 and 350. In Alternative 3, the proposed commercial
thin units currently exceeding 8% are units 305, 307, 318, 319, 327, 328, 330, 331, 334, 335, 339, 340,
344, 345, 346, 347, 349 and 350. Higher values in these units are believed to be the result of much more
recent harvest operations when compared to both regeneration and intermediate operations which tended
to have been harvested between early 1960s and 1980s. Such conditions in the commercial thinning units
have allowed far less time for soil recovery to occur. Soil recovery studies on the KNF (2012) display
much higher percent recovery when comparing harvest activities which occurred more recently as
compared to earlier D6 equivalent activities.
Those units exceeding 8% DSD are also present in proposed Fuel and Fuels and Wildlife Units F1OG,
FW5122 and FW50602 in Alternative 2; and units FW5122 and FW50602 in Alternative 3. It should be
noted that no equipment activities are planned to occur within Units FW5122 and FW50602 while Unit
F1OG only proposes to be a mastication-equivalent operation which results in only a 2% DSD value.
Unit F1OG is only proposed for Alternative 2 (Table 3.37).
No additional impacts to the existing conditions are expected to occur in white pine daylight thin units
and precommercial thins as such activities do not involve heavy equipment activities.
Cumulative Effects
Units found to cumulatively exceed the 15% DSD value on one or more of the proposed alternatives
include intermediate harvest Units 194S, 194T and commercial thin units 330 and 331 (Table 3.37).
Following harvest operations there are plans to reduce the overall DSD values in these units as
determined by the Forest Soil Scientist in coordination with the timber sale contracting officer. In such
units, winter operations are proposed in order to minimize additional soil disturbance values. However,
new skid trails may be required in areas where the existing skid trail network does not fit the current
operations. Effects on temporary roads and skid trails on vegetative regrowth are expected to be
temporary due to planned ripping and seeding following harvest operations where these areas are used for
harvest operations. Post-harvest rehabilitation activities would include ripping skid trails and temporary
roads and seeding as necessary. Such activities would help to offset the harvest activities to soil
productivity by allowing previously disturbed soils to re-establish as a productive area capable of
producing future natural vegetative cover which in turn may one day be harvested again. Harvest
operations may also include placing downed woody material on skid trails to reduce impacts to soils. In
proposed ground based harvest units currently exceeding 8% DSD this analysis assumes that 50% of
historic skid trails would be reused during harvest operations.
The soil rehabilitation effects may not be immediately apparent, as it would take several years for diverse
native vegetation to establish in areas that previously had limited root capacity. Disturbed soil organic
layers, which play an important role in soil nutrient cycling and microbial population/function, would also
take time to rebuild after rehabilitation treatments. The importance of the rehabilitation cannot be
overlooked because it does not immediately restore soils to pre-disturbance conditions. The rehabilitation
provides the critical bridge that allows these natural processes to improve conditions over time. Based on
this analysis, while some increase in DSD is expected with proposed management activities, following
soil mitigation and rehabilitation activities all activity areas would be below the 15% allowable DSD.
Even with the proposed mitigations/ rehabilitation activities, there is a potential that intermediate harvest
Units 194S, 194T, and commercial thin Units 330 and 331 may still exceed the15% DSD value. For these
units, the goal is to return the soils following harvest operations to DSD values which are either
equivalent or lower than the currently existing conditions within a 3 year timeframe. Accomplishing this
would be completed by requiring the contractor to actively rehabilitate all skid-trails and landings used by
the operators during the harvest activity. Plans are to monitor these units within 2-3 years following
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 90 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

harvest operations to determine the recovery ratio of the soils to compare pre-existing to post-existing
conditions.
PERMANENT ROADS
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Regarding soil disturbance it should be noted that Authorized Forest Roads as defined in 36 CFR 212.1
are not considered part of the productive land base. As a result, these features do not count toward the
15% soil quality standard (FSM 2500-2009-1).
In Alterative 1, no additional permanent roads road construction or temporary road reconstruction is
proposed; no Intermittent Stored Service or road decommissioning would take place. Therefore, road
management would have no cumulative effect on soils in the analysis areas because soil productivity
effects are spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect productivity in another location.
Similarly, in Alternative 1, 0 miles of road are to be placed in intermittent stored service or
decommissioned, and no motorized trails would be converted to non-motorized trails.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Currently, approximately 34.4 miles of road exist as stored road miles within the East Reservoir analysis
area. Alternatives 2 would involve placing approximately 16.0 miles of road into Intermittent Stored
Service and Alternative 3 would involve placing approximately 17.6 miles of road into Intermittent
Stored Service. Intermittent road storage activities may include removing culverts on live, intermittent
and ephemeral streams, restoring natural stream drainage patterns, out-sloping the road surface, removing
unstable materials such as seeps and slumps, water-bar or cross-drain installation, and seeding disturbed
sites. Under such activities the road prism remains on the landscape for long-term future resource
management. The benefit of such activities includes decreased soil erosion from water channeling down
the road surface. It should be noted that although such activities would not achieve 100% soil recovery, it
is anticipated that with time such linear segments would improve hydrologically and begin to vegetatively
recover (Table 3.38).
Under Alternative 2, approximately 9.3 miles of new permanent road miles would be constructed while
Alternative 3 would involve constructing approximately 8.1 miles of new permanent road. Physical
activities suspected to occur include, but are not limited to, vegetative removal, placement of culverts,
road prism excavation, hauling, leveling, surfacing and compacting in order to provide a functional road
drainage system. It should be noted that construction of new permanent road miles are not analyzed as
being a concern as system roads fall out of the productive land base.
Both Alternatives 2 and 3 propose decommissioning approximately 5.9 miles of existing roads. Such
activities would involve removal of culverts where stream channels exist, road closure barriers, outsloping the road surface, removing unstable materials such as seeps and slumps, water-bar or cross-drain
installation and seeding disturbed sites. Under such activities, the past road prism would return to a
productive land area for long-term future resource management.
Alternatives 2 and 3 propose placing approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads.
Alternative 2 proposes converting approximately 6.2 miles of undetermined roads to be decommissioned
while Alternative 3 proposes converting approximately 6.5 miles of undetermined roads to be
decommissioned.
Alternative 2 proposes making approximately 1.8 miles of seasonally restricted road miles open yearlong
while Alternative 3 is scheduled to open approximately 8.1 miles of seasonally restricted road miles.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 91 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

Similarly, Alternative 2 proposes to reconstruct approximately 7.1 miles of stored roads to use and store
after harvest activities have occurred while Alternative 3 proposes reconstruction of approximately 5.5
miles of stored roads which would be stored following harvest activities. Proposed road reconstruction
and maintenance under both Alternatives 2 and 3 may increase short-term sediment movement from road
surface runoff but should be minimal, especially at road locations higher on the slope that are relatively
low gradient and provide for sufficient buffer zones. Road reconstruction includes new culvert
installation, blading, and brushing, and typically improves drainages and decreases erosion from water
channeling down the road surface in the long-run (Table 3.38). Alternatives 2 and 3 both would involve
approximately 30.3 miles of cost-share road use during harvest activities.
Alternative 2 proposes converting approximately 36.6 miles of motorized trails to non-motorized access
only while Alternative 3 proposes 26.9 miles of such activities. The conversion of motorized trails to nonmotorized trails involves those trails found to be no longer necessary for motorized access. Under
Alternatives 2 and 3, it is expected that such activities would not include any direct physical impacts to
soils but more directly deal with constructing barriers and placing signs at the beginning of current roads
to prohibit vehicular traffic. In the long-term, soil infiltration rates and ground drainage capabilities would
begin to improve as soils freeze and thaw, and plant root growth improves soil porosity.
Table 3.38 - Road Treatments by Alternative with regards to Soils 4Disturbance
ROAD MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

Existing Stored Road
Road Placed in Intermittent Storage
New Permanent Road Construction
New Temporary Road Construction
Existing Road Proposed for Decommissioning
Undetermined Roads to NFS Roads
Undetermined Roads to be Decommissioned
Stored Roads to Use and Store After
Motorized Trails Converted to Non-Motorized Trails
Seasonally Restricted Roads Made Available to Motorized Vehicles
Miles of Cost Share Roads
Total Miles

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

34.4
16.0
9.3
4.3
5.9
13.5
6.2
7.1
36.6
1.8
29.72
App. 176.5

34.4
17.6
8.1
4.1
5.9
13.5
6.5
5.5
26.9
8.1
29.72
App. 168.3

TEMPORARY ROADS
ALTERNATIVE 1 (NO-Action)
Direct and Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Alternative 1 has no temporary road construction and closure occurring. Therefore, temporary road
management would have no cumulative effect on soils in the analysis areas because soil productivity
effects are spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect productivity in another location.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
All new landings and temporary roads are considered 100% detrimentally disturbed through removal of
organic matter and compaction. Related mitigation activity following timber harvest includes restoring
temporary roads and landings needed to facilitate timber harvest after use. Indirect effects from the action
alternatives include the temporary soil erosion related to the exposure of more mineral soil. Without a
protective mat of vegetation and stable soil profile, these areas are more susceptible to the erosive forces
of wind, water and the dynamic temperature changes (frost heaves) sometimes seen in and around the
East Reservoir analysis area. These localized effects are typically short-term (5-10 years) due to the
warmer wet climate found on the KNF. Should Alternative 2 be selected approximately 4.3 miles or
roughly 8.6 acre equivalent of temporary road would be constructed while Alternative 3 involves
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 92 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

approximately 4.1 miles of temporary road (8.2 acre equivalent) disturbance (an average 2 ac/mi has been
used to calculate DSD values). Tables 3.38 and 3.39 display information regarding which units would
have temporary roads constructed in Alternatives 2 and 3. These potential soil disturbance values are also
represented on a unit by unit basis in Table 3.37.
Table 3.39 - Calculated DSD Related to Temp Road Construction
TEMP RD #

TEMP RD
LENGTH (miles)

T5
T6
T14
T25
T25
T28
T37
T42
T43
T42
T43
T44
T45
T53
T54
T55
T57
T58
Sub-total (Alt 2)
Sub-total (Alt 3)

0.2
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.2
4.3
4.1

UNIT ID*

UNIT ACRES by
ALT 2/3

17
22
318
31
197
345
340
362
362
362B
362C
150
49
148
344
343
23
179

68/68
83/83
131/0
698/698
24/24
45/45
266/266
192/0
192/0
0/40
0/39
103/40
64/64
77/40
73/64
100/93
146/146
76/0

ROAD DSD by
UNIT (ac)
ALT 2/3

% DSD RELATED to
TEMP ROAD by UNIT
ALT 2/3

0.4/0.4
0.8/0.8
0.2/0
1.0/1.0
0.2/0.2
0.8/0.8
0.2/0.2
0.4/0
0.6/0
0/0.4
0/0.6
0.4/0.4
0.6/0.6
0.8/0.8
0.4/0.4
0.6/0.6
0.6/0.6
0.4/0
8.6
8.2

<1/<1
1/1
<1/0
<1/<1
1/1
2/2
<1/<1
<1/0
<1/0
0/1
0/2
<1/1
1/1
1/2
1/1
<1/<1
<1/<1
1/0

^Road length rounded to the nearest tenth of a mile.
*Only those Units where new temporary road construction would be required are listed above.

All temporary roads and landings constructed for the sale would be agreed upon by the FS and purchaser.
These areas would be constructed and used in adherence to BMPs and RHCAs to minimize their impacts
to soils. After use, these areas would receive the following rehabilitation treatments: the road or landing
surface would be ripped to remedy compaction, the berm would be pulled back (on roads), woody debris
would be spread to stabilize soil from movement and to provide organic material, and all disturbed areas
would be seeded. Such activities would help to offset the harvest activities to soil productivity by
allowing previously disturbed soils to re-establish as a productive area capable of producing future natural
vegetative cover which in turn may one day be harvested again.
FUELS TREATMENTS
Due to the suppression of wildfires over the last century, fuels have accumulated in many areas
throughout the analysis area. The intent of fuels treatments is to reduce fuel levels and meet vegetation
management objectives. Table 3.40 displays the fuels treatment proposed with this project.
Soils Table 3.40 - Types and Amount of Fuels Treatments by Alternative
ACTIVITY

Timber Harvest/Grapple Pile
Timber Harvest/Prescribed Fire
Fuel Reduction/Prescribed Fire
Mechanical Fuel Treatments

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0
0
0

3,952
2,771
1,378
498

2,457
3,390
1,309
375

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 93 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES
ACTIVITY

Commercial Thin/Whole Tree Yarding
Fuels and Wildlife Prescribed Fire
Precommercial Thin/Lop and Scatter
Timber Harvest/Prescribed Fire on COE Lands
Fuel Reduction/Prescribed Fire on COE Lands
Fuel Reduction/Grapple Pile on COE Lands

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
765
0
0
0
0

2,256
10,049
5,775
261
137
23

1,965
10,049
5,563
261
137
23

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Currently, as of the spring of 2013, approximately 170 acres of Unit FWF545 have already been burnt as
part of the Forestwide Fuels EIS. Similarly, an additional 765 acres of Forestwide Fuels acres are planned
to be burnt in proposed Units FWF545, FWF536, FWF52403 and FWF589 (Chapter 3, page 5). These
acres would to be burnt even if Alternative 1 is the selected alternative. This activity would result in both
a cumulative and indirect effect to soils. The potential direct effects include alteration of soil structure,
impacts to soil invertebrates, reduced nitrogen and loss of soluble nutrients (Kuennen 2000). However,
past experience with wildfires on KNF indicate that there is a very low risk of these effects even with
high intensity fire. Alternative 1 does not propose any additional fuels treatments. The indirect effects
would be an increased risk of damage to soils caused by high intensity wildfire resulting in a higher soil
heating (Keane et al. 2002).
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2 and 3 include approximately 3,952 and 2,457 acres proposed grapple pile fuel abatement
activities following both regeneration and intermediate harvest activities. Excavator (grapple pile)
activities would only occur in areas which are feasibly reached by machinery along skid trails and/or
clipper cut trails used during harvest activities in order to reduce impacts to soils. In Alternatives 2 and 3,
approximately 2,771 and 3,390 acres of timber harvest activities would occur with prescribed fire
treatments such as underburning, broadcast burning and jackpot burning activities with timber removal.
Alternatives 2 and 3 propose a total of 1,378 and 1,309 acres of proposed fuel treatment units where no
harvest activities will occur. Some of these units involve proposed mechanical fuel treatment activities
such as mastication. Of the fuel treatment units, Alternative 2 proposes 498 acres of potential mastication
while Alternative 3 proposes only 375 acres of such activities. Alternatives 2 and 3 propose 2,256 and
1,965 acres of commercial thinning operations/whole tree yarding in order to remove potential fuel
material overloading and improve the existing timber stand conditions. Such activities would involve
heavy equipment activities along dominantly pre-existing skid trails. Activities such as grapple piling,
mechanical fuel treatments and commercial thin are all expected to impact soils based on equipment
activities in those units (Table 3.40).
Approximately 10,049 acres of Fuels and Wildlife acres are proposed for treatment under both
Alternatives 2 and 3. Such activities are anticipated to remove understory vegetative concerns and
enhance wildlife habitat along with reducing the potential for a large natural fire to occur which may
remove standing vigorous healthy tree stands. In both Alternatives 2 and 3, approximately 5,563 acres of
precommercial thinning are proposed. Such activities would be completed by hand saw with slash hand
pile, and/or lop and scatter thus would not involve heavy equipment. Both Alternatives 2 and 3 propose
261 acres of proposed timber harvest along with prescribed fire on COE lands while Alternatives 2 and 3
both recommend a fuel reduction by prescribed fires on COE lands that does not involve timber harvest
activities. Finally, Alternatives 2 and 3 both propose grapple piling on COE lands to deal with fuel
concerns. No harvest activities are to occur in these areas (Table 3.40).
The burning prescriptions under Alternatives 2 and 3 were designed to provide only the fire intensity
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 94 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

needed to achieve the vegetative management objectives. Direct effects resulting from underburning can
result in soil heating and associated soil impacts such as loss of organic matter, impacts to soil organisms
and creation of water repellency. The potential for these impacts are minimized because the burning
prescriptions for this project were designed for low to moderate fire intensity and would be implemented
when soil moisture levels are high. Typically, burning is scheduled when the moisture in the lower duff
layers is high enough so that the fire does not consume those layers, which insulate the soil from surface
heating (DeBano 2000). Burn intensity would not reach the levels associated with nutrient loss through
volatilization. Nutrients would be released from burned materials and made available for new vegetation.
If temperatures are hot enough during prescribed burns Nitrogen (N) may be lost into the atmosphere
(KNF 2001). If the soil is moist when burning occurs, much of the volatilized nitrogen would be
retained in the soil. When soils have adequate moisture conditions to retain their biological, chemical
and physical integrity, effects from the loss of forest floor can be minimized (Barnett 1989; Frandsen
and Ryan 1985; Hungerford et al. 1991; McNabb and Cromack 1990). Prescribed pile burning could
potentially remove woody debris that would otherwise provide nutrient to the soil as the decay
process occurs (Page-Dumroese et al. 2006). Hence, burning when soil moisture content is high helps
to maintain both coarse woody debris requirements.
Although a small portion of the nutrients would be lost through leaching, most of the nutrients would
remain attached to or between the soil particles on-site. The re-introduction of fire in the analysis area is
consistent with the ecological understanding of these forest types (Arno 1996). Positive impacts may
result in a short-term (1 to 2 years) increase in plant-available nutrients (Choromanska and Deluca 2001;
Hart et al. 2005; Certini 2005). Additionally, MacKenzie et al. (2006) found that light to moderate fire
effects may maintain higher nutrient availability in the long-term with the positive influences from
charcoal. Therefore, implementation of an action alternative containing post-harvest burns is not expected
to adversely impact nutrient cycling in the analysis area. This is supported by Forest Soil Productivity
Monitoring (refer to the Soil and Water Project File).
NUTRIENT CYCLING
Forest ecosystems have evolved with a continual flux of coarse woody debris (CWD). Coarse woody
debris is defined as woody material greater than 3.0 inches in diameter, and is derived from tree limbs,
boles and roots in various stages of decay (Graham et al. 1994; Brown et al. 2003). CWD performs many
physical, chemical and biological functions in the forest ecosystems. Physically, it protects the forest floor
and mineral soil from erosion and mechanical disturbances. CWD disrupts airflow and provides shade,
which insulates and protects new forest growth. In moist forest types, it can be a seedbed and nursery area
for new conifer seedlings. CWD also has significant water holding capacity, making it an important
source of moisture for vegetation during dry periods. This decaying woody debris provides nutrients,
especially sulfur, phosphorus and nitrogen, necessary for new plant growth. CWD also hosts
ectomycorrhize, micro-organisms that play an important role in the uptake of nutrients and water by
woody plants (Graham et al. 1994).
The importance of soil organic matter (duff layer) is indispensable to productivity and the ecological
function of soils (Brady and Weil 2002). The organic component contains large reserve of nutrients and
carbon, and typically contains the majority of microbial activity within the soil column. Forest soil
organic matter influences many critical ecosystem processes such as formation of soil structure, which in
turn influences soil water infiltration rates and soil water holding capacity. Soil organic matter is also the
primary location of nutrient recycling and humus formation, which enhances soil cation exchange and
overall soil fertility.
Nitrogen (N) is the most limiting nutrient in forest ecosystems and is almost totally dependent on
microbial action by way of both symbiotic and nonsymbiotic N fixation. Except where nitrogen fixing
plants are abundantly present such as alder, most N acquisition in forests comes from non-symbiotic
fixation that depends on organic matter (Harvey et al. 1989). Another group of microorganisms that
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 95 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

depends on soil organic matter and is important to a conifer’s ability to acquire nutrients such as nitrogen
is the ectomycorrhizae fungi associated with roots. Using ectomycorrhizae fungi as a bioindicator of
healthy productive forest soils, Graham et al. (1994) developed conservative recommendations for leaving
CWD after timber harvesting to ensure organic matter will be left to maintain long-term soil productivity.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct, Indirect and Cumulative Effects
Alternative 1 does not propose any new management activities. Therefore, no direct, indirect or
cumulative effects to nutrient cycling could result from Alternative 1. Nutrient cycling would continue at
present rates until a natural disturbance occurs.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
A direct impact from management activities in Alternatives 2 and 3 would be the removal of woody
material from proposed timber harvest units. The removal of all or most of the organic material (both duff
layers and CWD) from a site can cause temporary nutrient deficits that may affect physical and biological
soil conditions (Brady and Weil 2002; Graham et al. 1994; Brown et al. 2003). To avoid this, it is
important to maintain both fine and CWD on managed sites, especially regeneration harvest units where
most of the organic matter is removed (Graham et al. 1994; Brown et al. 2003). Allowing the
accumulation and decomposition of a range of sizes of woody debris maintains both short-term and longterm soil productivity. The different decomposition rates provide for the slow, continual release of
nutrients.
This project was designed to provide for a continuous supply of woody material based on
recommendations from Graham et al. (1994) and Brown et al. (2003). In harvest stands where more of the
overstory is being removed, each activity area has been assigned a habitat-specific retention level for
CWD (Table 3.41). In both regeneration and stand improvement units with underburn, broadcast burn, or
jackpot pile activities, post-harvest stands would remain fully stocked, which would provide for yearly
nutrient inputs through litter fall (Brady and Weil 2002) and long-term CWD as a result of future blowdown and decadence. Therefore, these units would meet the CWD requirements left on the ground
following harvest activity. It should be noted that currently under the KNFP, the required CWD tons per
acre to be retained only applies to regeneration harvest activities. In stand improvement units such as
commercial thins future CWD is expected to result from natural events such as blow-over, root rot and
beetle kill.
Table 3.41 Recommended Levels of CWD (> 3’ diameter) for Timber Treatments Units
FOREST TYPE

VRU(S)

TONS ACRE^

Warm Dry

1-3

5 to 20

Warm Moist /
Cool Moist

4-11

10 to 30

UNIT(S)*

1A, 2, 3, 3C, 9, 10, 11, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 33, 34, 44, 45A, 45B, 46,
54, 73T, 80, 81, 82, 141, 142, 143A, 158, 158A, 188S, 193, 195,
214, 219, 220, 367, 367A, 368, 368A, 368B, 368C, and 368
6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 14A, 36, 39, 40, 41, 47, 51, 52A, 53, 59, 61, 62,
62A, 62B, 64, 64A, 64B, 68, 69, 70, 70T, 71, 72, 74T, 75, 144S,
144T, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 159A, 170, 185, 185N, 188, 190A,
207, 208, 362, 362A, 362B, 362C, 363, 364, 365, 366, and 369

*Some units may be listed under more than one Forest Type based on multiple habitat types being present in the unit.
^It should be noted that the biophysical setting CWD values should be looked at as a local estimation and are dependent on local precipitation
levels and vary across the KNF from north to south.

Coarse wood provides micro-sites for microbial activity, retains carbon on-site, and moderates soil
moisture (Graham et al. 1994; Brown et al. 2003). Alternatives 2 and 3 propose the removal of vegetation
through timber harvest and burning. Soil productivity would be maintained through retention of CWD at
levels recommended in Graham et al. (1994) and Brown et al. (2003). Maintaining CWD at the levels
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 96 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

identified in these guidelines would ensure that both short-term and long-term soil productivity is
maintained. Therefore, implementation of either of the action alternatives is not expected to adversely
impact nutrient cycling in the analysis area.
Cumulative Effects
Cumulative effects are the result of all the impacts that past, current and reasonably foreseeable activities
have on a resource. A summary of activities are listed in Chapter 3 of the DEIS. The results of past
activities have resulted in the “Existing Condition” described previously. The anticipated effects from
proposed activities were then added to the existing condition and described in the section titled Analysis
Methods, Detrimental Soil Disturbance. The sum of the existing condition (including past actions) and the
direct and indirect effects of proposed actions combined with current and reasonably foreseeable actions
result in the cumulative effects described in this section.
The geographic bounds of analysis area for consideration of cumulative effects consist of the same
activity areas analyzed used in existing condition, direct and indirect effects. This is appropriate because
soil productivity is spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect productivity in another
location. The activity areas are delineated as directed by FSM R-1 Supplement No. 2500-99-1.
The temporal scale is dependent on the issue being addressed with no one scale being appropriate for all
issues. The analysis may need to evaluate the effects of proposed management over all seasons for several
days, years and even decades with regards to soils. This is complicated by data constraints that require
constant monitoring to detect change – though data is often insufficient to identify even trends or
trajectories of change until the impact is large enough or has been occurring for some time. Furthermore,
there is often a lag between some actions and the observed effect. This is particularly true for soils. This
analysis strives toward an integrated approach to soil processes and function to project future trends in
response to proposed management options to the best abilities.
CURRENT VERSUS HISTORIC MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
There are marked differences between past and current land management practices and policies. The
evolution of land management practices is the result of science, technology, ongoing monitoring actions,
and changing public values. The earliest harvest activities within the analysis area were completed by
horse logging, railway, logging chutes, Shay locomotives and Holt tractors. Such activities involved
harvesting the biggest, most valuable trees and leaving the other trees on-site. Logging systems were
selected primarily by the least expensive method to transport trees from the forest to the mill. Tractor
skidding was typically used and trails and landings were not minimized. Harvest on steeper slopes, at
times, involved stair-step excavated trails (i.e. jammer roads). In addition to harvest activities, fuel
reduction and site preparation for natural regeneration or planting many times consisted of dozer piling.
Many of these practices led to excess soil disturbance and increased the risk of erosion.
Over the last 20 years, impacts to soil and water resources from logging activities have been significantly
reduced because of BMPs, the Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS), and changes in science, technology,
etc. Based on research studies, current BMPs and INFS riparian habitat conservation areas (RHCAs) can
reduce sediment delivery to streams compared with historical practices (Lee et al. 1997; USDA Forest
Service 1995). Harvest methods and removal of timber products from the National Forest changed
substantially over time. Modern timber harvest prescriptions and design emphasize desired conditions of
the forest after timber harvest. This often results in the retention of various amounts of trees in a postharvest stand to address objectives that may include seed production, shelter for the site, watershed
objectives, soil productivity, wildlife, and others. Elements of modern harvest prescriptions that address
specific resource concerns include retention of snags and down wood for soil nutrition, minimizing the
number of skid trails, and maintaining sediment filtering vegetation in riparian areas near lakes and
streams. Jammer roads and dozer piling rarely occur.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 97 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

Forest BMPs currently incorporated into timber harvest activities include some of the following:
• Reduce impacts to sensitive soils based on season of operations or equipment use.
• Use excavator for mechanized slash piling and fire line construction.
• Operate equipment over a slash mat where feasible.
• Limit logging to dry conditions (less than 18% soil moisture) or during winter when the ground is
frozen.
• Use existing skid trails and landings where feasible.
• Avoid skidding on unstable slopes and slopes that exceed 40% unless not causing excessive erosion
(State of Montana BMPS Section IV.B).
• Units 2, 2B, 3, 7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 24, 26, 64, 70T, 73T, 74T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196,
305, 307, 311, 318, 319, 327, 328, 330, 331, 334, 335, 339, 340, 344, 345, 346, 347, 349, and 350
require harvest operations in winter based on soil concerns. Similarly, winter tractor (WT) operations
are recommended in Unit COE6 to avoid exceeding 15% DSD following harvest activities.
• Provision C64 is recommended in those units where WT operations based on soil related issues are in
place.
• Rehabilitate, scarify, reseed and waterbar project areas deemed necessary upon completion.
• Space skid trails 75 to 125 feet apart.
• Ensure that enough coarse woody debris is left to sustain long term soil productivity while still
meeting fuel reduction objectives.
• Removal of slash to landing using whole tree yarding.
• Using excavators instead of dozers for slash piling.
• Reduce erosion and sedimentation through timber harvest unit design.
• Excluding RHCAs from harvest and equipment entry.
• Limit operations during high moisture conditions.
• Determining the proper log retrieval system for the timber harvest unit slope to protect from
degradation of water quality or soil productivity.
• Light intensity burns following harvest operations.
In 1995, the KNFP was amended to include INFS management direction (USDA Forest Service 1995).
The implementation of INFS gave greater protection to soil and water resources in riparian areas adjacent
to streams, lakes and wetlands. INFS gives riparian dependent resources priority over other resources in
RHCAs. RHCAs are no “lock out” zones, activities that occur in them either benefit the riparian area and
associated aquatic features or, at a minimum, do not slow the rate of recovery within the riparian area.
ONGOING and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
In the following discussion, the effects of past, current and/or reasonably foreseeable activities are
considered cumulatively with activities proposed with this project. The effects were either described as
not contributing effects, contributing indiscernible effects, or having measureable effects on water
resources.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There is an estimated 910 acres of Forestwide Fuel units which have been slashed in preparation for
underburning between 2013 and 2015. These three units (FWF545; FWF536 and FWF52403) have all
been hand-slashed and would not involve heavy equipment activities. Additionally, there is an expected
765 acres of proposed Forestwide Fuel acres which is likely to be treated should the no action
(Alternative 1) be selected. These units include: FWF545; FWF536; FWF53404; and FWF589.
Associated light, short-duration burning that does not consume the entire duff layer does not strongly
affect soils. Duff acts as an insulator, protecting the soil from excessive heating. As a result no impacts to
soil conditions are expected to occur.
It is expected that personal firewood collection would occur throughout the analysis area. Such activities
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 98 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

would not create additional ground disturbance or remove enough vegetation to affect soil productivity
and therefore would not contribute additional effects to soil resources.
State of Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) Harvest Activities
The DNRC plans on completing approximately 198 acres of regeneration harvest operations over the next
10 years of time. Such activities are planned to be mostly tractor operations. Some of the related soil
disturbance activities expected to occur on DNRC lands would include soil compaction along skid trails,
roads and firelines. Activities on state, Plum Creek Timber Company and DNRC lands would have no
effect on soils in the analysis area because soil productivity effects are spatially static and productivity in
one location does not affect productivity in another location.
Blowdown Salvage
It is expected that there would be salvage of blown-down trees within the analysis area. Treatment acres
are not expected to exceed 20 acres per year over the next 10 years. If blowdown were to occur, proper
analysis would be conducted for any potential harvest activities. As a result, related soil disturbance
would be limited to existing trails, roads and firelines. Therefore, no additional detrimental soil
disturbance is expected within the activity areas. Some of the salvage is likely to occur outside of the
units treated under the selected alternative; therefore, any such impacts would not be additive activity
areas analyzed in this decision.
Precommercial Thinning
An estimated 760 acres of precommercial thinning is anticipated to occur within the analysis area within
the Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek drainages over the next five years. Ongoing and reasonably
foreseeable precommercial thinning activities within the analysis area would contribute indiscernible
effects to soils at the analysis area scale. This is because precommercial thinning is done by hand and
there is no additional ground disturbance. In addition, trees removed during thinning projects are left onsite which is beneficial to soils by reducing soil erosion and returning nutrients to the system over time.
Christmas Tree Boughs
Christmas trees/boughs can be harvested for individual use or commercially on NFS land. Each of these
activities requires a permit. These activities are both current and reasonably foreseeable within the
analysis area over the next ten years (approximately 200 acres). This activity does not create additional
ground disturbance or remove enough vegetation to affect soil productivity and therefore would not
contribute additional effects to soil resources.
Noxious Weed Treatments
The control of noxious weeds on NFS land is an ongoing activity that normally occurs within the summer
months. The KNF Invasive Plant Management ROD (USDA 2007) provides direction for noxious weed
control on the District. Noxious weed control is expected to continue over the next ten years. Most
herbicide treatments are conducted along existing roads with very few treatments occurring in timber
harvest units.
Effects of noxious weed control were incorporated into the cumulative effects analysis through
consideration of the effects disclosed in the Herbicide Weed Control EA, a review of the project database,
and professional judgment and personal knowledge of noxious weed control. Approximately 183 acres of
weeds were sprayed in the Cripple Planning Unit (Weeds Project File) in 2010. The findings of this
assessment conclude that ongoing and reasonably foreseeable noxious weed control within the analysis
area would cumulatively contribute indiscernible effects to the soils resource. The level of noxious weed
control within the analysis area is not expected to increase much over the next ten years. All activities
would follow approved application methods as analyzed in the KNF Invasive Plant Management ROD
(2007); therefore no adverse cumulative effects would occur.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities would occur as needed. Effects from wildfire suppression would vary with
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 99 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

location and size of the fire; however suppression activities are expected to follow KNFP direction. Such
activities may include construction of firelines, safety zones and helispots by hand and equipment.
Suppression of wildfires could have measurable effects to soils within the analysis area. These effects
could include soil compaction, displacement and erosion. Due to the unpredictable nature of wildfires,
cumulative effects from future wildfire suppression activities could not be meaningfully quantified in this
document.
Road Management
Routine road maintenance is likely to occur as funds become available and would follow BMPs and INFS
guidelines in order to minimize effects on soil resources. Existing BMPs would be maintained but not all
needed BMPs would be accomplished (i.e. it would be unlikely that existing undersized culverts would be
replaced due to funding concerns, and thus would remain at risk of future failure). Water and sediment
delivery would continue to occur at problem locations and no road storage would take place under the No
Action Alternative. When viewed from a cumulative effects input to soils such activities would result in
such activities as contributing further cumulative effects to soil conditions when viewed at the individual
timber harvest unit.
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, an estimated 9.3 and 8.1 miles of permanent road are proposed to be
constructed on NFS lands. Permanent road management is outside of the activity areas identified for soils
analysis because the permanent road system and administrative sites do not count toward the 15% soil
quality standard. Road management would have no cumulative effects on soils in the analysis areas
because soil productivity effects are spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect
productivity in another location.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance would occur on non-motorized trails in the analysis area as funds become available
to do such work. Maintenance may include brushing; removing blowdown, debris and hazard trees;
repairing or adding waterbars; repairing treads; repairing or replacing signs; and improving vistas. All
such activities involve hand-work and would not include heavy equipment. As a result, routine trail
maintenance would have no effect on soils in the activity areas identified. Administrative sites do not
count toward the 15% standard. In addition, the trails are individually small, scattered across many
watersheds, and not all work would occur in the same year.
Outfitter and Guide Activities
There is one outfitter permit in the analysis area. This activity would have no effect on soils within the
analysis area. This conclusion is based on the limited amount of activity in the past. If camps are proposed
and approved, the outfitter is allowed only two motorized trips per camper year behind gates, one each
season to move in and set up compass and the other to move out. Activities moving in and out of such
camps are restricted to horses and trails. Therefore, disturbance is not expected to cumulatively affect soil
conditions.
Other special use permits include road access to private property, water lines and gravel pit. Such
activities would not add detrimental disturbance to the amounts listed in Table 3.37. The level of special
uses within the analysis area is not expected to change much over the next ten years.
Utility Lines
No additional utility lines are proposed for construction. Therefore, disturbance associated with utility
lines would not count towards the 15% standard individually or within proposed timber harvest units.
Mineral Activities
There are ten gravel pits within the East Reservoir analysis area. Only three of the ten pits are currently
active and still contain materials. Activities on such land areas are not considered a part of the soils
resource to analyze for disturbance values and no additional gravel pits are proposed for construction.
Therefore, disturbance associated with gravel pits would not count towards the 15% standard individually
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 100 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

or within proposed timber harvest units.
Public Uses
Recreational use of the analysis area includes hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, photography, small forest
product gathering (berries, mushrooms, cones, and boughs), Christmas tree cutting, firewood gathering,
driving for pleasure, mountain biking, sightseeing, wildlife viewing, cross-country skiing, snowshoeing,
trapping and snowmobiling. These activities are expected to continue over the next ten years. Because of
increasing numbers of people moving into the local communities, it is expected that some of these activity
levels would increase. Recreational activities would contribute indiscernible effects to soils. This is based
on the fact that these activities are individually small and scattered across many watersheds.
Special Use Permits
There are ten special use authorizations within the East Reservoir analysis area. Such authorizations
consist of authorized roads right-of-ways, water developments and utility corridors. Most road use
permits are short segment roads that were built to access private land/residences from major NFS roads.
Water developments normally consist of spring developments and water transmission lines crossing NFS
lands in need of domestic potable and non-potable waters. Electric and telephone utility corridors are
usually buried in road right-of-ways adjacent to NFS roads. As a result, all such activities would not be
counted towards the 15% DSD and have no impacts on cumulative effects.
Marina
Marina authorization includes access to the Kootenai Lake water body and NFS lands and is also
associated with lodging, guiding, sales, etc. The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping sites
during 2012-2013. This expansion includes 33 new seasonal RV camping sites, a new septic system and
new well. Such activities may also relate to chip sealing approximately 0.9 miles of the access road.
There would be selective tree and vegetative removal which is already associated with proposed Unit 183.
Should this occur, there would be potential soil impacts associated with equipment operations in that area.
It is expected that such operations would be very site-specific and benefit timber stands by removal of
future potential fire and beetle concerns in the East Reservoir Planning Area.
OHV Use
Off-highway vehicle (OHV) use was left off the list of reasonably, foreseeable future activities as
determined under USDA 2001 because it is currently limited only to existing trails and open roads (OHV
Record of Decision and Plan Amendment for Montana, North Dakota, and Portions of South Dakota,
2001). Therefore, no additional disturbance is expected from OHV use because soil productivity effects
are spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect productivity in another location.
Private Property
Activities on private lands would continue especially within the lower Warland Creek drainage basin.
Such activities would include commercial timber harvest, land clearing, home construction, road
construction, septic field installation, water well drilling, livestock grazing and stabilization of migrating
stream banks. Activities on private lands would have no effect on soils in the analysis area because soil
productivity effects are spatially static and productivity in one location does not affect productivity in
another location.
Grazing
There are four grazing allotments in the project area. They are Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse and
Canyon Creek. The Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek have been closed through the administrative closure
process due to declining transitory range, lack of demand and riparian area concerns. Both Cripple Horse
and Canyon Creek have been inactive for ten years. Fivemile is an active allotment that supports 17
cow/calf pair with a grazing season of June 1 to October 15. Much of the grazing is on private lands
owned by the permit holder along Fivemile Creek and upland areas adjacent to Blue Sky Road #6271.
The Warland Creek Allotment has been inactive for 6 years. It would be maintained as a potential grazing
in the foreseeable future.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 101 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SOILS RESOURCES

Only livestock grazing was determined to contribute cumulative effects. Livestock grazing and associated
activities are expected to continue in the analysis area through the operating period of 10 years. Cattle
tend to use existing skid trails and are not expected to increase soil compaction in activity areas by more
than two percent (Kuennen 2003). Those units located within the Fivemile allotment that are more likely
to be impacted by grazing include the following, F1, F1OG, F2, 143A, 144S, 144T, 147, 148, 149, 150
and 311. Those units located within the Warland Creek Allotment that are more likely to be impacted by
grazing include the following, 9, 10, 11, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 14A, 49, 51, 52A, 53, 54, 158, 159A, 306,
307, 348 and 350. Of these units, none are expected to cumulatively exceed the 15% DSD value. As a
result, grazing in combination with the effects of prior management and the proposed activities is not
expected to exceed the threshold of 15% for detrimental soil disturbance in the activity area (Table 3.37).

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
State and Federal Laws and Regulations
The National Forest Management Act (NFMA) requires that all lands be managed to ensure maintenance
of long-term soil productivity, hydrologic function and ecosystem health. All activities proposed are
consistent with this direction. Having a fully stocked stand left on-site to contribute needle-cast and/or
trending toward the CWD guidelines contained in Graham et al. (1994) and Brown et al. (2003) would
assure long-term soil productivity. All activity areas would remain below 15% detrimentally disturbed
soils, RHCAs would be delineated where appropriate, design criteria would be followed, and all
applicable BMPs would be implemented.
FOREST PLAN DIRECTION
The KNFP states that project plans for activities requiring the use of ground-based equipment will
establish standards for the area allocated to skid trails, landings, temporary roads, or similar areas of
concentrated equipment use (USDA Forest Service 1987a). FSM 2500-99-1 establishes guidelines that
limit detrimental soil disturbance to no more than 15% of an activity area. KNFP soil productivity
monitoring results were reviewed throughout this project (Kuennen 2007b; Kuennen 2003; USDA Forest
Service 2003; and USDA Forest Service 1998). The five-year results from 1992–1997 found less than one
percent of the acres surveyed were above the 15% threshold, with 77% of surveyed areas having less than
10% detrimental disturbance. Between 1998–2005, none of the areas surveyed were above the threshold.
Kuennen (2003; 2007c; Kuennen 2007e) compiled all monitoring data to date, which was used as the
basis for soils analysis and specifying design criteria for this project. All management activities would
follow the BMPs outlined in Soil and Water Project Files and would be consistent with KNFP Standards.
The 2011 KNF Monitoring Summary (USDA Forest Service 2011b) states that monitoring between 1991
and 2011 shows that 95 percent of the BMPs implemented during that time were effective. In 2012 the
KNF remonitored 57 timber sales which involved 118 timber sale units and 3,338 timber harvest acres.
Data was collected along 222 transects and 47,042 data points in harvest areas which had been previously
monitored for soil disturbance (1992-2006). All units were resampled at a 95% confidence level (Gier et
al. 2013).
The proposed project is consistent with the goals, objectives, and standards for soil and water resources
set forth in the KNFP because project design criteria and BMPs have been included to protect soil and
water resources. The BMPs include Soil and Water Conservation Practices at a minimum to control nonpoint source pollution and protect soil and water resources from permanent damage. All proposed
treatment units where harvest equipment may disturb soil conditions were field reviewed.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 102 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
This analysis section discloses the potential effects to fish, amphibians, and mollusks and their habitats
from implementing the action alternatives. This discussion includes the no-action alternative for
comparison with the action alternatives.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Clean Water Act
Cripple Horse Creek is a Water Quality Limited Segment (WQLS) (see Water Resources section).
Probable causes include sedimentation and siltation. The water quality limited listing includes all
upstream tributaries to the listed segment. Therefore, the entire Cripple Horse Creek drainage is
considered part of the WQLS.
Endangered Species Act
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973 declares that "...all Federal departments and agencies shall
seek to conserve endangered species and threatened species and shall utilize their authorities in
furtherance of the purposes of this Act." Under the Act, Federal agencies must consult with the Secretary
of the Interior whenever an action authorized by such agency is likely to affect a species listed as
threatened or endangered. Bull trout and white sturgeon are currently the only two listed fish species on
the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) as threatened and endangered, respectively, under the ESA.
Executive Order
Executive Order 12962 mandates disclosure of effects to recreational fishing.
Kootenai National Forest Plan
The Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS) amended the 1987 Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) in
1995 (USDA Forest Service 1995). INFS establishes stream, wetland and landslide-prone area protection
zones called Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) setting standards and guidelines for
managing activities that potentially affect conditions within the RHCAs. Widths of RHCA buffers are
based on current scientific literature that documents them to be adequate to protect streams from nonchannelized sediment inputs and provide for other riparian functions. These riparian functions include
delivery of organic matter, large woody debris (LWD) recruitment and stream shading. INFS also
established riparian management objectives (RMOs) that provide guidance with respect to key habitat
variables (Table 3.42). RMOs as established by INFS as standards for forested systems include pool
frequency, LWD, temperature, and width/depth ratio (W/D). Actions that retard attainment of these
RMOs, whether existing conditions are better or worse than objective values, are inconsistent with INFS.
Table 3.42 - INFS RHCA Buffer Widths
RHCA DEFAULT BUFFER WIDTHS
DESCRIPTION
INFS

FLOW REGIME

Perennial

Perennial Fish Bearing Stream

1

Perennial

Perennial Non-Fish Bearing Stream

2

Wetlands

Lakes, Ponds, and Wetlands > 1 acre

3

Intermittent/Ephemeral
& Wetlands

Intermittent/Ephemeral Non-Fish
Bearing Stream & Wetlands < 1 acre

4

INFS RHCA WIDTH

300 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
150 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
150 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
50 or 100* feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope

The RHCA buffer represented in the chart is for single side of the stream channel. The total length of the buffer would be 2X the listed value.
ERV = Edge of Riparian Vegetation
Priority watersheds have a 100 feet RHCA for Class 4

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 103 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

ANALYSIS AREA
Potentially affected watersheds in the analysis area include Lake Koocanusa and the Kootenai River,
Dunn Creek, Canyon Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland Creek, Five Mile Creek and tributary streams
to these drainages. The project area can be viewed on Map 1 in Chapter 2 at a watershed scale.

ANALYSIS METHODS
Existing conditions were determined through field surveys and review of data sources to develop effects
analysis for fisheries resources in project area watersheds. Effects to fish populations were assessed based
on effects to habitat. This analysis was done to the nearest point of effect for all threatened, endangered
and sensitive species.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
Sensitive species are managed under the authority of the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) and
are administratively designated by the Regional Forester (FSM 2670.5, Tidwell 2008). Threatened and
Endangered species (TES) are under the jurisdiction of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
under the authority of Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act. The Forest Service (FS) is directed to
maintain viable populations of native species and to avoid actions that may trend towards a species
becoming threatened or endangered. Threatened, endangered, and sensitive fish species identified to exist
on the KNF are displayed in Table 3.43. The table includes presence and/or absence of species in the
analysis area.
Table 3.43 – TES Fish Presence in the Analysis Area
STATUS

Threatened
Endangered
Sensitive
Sensitive

SPECIES

PRESENCE in ANALYSIS AREA or
DOWNSTREAM RECEIVING
WATERS

Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus)
White Sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus)
Westslope Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki lewisi)
Western Pearlshell Mussel (Margaritifera Falcata)

Known from Lake Koocanusa
Found only below Kootenai Falls
Known
Known

Data Sources, Methods and Assumption
Libby Ranger District records and the Montana Fisheries Information System (MFISH) were reviewed to
determine current known fish and amphibian distribution in the analysis area. Fisheries surveys conducted
in the past found trout distributed in Dunn Creek, throughout Cripple Horse Creek, and lower Fivemile.
Warland Creek and upper Fivemile Creek have limited fisheries due to their intermittent nature. The
results of genetic analysis in streams above Libby Dam showed that fish where highly hybridized with
non-native rainbows. A genetic sample from Dunn Creek was completed in 2010. The results of this
sample showed that cutthroat were 98% pure westslope and were hybridized with rainbow trout. The
sample site was located in upper Dunn Creek above a known natural fish barrier in the drainage. Due to
this genetic testing, westslope cutthroat from this segment of Dunn Creek will be considered pure strain
for this document. Brook trout also populate the streams making up most the fish within Fivemile Creek
and Cripple Horse Creek above the falls. Non-native rainbows are known from project area streams as
well.
There are three known natural barriers on the mainstems of Canyon Creek (Photo1), Dunn Creek and
Cripple Horse Creek (Photo2). The barriers on Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek are large
waterfalls with roughly 10 and 20 foot drops respectively. There are no fish above the falls in Canyon
Creek and only brook trout are known above the falls in Cripple Horse Creek. The barrier on Dunn Creek
is a steep intermittent segment of stream channel. There are three known culvert barriers in the project
area. Dunn Creek (Photo 3) and Canyon Creek (Photo 4) both have large barrier culverts where US HWY
37 crosses. These large structures are barriers to fisheries migration into the drainages. A third structure is
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 104 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

known from Warland Creek where NFS road 566 crosses the stream (Photo 5).
Photo 1 - Canyon Creek Falls

Photo 2 - Cripple Horse Creek Falls

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 105 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Photo 3 - Fish Barrier on Dunn Creek HWY 37

Photo 4 - Fish Barrier on Canyon Creek HWY 37

Photo 5 – Fish Barrier on Warland Creek 566

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 106 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

FISH POPULATION STATUS
A detailed map of the analysis area can be found in Chapter 2.
Project area streams presently have small populations of westslope cutthroat, coastal rainbow and brook
trout. Genetic surveying found mixed westslope cutthroat and coastal rainbows hybrids, and pure strain
westslope cutthroat in the analysis area. MFISH was queried for species presence within the analysis area.
The MFISH database showed the presence of other native fish from past surveys. Dunn Creek showed the
presence of both longnose dace and sculpin, Cripple Horse Creek had both large scale sucker and
longnose dace; and Fivemile Creek had longnose dace, mountain whitefish and sculpin.
Historical data on fisheries abundance and distribution is limited and dates back to the late 1800s. The
earliest stocking records for streams around Libby are from 1913. There were some 185,000 brook trout
and some unknown number of Yellowstone cutthroat trout released into local waters. The next earliest
recorded planting was 1914 when more Yellowstone cutthroat trout were released. It is important to note
that the next detailed stocking report was from 1936. In the 22 years between stocking records, millions
of brook trout, Yellowstone cutthroat and coastal rainbow trout were brought into the Libby area.
The construction of Libby Dam created numerous problems to native fish. The river above the dam was
wild and had high populations of native fish including westslope cutthroat, bull trout and burbot. The
reservoir created challenges for these fish and as part of the mitigation for the dam, westslope cutthroat
were enhanced and propagated to colonize the reservoir and its tributaries. The mitigation plan from 1968
included chemical treatment (retenone) of streams entering the reservoir by Montana Fish, Wildlife and
Parks (MFWP). The plan called for the removal of “rough” fish to increase the amount of

available habitat for westslope cutthroat. This project was carried out in 1969 and 1970 when
streams were rotenoned along the reservoir corridor. Most of the native fish were removed from
reservoir tributaries. Fish from the reservoir have recolonized analysis area streams but no longer contain
the pure strain westslope genetics. Recent electrofishing surveys show that brook trout were more
successful at colonizing these streams then westslopes. Most of the perennial segments of stream channel
above the Reservoir contain higher concentrations of brook trout then westslope and rainbows combined.
MTFWP no longer stocks westslope cutthroat trout in Lake Koocanusa. The appearance (and food web
take over) by kokanee salmon (landlocked sockeye salmon) made the cutthroat trout fishery infeasible.
The State now stocks triploid rainbows from Canada to create a trophy rainbow trout fishery. The stocked
rainbows are sterile and do not contribute their genetics to fish within the Reservoir and its tributaries.
Bull trout have thrived in past years due in part to the large population of kokanee. The number of bull
trout is high enough in the reservoir that a tag system was in place for the taking of bull trout. However,
in recent years, redd counts in the Elk River have dropped and the taking of bull trout is no longer legal in
the Reservoir.
MFWP continues to plant non-native fish in lakes throughout Lincoln County many of which are
headwaters streams. These fish can migrate downstream which brings them into contact with native
species.
THREATENED, ENDANGERED and PROPOSED FISH SPECIES
White Sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus)
Description of Population and Habitat Status
The white sturgeon is restricted to 168 miles of the Kootenai River between Cora Linn Dam in Canada
and Kootenai Falls in Montana. They migrate freely throughout the area, but are uncommon upstream of
Bonners Ferry, Idaho (Apperson and Anders 1991; Graham 1981). Above Bonners Ferry there are very
few fish, estimated at only 1 to 5 individuals (Graham 1981).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 107 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Operation of Libby Dam is considered the primary cause for the white sturgeon decline (Holton 1980;
Apperson and Anders 1991). Overt or inadvertent harvest of the species by anglers is thought to be
virtually non-existent, and a no-kill harvest regulation is in effect throughout the range of this population.
No activities are proposed that would directly affect potentially inhabited white sturgeon habitat. The
proposed activities are situated over 20 stream miles from Kootenai Falls. No riparian or upland activities
immediately adjacent to sturgeon habitat are proposed and as such the proposed activities would have no
effect on white sturgeon or their habitat.
Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus)
Description of General Population and Habitat Status
Bull trout are native to the upper Columbia River basin in northwest Montana. They require clean, cold,
complex and connected habitat (MTBSG 1998). They have declined by perhaps more than 50% because
of land management practices, expansion of introduced fish, non-sustainable recreational harvest and loss
of habitat connectivity (MTBSG 1998). Forest management, mining and dam operations have adversely
affected spawning and rearing habitat conditions for bull trout in the Kootenai River Section 7
Consultation population. (The middle Kootenai River is that segment of river from Libby Dam down to
Kootenai Falls). Current bull trout habitat is also inhabited by non-native brook trout and lake trout that
threaten the persistence of bull trout by hybridization and interspecific competition. Bull trout, brook trout
and lake trout are (genetically) similar species (falling in the genus Salvelinus). These fish were
historically separated geographically; bull trout in the western side of the continental divide, and brook
trout in the east along the Appalachian Mountains, and lake trout occurring in the Midwest and Canada.
The species are fall spawners and will hybridize with other species in the Salvelinus genus. This
hybridization in bull trout threatens the species throughout its range.
Description of the Population within the Analysis Area
Bull Trout are known from Lake Koocanusa. The fish in the reservoir are migratory and move into
streams for spawning and rearing primarily in the Elk River, Canada. Fivemile Creek in the analysis area
has mention of bull trout use which is anecdotal and from past professional judgment and personnel
communications. However, during numerous electrofishing surveys by Libby Ranger District personnel
and FWS, only large numbers of brook trout (and a few rainbows) were found in the perennial segment of
the stream. Any use of the drainage for spawning by bull trout would result in hybrid fish and the lack of
actual evidence of bull trout in the drainage leads to the conclusion that bull trout do not use the drainage
for spawning and rearing. An occasional fish may migrate into the system but conditions for bull trout in
the drainage do not contain suitable habitat. Therefore, for this document, bull trout will not be considered
present in tributary streams and not affected by the proposed project.
SENSITIVE FISH SPECIES
Westslope Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki lewisi)
Description of General Population and Habitat Status
The distribution and abundance of westslope cutthroat trout has declined from historic levels across its
range, which includes western Montana's Kootenai River drainage. Westslope cutthroat trout persist in
only 27% of their historic range in Montana. Due to hybridization, genetically pure populations are
present in only 2.5% of that range (May et al. 2003). Hybridization causes loss of genetic purity of the
population through introgression (Backcrossing of hybrids populations to introduce new genes into a wild
population.). Some of the remaining genetically pure populations of westslope cutthroat trout are found
above fish passage barriers that protect them from hybridization, but isolate them from other populations.
Westslope cutthroat trout are common on the KNF and many genetically pure populations still persist
although hybridization and displacement is still a major concern.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 108 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Westslope cutthroat trout exhibit both migratory and resident life histories on the KNF. These fish are
capable of traveling over 100 miles on spawning migrations. Migratory fish typically rear in their natal
streams until their third year, and a length of 7-9 inches, when they migrate to either a larger stream or
lake to rear to maturity. Resident fish are significantly smaller than their migratory counterparts. Sexual
maturity is attained at either age 4 or 5, length of 4-16 inches at which time they migrate back to their
natal streams to spawn. Westslopes can reach lengths in excess of 20 inches and weigh in excess of three
pounds. Common lifespan for this species is seven years. Westslope cutthroat trout feed primarily on
aquatic insects in streams and larger zooplankton in lakes.
Habitat fragmentation and the subsequent isolation of populations is a concern for westslope cutthroat
trout due to the increased risk of local and general extinctions. The probability that one population in any
locality will persist depends on habitat quality and proximity to other populations (Rieman and McIntyre
1993).
Description of the Population within the Analysis Area
Historically, pure strain westslope cutthroat trout were likely distributed throughout the mainstems and
headwaters of project area streams. Genetic testing on Dunn Creek occurred in 2010 on a likely pure
population of westslopes. The data found 98% pure westslope cutthroat trout hybridized with rainbow
trout. The population of westslopes in upper Dunn Creek will be considered pure strain for this document
due to the fact that this population of fish is isolated from upstream migrants and its small size. Genetic
exchange is not occurring from downstream waters. A catastrophic event could remove fish from the
basin. There are no other pure populations of westslope cutthroat in the analysis area.
No additional population data exists for streams in the analysis area. Based on electrofishing data, as well
as results of previous genetic analysis completed on analysis area streams, westslope cutthroat are only
known to be present in Dunn Creek. Streams in the analysis area above Libby Dam have been chemically
treated by MFWP and recolonized by non-native fish and westslope hybrids.
There is insufficient data to determine growth and survival rates of fish in the analysis area. Genetic
analysis has proved the existence of pure westslope cutthroat in Dunn Creek and hybrid westslope
cutthroat x redband rainbow trout throughout the remainder of the analysis area streams. Since growth
rates have not been determined in the analysis area, this factor is largely rated based on the survival
aspect. Removal of barriers to fish passage facilitates genetic exchange with other westslopes but also
facilitates movement by introduced salmonids, which can permit hybridization and interspecific
competition. The remaining culvert barriers in the analysis area seem not to be negatively affecting
westslope cutthroat.
DESIRABLE NATIVE AND NON-NATIVE FISH SPECIES
Brook Trout (Salvelinus fontinalis)
Description of General Population and Habitat Status
The brook trout is widespread across the KNF. This species is endemic to the Eastern United States and is
an invasive in western streams. They directly compete with native fish for food and habitat, and in some
instances completely replace native fish. This is especially true with westslope cutthroat in lower gradient
warmer water streams. This does not seem to be the case on the KNF where brook trout and westslopes
seem to come to some sort of equilibrium. The brook trout is closely related to native bull trout and can
interbreed with them. Hybrid brook/bull trout are usually sterile and do not contribute to the genetics of
either bull trout or brook trout. Historic stocking of brook trout started around the turn of the century on
the KNF. This fish was widely planted in streams and lakes and still maintains viable populations on the
Forest in many watersheds.
Brook trout are fall spawners with spawning normally occurring between September and November. Fry
emerge in the spring after high flows and live up to five years (Scott and Crossman 1973). Sexual
maturity comes at age three; however in some cases individual fish may become mature as early as two.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 109 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Spawning occurs mostly in headwater streams but can also occur in lower gradient streams and lakes with
sandy substrate with spring upwelling (Scott and Crossman 1973).
Brook trout exhibit a large number of migratory patterns. Most fish live in a particular area for the
majority of their lives. However, some exhibit both fluvial and adfluvial migrations both for spawning
and for finding new home ranges. It is not uncommon for these fish to colonize an entire drainage in a
short time period if no barriers to upstream migration are present.
Brook trout are considered to be a desirable non-native species from the perspective of sport fishing.
From the perspective of native fish species diversity, brook trout are considered a threat due to
hybridization and competition for food and habitat.
Rainbow Trout (Coastal strain) (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
Description of General Population and Habitat Status
The rainbow trout is a widely distributed western North America native salmonid that is closely related to
the interior redband rainbow. Rainbows can be divided into two forms - the adfluvial rainbow that
annually migrates between a lake and tributary river in order to complete its lifecycle, and the fluvial
rainbow that remains in a river system throughout its life. The potential for both exists in the project area.
The historic range of the rainbow trout included freshwaters west of the Rocky Mountains, extending
from northern California to northern British Columbia, Canada. Presently there are a large number of
populations of rainbows in the Upper Kootenai Subbasin, they occur in numerous drainages and lakes on
the Libby Ranger District.
Rainbows are spring spawners, March-June, (Scott and Crossman 1973). Fry emerge from the streambottom approximately two months after spawning and begin a stream residence that may last one year to a
lifetime (Scott and Crossman 1973). Adfluvial and migratory fluvial rainbow juveniles will typically
move downstream to their ancestral lake or river after one to three years of residence in the headwaters.
Sexual maturity typically occurs at three to five years except in cold or hot climates where life expectancy
is shortened.
Rainbow trout have been found in watersheds as small as three square miles, but the subspecies is
generally known from far more productive waters where piscivory supports fish up to 35 pounds (Scott
and Crossman 1973).
The widespread culture and stocking of coastal rainbows (as described above) or hybrid rainbow,
steelhead and rainbow, throughout the range of other native trout species has lead to substantial losses of
the native genotypes (Behnke 1992).
Description of the Population within the Analysis Area
Historically, it is assumed that only native redband rainbows were present and distributed throughout the
Kootenai River system on Libby Ranger District. The current population of costal rainbows is probably
composed of a resident component that rears and spawns in the Kootenai River and Lake Koocanusa and
lower segments of other streams (where migration is not blocked) in the project area.
Sculpin (Cottus spp.)
The sculpin is a wide-ranging species found across the Western North America. Generally, this small fish
is found in riffle areas among rocks of cold, clear streams, but it can be found along gravel beaches of
lakes. They spawn in the spring with females lay eggs under rocks and eggs guarded by males. They feed
on a variety of aquatic invertebrates. They may attain lengths of four inches or slightly more, but most
adults are two to three inches in length. Sculpin are a prey species for other fish including salmonids.
District electrofishing confirmed the presence of sculpin in the analysis area. These fish are desirable in
the fact that they are a natural component of healthy streams in the analysis area.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 110 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Mountain Whitefish (Prosopium williamsoni)
Description of General Population and Habitat Status
The mountain whitefish is widespread across the KNF. Their numbers however are only high in the
Kootenai Rivers system. They are a native fish that seeks cold, clean water and is almost entirely an
insectivore. These fish normally become sexually mature between the ages of three and four. Spawning
occurs in the late fall or early winter. Life span of the mountain whitefish can be upwards of fifteen years
(Scott and Crossman 1973).
The mountain whitefish has both fluvial and adfluvial life histories. Fish in lakes will seek out streams for
spawning. Numerous fish leave the Kootenai River and spawn in the tributary drainages.
Past electrofishing surveys found whitefish in streams above and below the Libby Dam in the Project
area.
OTHER NATIVE FISH SPECIES
Largescale Sucker (Catostomus macrocheilus)
The large-scale sucker is native to the Pacific Northwest, occurring from British Columbia south to
Oregon. It is widespread in the Columbia River system. It occurs in the slower-moving portions of rivers
and streams, and in lakes. Largescale suckers spawn in the spring in shallow water over sandy areas of
streams or the sandy or small gravel shoals of lakes. Females may produce up to 20,000 adhesive eggs.
The young feed upon small zooplankton until they become bottom dwellers. Then they feed on benthic
aquatic invertebrates, diatoms, and other plant material. This species reaches a length of up to 24 inches
and weighs of up to seven pounds in parts of their range. The young probably serve as forage for larger
predaceous fishes and fish-eating birds.
The large-scale sucker is known from only Cripple Horse Creek in the analysis area below the barrier
falls.
Longnose Dace (Rhinichthys cataractae)
The longnose dace is widely distributed across north central North America from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. They prefer the riffle areas of streams, but can be found along the shoreline of lakes where the
substrate is composed of small rubble. It is a benthic species, living among the stones on the bottoms of
streams. Longnose dace spawn in late spring/early summer on gravel bottoms of shallow riffles. Eggs,
about 400 to 3,300 per female, are adhesive and are scattered on the substrate. The food of this species is
primarily aquatic insect larvae. They reach a size of three to six inches. The adults and fry serve as food
for a variety of game fish.
The longnose dace was found in streams above and below Libby Dam.
AMPHIBIANS
Threatened and Endangered Species: No threatened or endangered amphibians are known or suspected
on the KNF.
The western toad (Bufo boreas) is the only toad listed as sensitive in Region 1. The boreal toad was once
common and widespread in western Montana but now is uncommon. The toad is however, still common
on the KNF and found in many locations on the Libby Ranger District. Adult western toads are largely
terrestrial and found in a variety of habitats from valley bottoms to high elevations; they breed in lakes,
ponds, and slow streams, where they prefer shallow areas with mud bottoms. Breeding and egg laying in
western Montana usually takes place one to three months after snowmelt, and tadpoles are typically two
to three months old before they metamorphose. At metamorphosis, hundreds of small toads, many with
the tail remnants still present, can be found on the shores of breeding ponds (Reichel and Flath 1995).
Past surveys found the boreal toad to be present within the project area. Surveys showed the toad to be
well dispersed and fairly abundant.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 111 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

The long-toed salamander (Ambystoma macrodactylum) is the most common salamander in western
Montana. They are found in a variety of habitats from sagebrush to alpine; typically breed in ponds or
lakes, usually those without fish. Adults go to the breeding ponds immediately after snowmelt, and in
western Montana, are usually the first amphibians to breed. Following breeding, they move to adjacent
uplands. Eggs hatch in three to six weeks and metamorphosis takes two to14 months (Reichel and Flath
1995).
The long-toed salamander is known to occur in the analysis area. A total of nine sites were surveyed since
2004. Not all sites in the analysis area were surveyed but enough were located to prove that the long-toed
salamander is the most wide spread amphibian in the East Reservoir area.
The Pacific tree frog (also known as the Pacific chorus frog) (Pseudacris regilla) is only regularly found
in water during the breeding period in spring. They announce their presence during this time by calling
frequently at night and sporadically throughout the day. Following breeding, they move into adjacent
uplands and are rarely seen. In western Montana, they breed in temporary ponds in lower elevation forests
and intermountain valleys shortly after snowmelt. Eggs hatch in two to three weeks and tadpoles take
eight to ten weeks to metamorphose (Reichel and Flath 1995).
The Pacific tree frog was found only at one site.
The Columbia spotted frog (Rana luteiventris) is the most common frog in western Montana and is very
common on the KNF. Spotted frogs are regularly found at water’s edge in or near forest openings and
wetlands at or near treeline.
Breeding takes place in lakes, ponds (temporary and permanent), springs, and occasionally backwaters or
beaver ponds in streams. All egg masses in a particular pond are often found in the same location at the
margin of the pond. Young and adult frogs often disperse into marsh and forest habitats, but are not
usually found far from open water (Reichel and Flath 1995).
Surveying found the spotted frog within the analysis area. The spotted frog was found in available habitat
and is probably understated in past surveys. The spotted frog likely lives in all mainstems of project area
streams and maintains fairly high densities.
MOLLUSKS
Western Pearlshell Mussel (Margaritifera falcata)
The species range extends from Alaska and British Columbia south to California and east to Nevada,
Wyoming, Utah and Montana. In Montana, it is the only coldwater trout stream mussel, and the only
native mussel found on the west-side of the continental divide. It is an old-lived species with average life
span of 60-70 years, though it can live to more than 100 years. The shell is elongate, compressed, dark
colored and slightly concave on the ventral edge, erosion marks are frequently prominent on the umbo
region. It has weakly developed teeth and purple nacre. The normal size is 50 to 85 mm with larger older
specimens surpassing 10 cm.
Past surveying for the western pearlshell found them present in Fivemile Creek. The species was observed
numerous times during other surveying of the stream. Although some impacts to the population have
likely occurred, the species seems to be thriving in the drainage.

WATERSHED EXISTING CONDITION as RELATED to AQUATIC HABITAT
The proposed project has the potential to affect both native and nonnative fish species as well has western
pearlshell mussels. This analysis will center on their habitat needs.
This section compliments the existing condition narrative in the watershed and soils section of this
document. In an effort to minimize repetition, only select watershed condition information is
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 112 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

summarized as it relates directly to the local threatened, endangered and sensitive fish populations.
Mussels require similar habitat functions so the 19 indicators will apply to them as well. For a
thorough review of the existing hydrologic condition, the reader is referred to the Hydrology
Resources Section of this document. There are 19 habitat indicators in the FWS bull trout matrix
(FWS 1998) used to evaluate effects on fish species, starting with the baseline condition. The
following discussion addresses those 19 habitat characteristics.
Habitat Indicators
Existing conditions for each habitat indicator are described and rated at a single scale the Columbia River
Basin (CRB) 6th and 7th code HUCs. Stream habitat data exists from the analysis area with the bulk of the
information on habitat and species composition. The 19 habitat indicators are good examples of high
quality habitat for native salmonids.
1) Temperature - Extensive riparian harvest began on National Forest System (NFS) lands around the
turn of the century and slowed after the 1910 fires. Past timber management within the East Reservoir
area included both one and two sided riparian harvest. The drainages in the analysis area also have
moderately high road densities and many roads within RHCAs. Some temperature data exists on Warland
Creek and Cripple Horse Creeks. Libby Ranger District deployed a Hobo Temp in Warland Creek for one
season and installed an Aqua Rod pressure transducer in Cripple Horse Creek in 2004. Graph 1 shows the
latest temperature data from Cripple Horse Creek Aqua Rod. This graph is consistent with other data
showing the 160C limit being exceeded for a short time in the summer months. Warland Creek shows a
similar trend with water temperatures reaching this threshold. Warland Creek is intermittent where the
Hobo Temp was installed. No other temperature data was collected by Libby Ranger District on streams
within the analysis area. Temperature within Warland Creek is representative of other drainages within
the analysis area. Other streams in the project area have similar orientations and drainage size.
Graph 1 – Cripple Horse Aqua Rad Temperatures

Cripple Horse 2010

20
15
10
5
0
12-Feb

12-Mar

12-Apr

12-May

12-Jun

12-Jul

12-Aug

2) Sediment - The RMO for pool quantity was not met in most measured reaches (Table 3.46). The
existing road system contains many stream crossings and overall the amount of roading within the
analysis area is considered moderately high (Table 3.45). Land management has been moderate to high
throughout the analysis area. A portion of the analysis area has been established as shelter watershed
within the Cripple Horse drainage. These drainages will protect water quality from sediment inputs and
maintain natural stream functions. The removal of beavers has changed sediment transport. Beaver dams
are known to trap and transport sediment slowly downstream. Without these sediment traps any sediment
produced from upstream is transported downstream filling habitat including pools. However, sediment
from upstream waters above the dam will be transported into Lake Koocanusa. These sediments will be
trapped in the Reservoir and not impact downstream waters. Dunn Creek flows into the Kootenai River
below the dam. The Kootenai River is considered a sediment starved system below Libby Dam and does
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 113 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

not show signs of excessive sedimentation on the KNF.
Macroinvertebrates have been collected in project area streams beginning in 1998. Macroinvertebrates
are good indicators of water quality in streams and show changes in communities when factors outside the
natural range of variability occur. Sediment affects water quality directly and macroinvertebrate
communities change to match the conditions with a different assemblage of insects that thrive in differing
water quality. BCIs (Biotic Community Index) can be used to determine water quality in streams and is a
good indicator to determine if a drainage is being affected from upstream impacts. Figures 1 through 4
show the condition trends at the sites. BCI numbers <70 indicate poor water quality, while numbers from
70-80 indicates fair water quality, numbers from 80-90 indicates good water quality, and numbers >90
indicates excellent water quality. The majority of measured sites have water quality ranging from good to
excellent. Only 4 samples fell into the poor category.
Figure 1 - Fivemile Creek BCI

Figure 2 - Cripple Horse BCI

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 114 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Figure 3 – North Fork Canyon

Figure 4 - Warland Creek BCI

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 115 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

3) Nutrients and Contaminants - As mentioned previously, the existing road system consists of many
stream crossings and has moderately high road densities in the analysis area. The road network is a
channel where products from upland activities can be routed directly into stream channels. Most roads
occur high in the drainages on intermittent channels. Because of the intermittent flow in these drainages
nutrients and contaminants can be moderated. However, with the existing road densities and densities of
stream crossings the probability exists where overland flow could directly input nutrients and
contaminants into live streams. Streams in the analysis area are showing signs of high sediment loads.
Cripple Horse Creek’s listing as a WQLS has been in part due to sedimentation.
4) Physical Barrier - As described previously, there are three barrier culverts in the analysis area. The
structures on HWY 37 have been in place since the construction of Libby Dam and HWY 37 in the mid1960s. The structure on Dunn Creek is a large pipe with a long steep gradient and a drop at the outlet. The
culvert on Canyon Creek is a long, undersized culvert placed at a high gradient, with a drop at the outlet.
These State of Montana Department of Transportation culverts are restricting migration of fish. Their
management is outside FS decision space and therefore beyond the scope of this project.
The culvert on Warland Creek Road 566 lies on NFS and is considered as part of this baseline. The
culvert is undersized and perched restricting aquatic organism passage. Warland Creek in this area is
intermittent. Fishery use of the stream is dependent on water conditions from year to year. The use of the
drainage is probably only for spawning and small rearing segment in the upper drainage. It is likely that
fish trapped in the drainage over the summer would not survive due to dewatering of the stream channel.
The analysis area also contains 3 natural water fall fish barriers. These structures will continue to act as
barriers to migration. The falls are mentioned previously, and will be considered part of the natural
character of those watersheds.
5) Substrate - Inherently stable streams have large stable streambed substrates that are not mobile
under most flows. If large streambed material becomes mobile they only move short distances before
becoming stable again. Gravel substrates are inherently unstable. Large flows could easily move
these substrates, which can cause significant bedload movement. The dominant substrate size class
varies by reach within the drainages. Most of the upper drainages have cobble/boulder substrate
while downstream reaches are mostly cobble. The drainages in the project area are fairly stable due
to their cobble dominated substrate.
6) Large Woody Debris - Large woody debris (LWD) was measured as part of fisheries habitat surveys
(Table 3.47). All measured reaches met the RMO for LWD, although in the 1970s and early 1980s
fisheries improvement work included the removal of LWD. In the early 1990s, LWD was placed back
into upper Cripple Horse Creek with mules and in Canyon Creek by hand as part of fisheries mitigation
for the Dry Fork Fire. This LWD placement was not anchored into the banks. Most of the LWD was
transported downstream to other areas and is creating some small amount of habitat. Past timber
management activities utilized both one and two-sided riparian harvest within the project area. Riparian
roading has the potential of impacting LWD delivery to streams not only through cutting of trees for the
right-of-way but also from firewood cutters removing wood that would have fallen into the stream.
Streams in the project area are currently meeting or exceeding this RMO.
7) Pool Frequency - Pool frequency was measured at the same time as LWD. The RMO (Table 3.46) was
only partially met in the measured reaches. Surveys indicate that wood is in ample supply and flows are
conducive to creating pools in some streams. However, few pools are being formed and maintained.
Sediment from high roading could be filling pools and causing channel adjustments. The Dry Fork Fire
burned in the upper reaches of Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek. Effects of this fire could still be
lingering and affecting pools within these drainages. Warland Creek and Fivemile Creek have had past
grazing which also affects pool creation and stability. Trapping of beaver has nearly removed these
animals from the project area. Beaver are an important source for creation and stability of pools within
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 116 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

streams. Road systems parallel the mainstems of drainages in the project area. These road systems bisect
and reduce the effect of the RHCA. These factors could all attribute to the general lack of pools in the
project area.
8) Pool Quality - Quality pools are pools that are deep (minimum of three feet in depth) with sufficient
cover to hide fish. Pool quality in the analysis area varied by reach. Deep pool creation in small streams is
difficult, as these streams lack the hydrologic power to create and maintain pools of this depth. The
mainstems of project area streams do possess sufficient flows and power to create quality pools. Fisheries
habitat inventories measured few pools in measured reaches and even fewer quality pools. Past and
ongoing activities including; grazing, riparian roading, fisheries LWD removal, beaver removal, and
forest management have likely changed the streams ability to maintain deep pools.
9) Off Channel Habitat - Off channel habitat is that habitat which exists for fish and other aquatic
organisms inside channels, tributary streams and springs within the RHCAs. The stream types in the
analysis area are classic mountain streams with moderate gradients and moderate entrenchment ratios.
This changes to deeply incised boulder/bedrock dominated streams in the headwaters and gentler gradient
wider floodplain with lower incision ratios in the lower reaches (except where the streams enter the
reservoir). The analysis area has moderate to high densities of roading and moderate to high number of
drainage crossings (Table3.45). Riparian roading densities are high with roads running the lengths of
most mainstems of larger streams. Due to this construction within the RHCAs, off channel habitat has
been modified and in places removed from the systems. The roads will continue to impact this criterion
into the future. To further impact off channel habitat, beavers have been nearly removed from the analysis
area. During surveying, many abandoned beaver flats were found in Dunn Creek, Canyon Creek, Cripple
Horse Creek and Fivemile Creek. These beaver flats at one time created diverse high quality habitat for
the aquatic environment. Since the beavers were removed the areas have become entrenched gullies with
little connection to the RHCA.
10) Prime Habitat (Refugia) - The analysis area contains few areas of prime habitat. A small area has
been set aside in Cripple Horse Creek as sheltered watersheds mostly on intermittent channels that
provide little refugia for fisheries. There exist some old growth areas along RHCAs that will continue to
function as refugia for aquatic organisms. But by far, past management, roading, and removal of beavers
has changed the charter of the streams limiting the amount of prime habitat within the analysis area.
11) Pool Width/Depth Ratio - The majority of measured pools were shallow and wide. The analysis area
contains stream types that are somewhat stable. However, the vast amount of pool habitat has a high W/D
ratio. The streams within the analysis area are showing signs of past and current management.
12) Stream Bank Condition - Stream surveys showed bank stability to partially meet the RMO (Table
3.46) (which is not required in forested systems under INFS). However, it is a good indicator for showing
signs of unstable banks due to upslope conditions. There were some measured reaches that showed
unstable bank conditions. Overall, stream banks are in good condition; though high spring peak flows and
grazing have the ability destabilize banks.
13) Floodplain Connectivity - Floodplains in the analysis area remain partially intact with some minor
alterations where roads occur. Riparian functions remain mostly intact along stream channels within the
analysis area. This is in part due to fertile soils and high growth rates of shrubs and trees. Recovery is
occurring in places but where roads are constructed within the RHCA and constrict the channels these
areas will continue to show impacts into the future.
14) Peak and Base Flows - Peak flows normally occur in May but can occur anytime between November
and June. Streams in the analysis area are fairly stable but have the potential for; flooding, annually high
suspended sediment levels, bedload movement and channel adjustments. Since the turn of the century,
timber harvest, road construction, beaver removal and human development have changed the character of
the watersheds and their response to weather events. Road densities and current harvest levels are
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 117 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

considered moderate to high. Streams within the analysis area are fairly stable but will continue to show
impacts of PFI from past activities into the future as timber management and roading continue to impact
the hydrology of the streams.
15) Drainage Network - Road densities in the analysis area are considered moderate to high (Table
3.44). The road system within the analysis area is fairly stable due to past best management practices
(BMPs). As mentioned previously, road systems follow the mainstems of all the larger analysis area
streams. The roading in RHCAs has impacted the drainage network by constricting the floodplain and
bisecting the streams and the RHCAs. Beaver removal has changed the hydrology of the streams
impacting water storage, sediment transport and channel movement.
Table 3.44 - Water Yield 2011
WATERSHED

WATERSHED SIZE
(ac)

TOTAL
ECA

EXISTING
% ECA

EXISTING PEAK
FLOW %

ECA for 1%
PFI

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

21,666
13,184
21,823
8,520
18,434

3,524
1,841
4,336
966
2,130

15
14
20
11
12

8
8
11
6
6

433
264
436
170
369

16) Road Network - Road systems parallel most of the length of the mainstems of Dunn Creek, Canyon
Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland Creek and Fivemile Creek. Further, the headwaters and tributary
streams have many road systems following their entire length. Road densities in these drainages are
considered moderate (Table 3.45). The table shows the relatively high number of road/stream crossings.
The large amount of roading coupled with high numbers of stream crossings is routing large amounts of
sediment into streams. Most of the drainages (except Dunn Creek) flow directly into Lake Koocanusa
preventing any further sedimentation downstream into the Kootenai River. Below Libby Dam the
Kootenai River is sediment starved.
Table 3.45 - East Reservoir TRD, RRD and SCD - 2010
WATERSHED

Dunn Creek
Canyon
Creek
Cripple
Horse Creek
Warland
Creek
Fivemile
Creek

ROAD
(mi)

TRD
(mi/mi2)

DISTURB
FACTOR

RIPARIAN
ROADS

RRD
(mi/mi2)

DISTURB
FACTOR

STREAM
CROSSINGS

SCD
(#/mi2)

DISTURB
FACTOR

121.2

3.6

High

13.6

3.2

High

138

4.1

High

59.1

2.9

Moderate

4.7

2.0

Moderate

60

2.9

Moderate

95.2

2.8

Moderate

10.5

2.7

Moderate

89

2.6

Moderate

35.3

2.7

Moderate

1.6

1.5

Moderate

34

2.6

Moderate

71.9

2.5

Moderate

8.6

2.8

Moderate

65

2.3

Moderate

DISTURB FACTOR = DISTURBANCE FACTOR

17) Disturbance History - Natural disturbance regimes are highly variable in the analysis area. Natural
disturbances are common, including flood events, bedload movement and deposition, channel braiding,
and mass wasting. Windstorms resulting in blowdown have been minor and are generally associated with
clearcuts. Fires have been relatively small with only one large fire occurring in the past 30 years (the Dry
Fork Fire of 1989 which is still impacting streams), a large portion of the analysis area burned in 1910
and 1924 (but has since mostly recovered).
18) RHCAs - Land management in the analysis area began around the turn of the century. Timber harvest
included both one and two sided riparian cutting techniques. Roads parallel the mainstems of most
streams in the analysis area. Impacts to RHCAs include timber harvest, road encroachment, firewood
harvest and road crossings. The amount of disturbance is moderate due to past management activities.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 118 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

RHCAs are mostly intact but the road system continues to impact the function of the RHCA.
19) Disturbance Regime - Natural disturbance regimes are stable in the analysis area. Streams in the
analysis area have natural events including high peak flows from spring snowmelt and, although minor,
some isolated impacts have occurred. Windstorms resulting in blowdown have been minor, generally
associated with clearcuts. Fires have been relatively small with only the large Dry Fork Fire occurring
recently and 1910 and 1924 fires which affected much of the project area. Although certain indicators of
habitat quality have been compromised, overall conditions are considered moderate in analysis area due
to the large buildup of fuels and the potential for another large fire.
Integration of Species and Habitat Conditions
The quality of aquatic habitat varies in the analysis area. Some areas contain fairly high quality habitat
where RHCAs are intact, while other areas are showing signs of stress from past natural disturbance
and management. Recovery from the Dry Fork Fire will continue to improve stream conditions. The
shelter watersheds will continue to produce higher quality waters which will benefit downstream
functions. RHCA harvest along with the existing road system has likely been a contributing factor
impacting fisheries habitat to some extent. Past aquatic enhancement has included the additions of
large woody debris to Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek. Much of this woody debris did not stay
in place and moved downstream and not meeting its intended purpose. Gravel was added to a segment
of Canyon Creek above HWY 37 to improve spawning. High flows have removed most of this gravel.
To further the issue, the culvert at the HWY 37 crossings has become a barrier to fisheries passage
(Photo 3). Grazing has impacted streams in the analysis area to some extent. There were four grazing
leases in the analysis area at one time. Two of the leases, Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek are now
inactive and have been that way for over 15 years. A riparian fence was constructed around a sensitive
meadow of Warland Creek in 1995. The enclosure has been monitored and showed vast improvements
to the stream within the fence. The Warland Creek allotment has been inactive for the past 5 years. The
entire basin has been recovering due to this inactivity. A new permittee has showed interest in
acquiring the Warland Creek allotment.
The only active grazing allotment in the analysis area is the Fivemile Creek. The grazing area is
located in the lower and middle reaches of the drainage. The stream is showing some stress to banks
and riparian vegetation. Drift fences and cattle guards have been construed to keep cows out of the
stream where the western pearlshell beds are found.
Libby Dam construction has affected natural channel movement and riparian vegetation. The dam has
however reduced large scale flooding downstream in the Kootenai River. Additional impacts to
tributaries have occurred through riparian harvest and road construction. Major events have occurred
over the past 10-20 years, such as large windstorms, one large fire and 100-year storm events.
Although minor, isolated impacts were seen, systems continue to remain stable. Genetic analysis has
shown the existence of one nearly genetically pure population of westslope cutthroat within Dunn
Creek. It is apparent that fish, in Cripple Horse Creek, Canyon Creek, Dunn Creek and Fivemile
Creek, are spawning and maintaining stable populations in available habitat.
DESIRED FUTURE CONDITION
As a result of the analysis, it was determined that Canyon Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Dunn Creek and
Fivemile Creek are restoration priorities. This is due to the westslope cutthroat trout population and other
wild populations of trout within these drainages. Data from hydrologic and fisheries habitat surveys
within the analysis area (Tables 3.46) were compared to the INFS Interim Riparian Management
Objectives (RMOs).
Table 3.46 - Stream Geomorphology Data for Analysis Area Streams
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 119 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

INFS - RIPARIAN MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVE STANDARDS
Bankfull Width (feet)
Pools/Foot
LWD/foot (> BFW)
Bank Stability (%)

< 10
10 to 20
20 to 25
25 to 50

1 per 55
1 per 94
1 per 112
1 per 203

1 per 250
1 per 250
1 per 250
1 per 250

Width/Depth

> 80
> 80
> 80
> 80

< 10
< 10
< 10
< 10

RIPARIAN MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES DATA
Table 3.47 - Channel Conditions in Dunn Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

POOLS
PER
FOOT

LWD
PER
FOOT

% BANK
STABILITY

W/D
RATIO

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

1
2
3
4
4A
5
6 (trib)
7
8 (trib)
9
10
11 (trib)

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

B3a
B4c
F4b
A4
B4
B4
F4a
B3a
B4a
F4
F4b
B1a

12.4
18.6
15
6.42
18
11.6
9.61
9.03
4.5
9.5
5.5
8.3

1/250
Dry
1/300.2
0/129.4
0/360
1/116.5
1/192
1/185
0/90
1/192
0/110
1/166

1/35.7
Dry
1/6.72
1/2.81
1/10.2
1/10.59
1/5.05
1/4.87
1/15
1/9.6
1/22
1/11.06

100
100
100
No Data
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

10.9
31.6
21.73
9.41
22.29
15.2
26.57
15.19
19.03
17.61
22.1
32.5

74
66
43
46
57
59
55
41
43
74
46
48

Fair
Fair
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Fair

Gray shading = sites do not meet current INFS guidelines

Table 3.48 - Channel Conditions in Canyon Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

POOLS
PER
FOOT

LWD
PER
FOOT

% BANK
STABILITY

W/D
RATIO

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

1
2
3
4

2006
2006
2006
2006

F4b
B3
B4
F4b

12.5
10.38
7.9
9.06

1/79.67
1/208
0/158
0/181.2

1/5.8
1/8.6
1/4.94
1/10.65

57
No Data
100
100

31.3
13.16
14.5
33.57

73
64
48
51

Good
Fair
Good
Good

Gray shading = sites do not meet current INFS guidelines

Table 3.49 - Channel Conditions in Cripple Horse Creek
SITE

1
2
3
3A (trib)
4
5
6
6A
7
8
9

YEAR

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

ROSGEN
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

POOLS
PER
FOOT

LWD
PER
FOOT

% BANK
STABILITY

F4b
F3
F3b
E3a
F2b
E4b
B3
B3
B4c
E4a
B3a

24.5
21.62
20.24
6.59
20.37
6.7
20.6
17.4
11.35
8.79
11.3

1/15.23
1/218.5
1/117
Dry
1/136.3
Dry
1/418
1/87
1/77
0/176
0/226

1/14
1/14.56
1/9.87
1/16
1/7.71
1/15
1/34.8
1/1/8.92
1/9.2
1/3.59
1/4.19

No Data
89.8
99
Dry
100
Dry
84.6
91
100
100
100

W/D
RATIO

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

23.6
23.16
44.58
7.37
18.53
7.16
19.4
14.71
15.88
8.96
11.2

56
81
72
42
56
69
58
65
56
44
73

Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Fair
Good
Good
Fair

Gray shading = sites do not meet current INFS guidelines

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 120 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Table 3.50 Channel Conditions in Warland Creek
SITE

1
1

YEAR

2007
2006

ROSGEN
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

POOLS
PER
FOOT

LWD
PER
FOOT

% BANK
STABILITY

E4
B4

8.75
8.46

1/46.88
1/56.7

1/15.9
1/11.3

100
100

W/D
RATIO

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

8.83
8.4

56
61

Good
Good

Gray shading = sites do not meet current INFS guidelines

Table 3.51 - Channel Conditions in Fivemile Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

POOLS
PER
FOOT

LWD
PER
FOOT

% BANK
STABILITY

W/D
RATIO

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

2
6
7
9b
10
13A
13B
13C

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

F4b
F4b
B4c
E4
B4
B2a
E3a
E4b

26.2
19.8
19.39
12.1
20.09
15.4
8.74
12.8

1/262.5
0/463
1/381
1/39.6
Dry
1/77
1/175
1/257

1/17.58
1/7.23
1/18.14
1/26.4
1/8.73
1/9.93
1/11.6
1/10.28

96
100
98
No Data
Dry
100
97
98

12.59
23.38
22.54
8.24
12.6
12.97
2.02
9.92

68
51
66
75
60
51
64
67

Good
Good
Fair
Good
Good
Fair
Fair
Good

Gray shading = sites do not meet current INFS guidelines
These figures were determined by converting the desired # of pools and LWD from pools/LWD per mile to pools and LWD per foot. For
purposes of this analysis only individual reaches of each stream were measured rather than the entire channel length.

The fisheries habitat data shows that existing conditions currently meet or exceed interim RMOs with the
exception of pool frequency in measured reaches. The vast majority of perennial flow is on private lands
in Dunn Creek. The desired future condition would be where all RMOs meet or exceed INFS standards
(The width to depth ratio is not representative of conditions on the KNF the values were calculated on
coastal streams in Washing and Oregon).
Fish passage is a Regional priority. There are existing road crossing structures that need to be upgraded
within the analysis area to provide fish passage.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
To remain productive, a fish population must have relatively stable habitat conditions over time. Forest
management actions produce changes that are similar in kind and intensity to natural environmental
variability. However, human-caused changes tend to persist for longer periods, either because they are
more widespread, or because they add to natural factors that are already affecting fish productivity. Fish
species vary in their tolerance for, and reaction to, adverse or positive environmental changes. Further, the
response of one species may act as an additional negative effect on another species. Native trout species
(bull trout, redband rainbows and westslope cutthroat trout) are particularly vulnerable to habitat changes
and effects from sediment (Weaver and Fraley 1991).
The analysis area provides a small to moderate amount of recreational fishing on NFS lands (excluding
Lake Koocanusa which receives high amounts of recreational fishing). Alternatives that degrade fish
habitat can limit the number of adult fish available for fishing. Alternatives that change the current
accessibility to fisheries resources can also impact recreational fishing opportunities. There may be some
short-term adverse effects to fish habitat as a result of proposed timber harvest and road building.
However, these effects are not expected to affect entire fish populations and would not result in a longterm trend in fish abundance. As long as INFS is met for given activities within an alternative, there
should be no effect to recreational fishing. None of the alternatives decreases access to fishing. There are
no other known potential effects to recreational fishing.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 121 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect
Vegetation in previously harvested units would continue to mature resulting in gradually decreasing water
yields. Restoring stream and riparian function through the continued growth of harvested areas would
increase depth, complexity and shading within analysis area aquatic habitats. This would provide for
cooler water temperatures, reduced evaporation, and potentially more stable flows through the summer
low flow period. Similar benefits would occur during winter low flows. Intact riparian communities
provide an insulatory benefit that prevents streams from freezing during extreme cold. Deeper water also
provides better aquatic habitat as it is less likely to freeze completely. Increasing the frequency of LWD
not only can increase instream complexity but also serves as a long-term nutrient supply. If wildfires are
successfully suppressed and prescribed burning does not occur, fuel loadings would increase, resulting in
an increasing risk of high intensity fires.
Encroachment of Douglas-fir would continue in dry ponderosa pine habitat. Stands of Douglas-fir and
ponderosa pine would remain at stocking levels higher than historic conditions. The risk of insect and
disease activity would therefore remain high or increase. Wildfire potential and intensity would also
remain high or increase and would remain higher than historic conditions. Existing roads would continue
to channel surface flow and sediment to the streams. Stream flows would remain elevated until a majority
of vegetative and hydrologic recovery had occurred. If these problems were not corrected, they would
continue to contribute to aquatic habitat degradation. Peak flow increases would never fully recover to a
natural condition with the existing road system in place. Undersized culverts could plug and wash out
resulting in large increases of sediment to streams. Fish barrier culverts would be left in place continuing
the loss of genetic flow and impeding migration between sections of streams.
Activities on State of Montana Department of Natural Resource and Conservation (DNRC) and private
lands would continue with the resulting change in watershed condition consistent with past activity. These
activities include landowners accessing their lands for timber harvest and sale and development of private
lands.
Cumulative Effects
Cumulative effects in the analysis area include the past and current effects of increased peak flows and
sedimentation to watershed from past timber management (Tables 3.1, 3.2, 3.3), road-building activities,
dam construction and natural events (i.e. fire, high flows from runoff). All presently authorized activities
would continue and there is a high likelihood that proposed agency action would be implemented. These
activities would incrementally affect fisheries habitat and fish populations. However, due to the State of
Montana SMZ law, Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC) Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), INFS and
BMPs, the level of effects would be similar to what currently exists and would not decrease the viability
of native and wild fish populations within the analysis area. Impacts from forest management would
continue as the DNRC and private landowners’ remove timber and develop their lands.
Impacts to streams in the analysis area would continue to be from existing forest management, natural
high flows and Lake Koocanusa operations. These impacts would not be reduced by long-term storage,
culvert removal and replacement, and BMPs on roads in the analysis area as described in Chapter 2 as
proposed for this project. Proposed BMPs and long-term road storage, under action alternatives, would
not be completed and sediment routed to streams from roads would not be reduced. Natural events such as
wildfire and flooding could slow or set back watershed recovery from past land management. Natural
hydrologic recovery would continue as harvest units revegetate and past road decommissioning continues
to recover.
The analysis area would continue to have forest management. Fisheries populations and aquatic habitat in
the analysis area would continue to be impacted from sedimentation and peak flow increases (PFIs).
Hydrologic recovery would continue to occur within the analysis area. However, roading, grazing, beaver
removal, the Dry Fork Fire and past harvest would continue to negatively impact fish and their habitat.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 122 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Libby Dam, completed in 1972, would continue to operate as a flood control structure and moderate flows
to downstream areas. Streams below the high water mark no longer function properly entering Lake
Koocanusa. Many of the drainages were poisoned by FWP to remove native fish. Past fisheries
management was done to establish a large migratory westslope cutthroat trout population in the
Reservoir. FWP has stocked the Reservoir and tributary streams with a number of native and non-native
fish. These fish species are mostly gone now with kokanee salmon taking up much of the biomass in the
lake. Brook trout have colonized the drainages above the dam and coastal rainbows have colonized much
of Dunn Creek up to the natural barrier. Native fish will never recover to historic levels in the analysis
area due to nonnative fish stocking and past management of native species by the State. Sediment and
bedload transport in the Kootenai River has been affected by the dam. Natural stream processes are not
occurring due to Reservoir operations and flow regulation.
The proposed Dunn Creek watershed connectivity project would result in immediate changes to the
stream channel condition for the last 1.5 miles of Dunn Creek. This project is unfunded at the time and
will require a separate analysis. Depending on the level of restoration implemented the following may
occur, approximately 0.7 miles of FS Road 334 would be re-located on the hillside starting at
approximately MP 1.4,the historic railroad concrete box culvert would be removed or bypassed; the
culvert under Hwy 37 would be replaced or modified to accommodate aquatic organism passage; and the
last ½ mile of Dunn Creek would be fully reconstructed to accommodate stream function as well as
aquatic organism passage; large eroding banks 2 miles upstream of HWY 37 would be stabilized.
Relocation of Road 334 would require the new construction of approximately 0.7 miles of new system
road. The road would be located on DNRC lands and PCTC lands. The existing road would be gated
removing traffic near the stream. The new road location would be located across a dry hillside with no
perennial stream channels. This would reduce overall sediment into Dunn Creek and protect water quality
and fisheries habitat in lower Dunn Creek.
Removal of the historic railroad concrete box culvert would require removal and re-sloping of the
railroad, plugging the existing channel, construction of a new stream channel to the confluence with the
Kootenai River, and re-vegetation of the disturbed soil. Bypassing the railroad culvert would require
excavation of a new channel around the structure, plugging the old channel downstream, and construction
of a new channel to the confluence with the Kootenai River. Removal of the Hwy 37 culvert would
require extensive excavation as the culvert is buried under approximately 30 feet of fill; in addition the
culvert is 275 feet long and 10 feet high. The removal of this culvert is beyond the scope of this project.
The culvert is administered by State of Montana Department of Transportation (DOT).
Modifications to the Hwy 37 culvert may include the installation of baffles to reduce flow velocity
through the culvert and provide refuge areas for aquatic organisms and the construction of step-pool
structures to connect the downstream channel to the culvert.
The entire stream channel for the last ½ mile of Dunn Creek would be fully reconstructed as a single
channel, with low flow benches, bankfull benches, floodplain, and riparian areas. The braided reaches
would become single channels, retaining low flows, in-stream structures would improve fish habitat and
connectivity, streambank structures would reduce erosion and total suspended solids as well as improve
fish habitat; realigning the confluence would reduce sediment and protect cultural resources. These
activities would require the use of heavy equipment (excavators, dump truck, etc), large woody debris,
large rocks and all applicable permits.
Bank stabilization up stream of the analysis area would be completed on PCTC lands. The area has three
large unstable banks which are inputting large amounts of sediment into the stream annually. The banks
would utilize techniques to push the stream flow away from them and allow vegetation to reestablish
providing long term stability.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 123 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

STATEMENT of FINDINGS/FOREST PLAN CONSISTENCY
Alternative 1, the no-action alternative, is consistent with INFS because existing conditions would remain
stable. However, problems that would likely develop associated with aquatic habitat characters, (e.g.,
sediment and fish barriers) would need to be addressed in the near future to promote long-term recovery
of analysis area streams. Culvert barriers under US HWY 37 would need to be replaced at some time in
the future. These culverts are outside the scope of this project. Sedimentation from roading would need to
be dealt with in the future. Past BMPs need reconstructing, undersized pipes need to be upsized and road
surface drainage needs to be re-established. Natural fire needs to be brought back on the landscape due to
the higher than natural densities of trees. Catastrophic wildfire is probable within the project area which
could cause negative impacts to the available aquatic habitat.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Based on the potential level of effects to fish habitat and populations there is small difference between the
action alternatives. The level of proposed harvest, burning and temporary road construction varies among
the action alternatives and varies with respect to the effects to fisheries. Because increases in water yield
are not expected to cause noticeable channel degradation, they should not have a measurable effect on
trout habitat. RHCAs would protect habitat from non-channelized sediment inputs, maintain LWD
recruitment, maintain water temperature and ensure nutrient delivery and storage. The surface flow and
sediment that is channeled to the streams by roads would be reduced with BMP work and water-barring.
This would accelerate hydrologic recovery of affected watersheds and reduce the potential for further
degradation of fisheries habitat. By replacing culverts and upsizing them to 100 year flows and AOP
design, connectivity would be restored and the possibility of culvert failure would be reduced.
Short-term, small sediment increases would be expected with the road storage. Because increasing
sediment production can decrease habitat diversity, degrade spawning and rearing habitat, and reduce
aquatic insect production, the proposed roadwork could involve short-term effects on trout populations;
however, the long-term benefits of reducing water routing and sediment input would outweigh the shortterm effects caused by the roadwork.
Timber Harvest and Associated Activities
Timber harvest activities can impact fish and their respective habitat by increasing peak flow. Excessive
peak flows can destabilize the stream channel causing degradation of fish habitat by decreasing habitat
diversity (loss of pools, cover and stable substrates) and increasing in-channel sediment production.
Channel instability occur when the scouring process leads to degradation (downcutting), or excessive
sediment deposition results in aggradation (deposition) (Rosgen 1996).
Increasing sediment production is generally associated with ground based harvest systems and
particularly road construction. Sediment decreases habitat diversity, degrades spawning and rearing
habitat, degrades aquatic insect production, and consequently fish reproduction and survival. Fine
sediment can greatly reduce the capability of winter and summer rearing habitats and when levels reach
30% or more, survival to emergence is significantly reduced (Weaver and Fraley 1991). Fine sediment
may have the greatest impact on winter rearing habitat for juvenile salmonids by capping or filling
interstitial spaces of streambed cobbles. Fine sediment has also been shown to cause alterations in
macroinvertebrate abundance and diversity.
Under the various action alternatives, timber harvest, mastication and watershed restoration would occur.
Precommercial thinning would have no effect on fisheries and will not be discussed further. Cumulative
PFIs are not expected to exceed 14% in any drainage within the analysis area (Table 3.52).
Table 3.52 - Changes in Peak Flow by Alternative (% PFI) for 2012
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 124 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

WATERSHED

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

ACRES

2012 PFI

RECOMMENDED
PFI (%)

PFI
ALT 1

PFI
ALT 2

PFI
ALT 3

21,666
13,184
21,823
8,520
18,434

7
7
10
6
6

14
14
14
14
14

7
7
10
6
6

10
11
13
12
9

10
11
12
13
8

Default INFS RHCAs would be required on all streams and wetlands which would protect them from
non-channelized sediment inputs and adverse impacts to vegetation. A review associated with INFS
(USDA Forest Service 1995) concluded that non-channelized sediment flow rarely travels more than 300
feet. Buffer widths of 200-300 feet are generally effective at protecting streams and wetlands from nonchannelized sediment flow. The implementation of RHCAs would insure that riparian characteristics are
protected within the analysis area. Typically, there is a 3 to 4 year increase in nitrogen and phosphorus in
streams draining a newly harvested area. This brief increase in the two nutrients critical to stream
productivity results from the breakdown of logging slash, the flushing of some soil nutrients normally
taken up by trees, and in some cases, due to slash burning. These short-term indirect and cumulative water
quality effects do not generally extend very far downstream. They settle out of instream sediments and are
absorb by plants and animals. However, these nutrients are in general short supply in the affected area and
would increase aquatic productivity for a short time. The vegetative treatments are mitigated either
naturally or through project design for minimal effects.
Road Construction, Reconstruction and BMPs
Forest roads can cause serious degradation of salmonid habitats in streams (Furniss et al. 1991). Roads
directly affect natural sediment and hydrologic regimes by altering streamflow, sediment loading,
sediment transport and deposition, channel morphology, channel stability, substrate composition and
water quality within a watershed. Roads can interrupt hill-slope drainage patterns and alter the timing and
magnitude of peak flows and change base stream discharge and sub-surface flows.
Poor road location or concentration of surface and subsurface water by cross-slope roads can lead to roadrelated mass soil movements. Damaging direct effects to fish habitat occur if roads are located in RHCAs
and especially if they cross streams where they can intercept water and sediment and directly route it to
streams.
The action alternatives would result in BMP work on all roads associated with the project. Table 3.53
shows the range of new road and temporary road construction for the proposed project. All new
permanent and temporary roads would be constructed to BMP standards. BMP monitoring on the KNF
has been shown to be 95% effective in reducing sediment (KNF 2011). The Montana BMP 2012
Monitoring Report states that “across all ownerships, BMPs were effective in protecting soil and water
resources 99% of the time” (MDNRC 2012 BMP Executive Summary p. 2). The report goes on to say
that across all ownerships “for all applied BMPs, 98% were shown to be effective in preventing sediments
from reaching draws or streams” (MDNRC 2012 BMP Executive Summary p. 5). Any new permanent
road would be added to the Kootenai Forest road system.
Existing stored roads would be reused for this project. Stored roads are roads that were treated in the past
and placed into a stored state making them hydrologically neutral. This would utilize past road segments
to access units for the project. These roads were deemed to be needed in the near future in past NEPA
analyses. Utilizing these roads at their present location would reduce overall affects to the environment
far more than new temporary road construction on unaltered landscapes. They would however create
sediment and increase routing of overland flow into stream channels. This would occur until the roads are
put back to bed and the recovery process began. To facilitate sediment minimization the temporary use of
these roads would only be in place for one season during management activities.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 125 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Table3.53 - Proposed New and Temporary Roads, and Temporary Stream Crossings
WATERSHED

ALT 1 (miles)

ALT 2 (miles)

ALT 3 (miles)

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

0
0
0
0
0

0.9/0.51/0
2.6/2/1
0.4/0.95/0
2.1/0.25/0
2.3/0.51/0

0.9/0.5/0
2.6/2/1
0.2/0.39/0
1.8/0.25/0
1.5/0.51/0

BMP work would be conducted on all routes utilized in the analysis area. This project would utilize up to
176 miles of road for BMP upgrades. The surface flow and sediment that is channeled to streams by roads
would be greatly reduced with this work by accelerating hydrologic recovery and reducing the potential
for further habitat degradation. A list of existing roads to be put into long-term storage can be found in
Tables 2.9 and 2.21 of this document. Road storage would occur on up to 17 miles of road within the
analysis area (Table 3.54). This work would further improve the drainage network and would further
reduce road densities. In addition, all disturbed areas would be seeded. Nonetheless, short-term increases
in sediment are possible due to the risk of rain events occurring before the vegetation in disturbed areas is
established.
Approximately 0.34 miles of the new road would be built on FS lands to allow the DNRC access to their
lands. The DNRC intends to harvest timber on their lands within the Cripple Horse Creek drainage.
Additionally the DNRC would construct approximately 2.15 miles of new permanent road within their
lands. All roads constructed would use Forest Service BMPs on FS lands and would follow State of
Montana BMPs on DNRC lands.
Table 3.54 - Proposed Intermittent Stored Service and Decommissioning by Alternative
WATERSHED

ALTERNATIVE 1

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

0
0
0
0
0

0.58/2.4
1.02/0.0
3.18/3.8
3.38/2.6
7.3/2.5

0.0/2.4
1.02/0.24
2.88/3.8
6.76/3.45
9.34/2.56

Prescribed Fire
Total acres affected by fuels treatments for this alternative are displayed in Tables 2.4, 2.5 and 2.18. As a
result of this burning, any changes in fish habitat would be within natural environmental fluctuations.
Prescribed fire may be preceded by slashing, if necessary, to reduce the chance for ladder fuels to carry
fire to tree canopies and to assist in carrying fire throughout the treatment unit. Some burns would be
conducted in the spring when conditions are within prescribed parameters for weather and fuel moisture.
Some burning would occur in the fall and are designed to be stand-replacing. The stand-replacing burns
proposed would create openings in an otherwise continuous mature tree canopy. These openings would
provide foraging areas for bears and other wildlife species.
Most of the burns would occur outside RHCAs. However, there are some burns that include RHCAs
within the unit boundaries. Incidental and designed inclusion of RHCAs in burns would likely result in
low intensity fire due to moist habitat in RHCAs (See Fire and Fuels section of this document for location
and fire prescriptions).
Watershed Restoration Work
The bulk of the watershed restoration proposed with this project includes long-term storage of roads.
Restoration would occur under all action alternatives. See Chapter 2 for description of road treatments for
watershed restoration.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 126 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Removing culverts would re-establish stream courses and remove the threat of the structure plugging and
transporting the fill slopes into downstream waters. Unnatural channel widths, slope and streambed form
occurs upstream and downstream of stream crossings. Removing culverts and reconstructing the stream
channels would reconnect aquatic habitats.
A short-term increase in sediment is expected with culvert removal especially at live stream crossings.
Past culvert removal performed by Libby District fisheries and hydrology has shown very little sediment
actually enters the stream. Sediment that does enter the steam is of small scale and normally settles out
quickly downstream (USDA, KNF 1998). The long-term benefits of reducing water routing and sediment
input and restoring aquatic connectivity would far outweigh the short-term effects of roadwork. Stream
channels would also be reconstructed to minimize the channel's adjustment process and resulting
sedimentation following culvert removal. Large, rocky substrate and woody debris would be used to
armor the new channel and seeding of disturbed areas would minimize long term sediment input.
Noxious Weed Spraying
The proposed project would incorporate spraying of noxious weeds along NFS roads for all action
alternatives. Weed spraying would follow application protocol and would utilize mitigation set in the
KNF Weed EIS. Following these guidelines would ensure that the spraying of noxious weeds ouldl not
have an impact on aquatic organism.
Recreation Proposal
The proposal involves the dispersed recreation sites on the south side of Fivemile Creek and at the
Yarnell camping area.
Currently the Fivemile area receives relatively little dispersed camping use due primarily to poor access.
The area would need new road construction as some of the terrain would provide opportunities for
dispersed campsites. Native rock ring fire pits, vault toilets and signage and other improvements may be
provided.
The Yarnell area has been a very popular destination for dispersed camping. The site(s) are occupied
primarily from Memorial Day through Labor Day and receives steady use. The road infrastructure is in
place and the objective would be to improve the road without changing the character of the area. Other
improvements, including vault toilets, may be identified through the analysis process.
Included with the proposed project is access management change on 36.6 miles of trail system (Table
3.55). The analysis area consists of a trial system designated as motorized and would be change to nonmotorized. The trail system was not built to motorized standards and is a safety and resource damage
issue. To make the trail system safe for users and protect resources, the trail system would become nonmotorized. Alternative 3 includes a motorized route of nearly 10 miles. This route was brought forward
into Alternative 3 from comments from the public (Tables 3.55 and 3.56). Recreation improvements
would follow INFS and would be consistent with the KNFP.
Table 3.55 – Alternative 2 East Reservoir Trail Access Changes
TRAIL ID

279
280
281
420
426
500

LOCATION

Warland Ridge
Warland Peak Lookout
Cripple Horse
Canyon Divide
Fivemile
Hornet Ridge

EXISTING STATUS

Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed

POST-PROJECT STATUS

MILES

Non-Motorized Only
10.70
Non-Motorized Only
2.30
Non-Motorized Only
6.22
Non-Motorized Only
9.83
Non-Motorized Only
1.82
Non-Motorized Only
5.69
TOTAL = 36.56 miles

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 127 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Table 3.56 - Alternative 3 East Reservoir Trail Access Changes
TRAIL ID

279
280
420
426
500

LOCATION

EXISTING STATUS

Warland Ridge
Warland Peak Lookout
Canyon Divide
Fivemile
Hornet Ridge

POST-PROJECT STATUS

Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed
Motorized allowed

MILES

Non-Motorized Only
10.70
Non-Motorized Only
2.30
Non-Motorized Only
6.38
Non-Motorized Only
1.82
Non-Motorized Only
5.69
TOTAL = 26.89 miles

Cumulative Effects
The expected cumulative PFIs from the alternatives range from 6-14% in perspective watersheds. KNFP
standards of 14% increase in analysis area watersheds would be reached in Cripple Horse Creek (Table
3.57). By maintaining water yields near KNFP levels, streams would not have negative impacts to RMOs.
Habitat conditions would remain stable and RMOs would not be retarded.
Table 3.57 - Changes in Peak Flow by Alternative (% PFI) for 2012
WATERSHED

ACRES

EXISTING
PFI 2012

RPFI

ALT 1
PFI

CUM
ALT 1 PFI

ALT 2
PFI

CUM
ALT 2 PFI

ALT
3 PFI

CUM
ALT 3 PFI

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse
Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

21,666
13,184

7
7

14
14

7
7

7
7

10
11

10
12

10
11

10
11

21,823

10

14

10

11

13

14

12

13

8,520
18,434

6
6

14
14

6
6

6
6

12
9

12
9

13
8

13
8

The effective road density with the proposed activities would be nearly the same within the analysis area
due to long-term road storage (Tables 2.9, 2.21).
There would be a net reduction of stream crossings through watershed restoration, which is the greatest
long-term benefit to fisheries resources. The removal of culverts and associated fills would reduce the
threat of these structures failing and depositing sediment into downstream waters. By reconstructing the
stream channels through the road prism, aquatic habitat and stream function would begin to be restored.
Short-term negative effects from this watershed restoration would be addressed and mitigated through
timing restrictions and design.
Implementation of this project in conjunction with the current activities in the analysis area, which
include all the ongoing agency actions and reasonably foreseeable actions described on pages 3-5 through
3-7, would not retard the attainment of INFS RMOs. Habitat conditions currently partially meet or exceed
INFS standards (Table 3.46).

FOREST PLAN CONSISTENCY
The proposed activities implement default INFS RHCAs to protect riparian resources and function. Road
storage would remove up to 17 miles of road and numerous stream crossing structures. Long-term road
storage would utilize BMPs to prevent retarding the attainment of RMOs. Based on these factors, it is
determined that Alternatives 2 and 3 are consistent with INFS and the KNFP.
ALTERNATIVE 2
Direct and Indirect Effects
Timber Harvest and Associated Activities
The proposed action was designed to meet the purpose and need and address issues and concerns
identified internally. Placement of harvest, stand improvement and fuel treatment locations were designed
with careful consideration to stand treatment need, fuel treatment need and location, stand resilience to
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 128 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

potential climate change, connectivity, fragmentation and other resource needs.
Activities associated with the proposed action include vegetative treatments including timber harvest,
slash treatment, site preparation and natural fuels reduction, tree planting, herbicide application to aid in
reforestation, precommercial thinning, access management changes, construction of new temporary roads,
access management, road storage, road reconstruction and implementation of BMPs.
Alternative 2 includes 4.26 miles of temporary road construction, timber harvest, site prep and slashing on
8,845 acres (Table 2.0). This would result in the creation of an additional 3-6% PFI (Table 3.57).
U.S. ARMY- Corps of Engineer: In addition to the aforementioned activities, vegetation treatments
within the analysis area, on US ARMY- Corps of Engineer Libby Dam (COE) jurisdiction lands will be
analyzed as part of the proposed action. The vegetation treatments include improvement harvest and fuels
treatment on approximately 421 acres. The fuel treatments include thinning, slashing and/or burning
(Table 2.12).
Management of COE lands would occur along the banks of the Kootenai River and lower Dunn Creek.
The amount of harvest and management on these lands would not affect PFIs within either drainage. The
small amount of management compared to the large size of Dunn Creek and the larger Kootenai River
would not be measurable in either drainage. Harvest would follow INFS and the SMZ law protecting
riparian areas.
Prescribed Burning
Total acres affected by fuels treatments for this alternative are 11,427 and are displayed in Tables 2.4 and
2.5. As a result of this burning, any changes in fish habitat would be within natural environmental
fluctuations.
Prescribed fire may be preceded by slashing, if necessary, to reduce the chance for ladder fuels to carry
fire to tree canopies and to assist in carrying fire throughout the treatment unit. Some burns would be
conducted in the spring when conditions are within prescribed parameters for weather and fuel moisture.
Some burning would occur in the fall and are designed to be stand-replacing. These openings would
provide foraging areas for bears and other wildlife species.
Most of the burns would occur outside RHCAs. However, there are some burns that include RHCAs
within the unit boundaries. Incidental and designed inclusion of RHCAs in burns would likely result in
low intensity fire due to moist habitat in RHCAs.
Road Construction, Reconstruction and BMPs
Alternative 2 would result in approximately 175 miles of road related disturbance, and approximately four
miles of temporary road. Spot reconstruction would occur on the existing road systems that are identified
as haul routes to improve surface drainage.
BMP work would be conducted on all routes utilized by the project. Surface flow and sediment that is
channeled to streams by roads would be reduced with this work. Hydrologic recovery would be
accelerated and the potential for further habitat degradation would be reduced.
Roadway reconditioning would occur on ditches, drainage structures, shoulders, roadbeds and aggregate
surfaces.
Watershed Restoration Work
The bulk of the watershed restoration proposed with this alternative includes road storage. Roads to be
put into long-term storage and decommissioned total approximately 28 miles. The drainage network
would be partially restored and the likelihood of sediment introduction from failed culverts would also be
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 129 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

reduced. Roads slated for storage and decommissioning are listed in Table 2.9 and 2.10A.
This alternative removes stream crossings and includes BMP improvements to the road system.
ALTERNATIVE 3
This alternative was designed to address many of the issues raised by the proposed action (Alternative 2)
internally, by the public in scoping comments, and further reconnaissance of the analysis area.
Timber Harvest and Associated Activities
Activities associated with the proposed action include vegetative treatments including timber harvest,
slash treatment, site preparation and natural fuels reduction, tree planting, herbicide application to aid in
reforestation, precommercial thinning, access management changes, construction of temporary roads,
access management, road storage, road reconstruction and implementation of BMPs.
Alternative 3 includes approximately four miles of temporary road construction, timber harvest, site prep,
and slashing on 7,782 acres (Table 2.15). This would result in the creation of an additional 2-7% PFI
(Table 3.57).
Prescribed Burning
Total acres affected by fuels treatments for this alternative are 11,358 acres and are displayed in Tables
2.18 and 2.5. As a result of this burning any changes in fish habitat would be within natural
environmental fluctuations. Prescribed fire would be similar to what is proposed under Alternative 2.
Road Construction, Reconstruction and BMPs
Alternative 3 would result in approximately 168 miles of road related disturbance. Spot reconstruction
would occur on the existing road systems that are identified as haul routes to improve surface drainage.
Culvert upgrades are the same as Alternative 2.
Trail Access Changes
Trail access changes would occur on approximately 27 miles of motorized trails (Table 2.20B). In
addition, due to further field verification, several roads that access dispersed camping sites have been
added for proposed access changes. Table 2.20A displays the roads that are proposed to be changed from
restricted seasonally to motor vehicles, open to snow vehicles to open yearlong.
Watershed Restoration Work
Approximately 30 miles of road would be stored or decommissioned in order to improve watershed
conditions, enhance wildlife security and maintain a safe and efficient transportation system. Tables 2.21
and 2.22 displays the roads proposed for treatment.
Undetermined Roads
Approximately 13.5 miles of road would convert to NFS roads (Table 2.10). These roads would be
brought up to BMP standards to increase safety and reduce resource concerns. The roads are being
utilized currently and are extremely low standard roads. The vast majority of the roads are to access
dispersed camping areas near the reservoir. Sediment generated from these roads is being routed directly
into the reservoir. Impacts are negligible with consideration of the size of Lake Koocanusa. There is little
concern to aquatic organisms from these roads.

STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Species
Alternatives 2 and 3 would have No Effect on white sturgeon. This conclusion is based on the lack of
evidence linking forest management to sturgeon viability.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 130 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FISHERIES and AQUATIC SPECIES RESOURCES

Alternatives 2 and 3 would have No Effect on bull trout from the proposed project. There is a lack of
evidence proving the existence of bull trout within streams in the analysis area. It is believed that bull
trout have been replaced by brook trout in streams above the Reservoir and within Dunn Creek. Bull trout
in the Reservoir will not be impacted by the proposed project.
This assessment constitutes the biological evaluation for sensitive species
Alternatives 2 and 3 May Impact habitat or individual westslope cutthroat and western pearlshell mussels
but will not likely contribute to a trend towards federal listing or cause loss of viability to the
population or species.
Alternatives 2 and 3 include the fisheries culvert replacement and upgrade. The possibility exists that
individuals could be crushed during culvert replacement. Work would occur directly in the stream
channel where fish are likely to be encountered. Sediment produced downstream may also impact
spawning gravels. This would be a short-term negative but long-term benefit on improved genetic flow.
Sediment generated from timber harvest and road activities has the potential to generate sediment within
the Fivemile Creek watershed. Some amount of sediment would be generated downstream onto mussel
beds. This would be short-term increases which may impact individual mussels. The grazing allotment
would remain open within the drainage. The potential for cows to escape upstream fences is high. Grazing
along the banks of Fivemile would increase sediment as well. More importantly, the point of effect would
likely occur from cows entering the stream and crushing individual mussels. This would occur
infrequently due to fence maintenance but has happened in the past.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 131 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

WATER RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
This section outlines the results of the analysis for the physical aspects of the water resources in the East
Reservoir analysis area. The biological aspects of the water resource are addressed in the Fisheries and
Aquatic Species Section.
Law, regulation, and policy drive effects analysis, specifically:
• Compliance with the Clean Water Act and Protection of Beneficial Uses;
• Compliance with Protection of Riparian and Wetland Areas; and
• Compliance with Forest Plan Standards.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The regulatory framework pertaining to water resources is summarized below. For additional information,
please refer to the Soil and Water Project File.
STATE and FEDERAL LAWS and REGULATIONS
The Clean Water Act (CWA) established Federal water quality policies, goals, and programs. Both the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the States have responsibility for carrying out the CWA.
The objective of the Act is to "restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the
Nation's waters.”
Section 313 of the Clean Water Act requires Federal agencies to comply with all Federal, State, interstate
and local requirements, administrative authority, processes and sanctions with respect to control and
abatement of non-point sources of water pollutants.
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act authorizes the Secretary of the Army (operating through the Army
Corps of Engineers) to issue permits for the discharge of dredged or fill material into wetlands (33 CFR
323). Silviculture activities are exempt from the 404-permit process, as are associated roads if constructed
and maintained using Best Management Practices (BMPs) (Federal Register 323.4(a), 7/91). Potential
effects on wetlands will be analyzed and disclosed. If a practical alternative to affecting a wetland exists,
the wetland will be avoided (40 CFR 230.1).
The authorities governing Forest Service water management are:
The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 - states that management of the National Forests must
provide sustained yields without impairment of the productivity of the land.
The Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (as amended by the National
Forest Management Act of 1976), Section 5 – directs the Secretary of Agriculture to use a systematic,
interdisciplinary approach to achieve integrated consideration of physical, biological, economic and other
sciences in National Forest land and resource management planning.
Clean Water Act, Section 313 – requires Federal agencies to comply with all Federal, State, interstate and
local requirements, administrative authority, processes, and sanctions with respect to control and
abatement of non-point sources of water pollutants. This requires the Forest Service (FS) to apply all
reasonable land, soil, and water conservation practices, or specialized Best Management Practices
(BMPs).
Water quality in the analysis area is currently managed through the application of BMPs. The use of
BMPs is the foundation for meeting water quality standards in the State of Montana. This is documented
in ARM 16.20.603, which states that, "land management activities must not generate pollutants in excess
of those that are naturally occurring, regardless of the stream's classification." Naturally occurring, as
defined by the ARM, is the water quality condition resulting from runoff or percolation over which man
has no control or from developed lands where all 'reasonable' land, soil and water conservation practices
(BMPs) have been applied. BMPs are considered reasonable only if beneficial uses are protected.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 132 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

The Clean Water Act also requires states to establish water quality standards that allow for the protection
of designated beneficial uses, and to identify waterbodies that do not meet these standards, called ‘water
quality limited segments’ (WQLS). A WQLS is a waterbody that is not fully meeting water quality
standards or is not fully supporting its intended uses.
The Montana Streamside Management Zone Law and Administrative Rules (HB 731 1995) establishes
a system for classifying streams and determining widths of Streamside Management Zones (SMZs) and
allowable activities within them. This law works in combination with Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS)
(described below under ‘Forest Plan Direction’). In most cases, INFS Riparian Habitat Conservation
Areas (RHCAs) specify a wider buffer than State mandated SMZs. A document summarizing the State
SMZs, INFS RHCAs, and the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) Riparian Guidelines is attached can be
found in the Soil and Water Project File. Any deviations from the SMZ Law require an Alternative
Practice Permit from the Montana Department of State Lands.
Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management directs that each agency shall provide leadership and
shall take action to reduce the risk of flood loss, to minimize the impacts of floods on human safety,
health and welfare, and to restore and preserve the natural and beneficial values served by floodplains in
carrying out its responsibilities for: acquiring, managing, and disposing of federal lands and facilities;
providing federally undertaken, financed, and assisted construction and improvements; and/or conducting
federal activities and programs affecting land use, including but not limited to water and related land
resources planning, regulation, and licensing activities.
Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands Order directs that each agency shall provide leadership
and take action to minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands, and to preserve and enhance
the natural and beneficial values of wetlands in carrying out the agency’s responsibilities for: acquiring,
managing, and disposing of federal lands and facilities; providing federally undertaken, financed, and
assisted construction and improvements; and/or conducting federal activities and programs affecting land
use, including but not limited to water and related land resources planning, regulation, and licensing
activities.
FOREST PLAN
Objectives
Construct the minimum number of roads necessary to permit the efficient removal of timber and mineral
resources. Construct and reconstruct roads only to the minimum standards necessary to prevent soil loss,
maintain water quality, minimize safety hazards for a reasonable and prudent Forest user, and provide
access for fire protection where needed to meet Management Area goals. (USDA Forest Service 1987b,
#2)
Meet or exceed State Water Quality Standards (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-2 #19).
Ground-disturbing activities such as road construction, road reconstruction, and timber harvest will be
accompanied by mitigating measures to prevent or reduce increases in sedimentation and stream channel
erosion. The amount of harvest allowed will depend on the rate of hydrologic recovery after timber has
been removed (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-7).
Municipal watersheds will be managed to provide current stream flows and keep water quality at current
levels (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-7).
Standards
Those activities or standards that will prevent or reduce stream sedimentation will be implemented along
with the soil and water conservation practices specified in Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 2509.22.
Examples include: location of roadbeds out of stream bottoms, design of stream crossing structures to
allow water to freely pass, rock surfacing of roads at stream crossings, keeping equipment from operating
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 133 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

in or alongside streams, and maintenance of roads to allow proper drainage. These practices will be
implemented in order to help maintain water quality (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-7).
Soil and water conservation practices as outlined in the Soil and Water Conservation Practices Handbook
(FSH 2509.22) will be incorporated into all land use and project plans as a principle mechanism for
controlling non-point pollution sources, meeting soil and water goals, and protecting beneficial uses.
Activities found not in compliance with soil and water conservation practices or State standards will be
brought into compliance, modified, or stopped (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-23).
A floodplain/wetland analysis will be made for all management actions involving wetlands, streams, or
bodies of water (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II-24).
Projects involving significant vegetation removal will, prior to including them on implementation
schedules, require a watershed cumulative effects feasibility analysis to ensure that water yield or
sediment will not increase beyond acceptable limits. The analysis will also identify opportunities, if any
exist, for mitigating adverse effects on water-related beneficial uses (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II24).
INFS (USDA Forest Service, 1995a) amended the KNF Land Management Plan. INFS established
riparian goals, riparian management objectives (RMOs), and riparian habitat conservation areas
(RHCAs). RMOs were created for pool frequency, water temperature, large woody debris, bank stability
and lower bank angle, and width to depth ratio. RHCAs are buffers delineated adjacent to streams, lakes,
and wetlands; their size is defined based on waterbody category (Table 3.50).
Table 3.50 - RHCA Default Buffer Widths
RHCA Default Buffer Widths
Description

Flow Regime

INFS

Perennial

Perennial Fish Bearing Stream

1

Perennial

Perennial Non-Fish Bearing Stream

2

Wetlands

Lakes, ponds, and wetlands > 1 acre

3

Intermittent/Ephemeral &
Wetlands

Intermittent/Ephemeral Non-Fish
Bearing Stream & Wetlands < 1 acre

4

ERV = Edge of Riparian Vegetation

INFS RHCA Width

300 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
150 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
150 feet on each side unless
extended by ERV or slope
50 or 100* feet on each side
unless extended by ERV or slope

*Priority watersheds (WS) have a 100 feet RHCA for Class 4

ANALYSIS AREA
For the East Reservoir project, analysis watersheds are delineated along hydrologic boundaries using GIS.
In general, these watersheds roughly correspond to 6th code HUCs using the NRCS classification of
hydrologic units (Department of Interior, USGS 2009). The East Reservoir analysis area consists of five
6th field HUCs; Dunn Creek, Canyon Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland Creek and Fivemile Creek.
Additionally, portions of the Lake Koocanusa and Kootenai River HUCs are included. All the watersheds
are tributaries to Lake Koocanusa, except Dunn Creek is a tributary to the Kootenai River. There are
small, diffuse (do not have a common outlet), intermittent, and non-fish bearing tributaries to Lake
Koocanusa and the Kootenai River that are identified, but not carried through all analyses because they do
not lend themselves to surveying, water yield, and/or sediment analysis. Figure 1 depicts the East
Reservoir analysis area.
Direct, indirect and cumulative effects from past, current, proposed and reasonably foreseeable activities
are discussed for water resources in the analysis area. In general, a cumulative effects boundary is
adequate when all the upstream activities are included and the effects are not discernible at a downstream
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 134 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

boundary. Lake Koocanusa and the Kootenai River are the boundary. Therefore the cumulative effects
boundary is the same as the direct and indirect effects boundary for this analysis.
Figure 1. East Reservoir Analysis Area

METHODS, ASSUMPTIONS and LIMITATIONS

Stream Flow
Timber harvest can increase the total water yield and/or peak flow generated during spring snowmelt or
rainfall events. The increase in spring runoff can lead to localized adverse hydrologic responses. This
depends on the magnitude of the increase, the stream type and the channel condition. In northwest
Montana, increases in peak flows are primarily due to modifications in snow accumulation, snowmelt
runoff and changes in evapotranspiration rates (USDA Forest Service 1973b). These increases are then
modified by components of the transportation network (roads and stream crossings) that interrupt normal
runoff patterns.
The only Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) standard for stream flow is the following:
Projects involving significant vegetation removal will, prior to including them on implementation
schedules, require a watershed cumulative effects feasibility analysis to ensure that water yield or
sediment will not increase beyond acceptable limits. The analysis will also identify opportunities, if any
exist, for mitigating adverse effects on water-related beneficial uses (USDA Forest Service 1987a, p II24).
The KNFP suggests using the Water Yield Guidelines in Appendix 18 of the KNFP (USDA Forest
Service 1987b). The intent of the water yield analysis process is to protect beneficial uses from the
potential effects of peak flow increases. However, threshold-type water yield increase numbers such as
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 135 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

those identified in the KNFP and in subsequent documents are to be used as "red flags” to indicate
instances where the potential is higher for channel damage from flows. The intent is that these "red flags"
would show a need for more extensive field reviews that would ultimately result in either modifications or
mitigation. In instances where time limitations did not allow for field review, activity would be reduced or
rescheduled until levels fall below the threshold. The threshold numbers are not necessarily static and can
change based on the condition or trend of the stream channel.
Water yield increase thresholds, ranging from 10 to 20% peak flow increase (PFI), represented the best
information available at the time the KNFP was written. These numbers were developed over time as
watersheds were compared with modeled results, beginning in the 1970s with the release of Hydrology
Part 2 (USDA Forest Service 1974). The thresholds were based on a qualitative survey that gave each
stream a rating of poor, fair, good, and excellent.
An equivalent clearcut acre (ECA) calculator was used in conjunction with the R1 Water and Sediment
Yield Model (R1-WATSED) to predict PFIs for the existing and expected conditions of the watersheds in
the analysis area. ECAs are a commonly used tool to analyze the change in peak flow by translating
canopy removal from timber harvest, road building and natural disturbances to a common unit, an ECA.
ECA units are in acres, but are usually displayed as a percentage of the watershed area. The ECA
calculator takes into account the initial percentage of crown removal and the recovery through re-growth
of the vegetation after the initial harvest or disturbance.
The ECA figures are then used to calculate water yield, in the form of PFIs, using regression curves
generated from running the R1-WATSED Model over a variety of watershed sizes and precipitation
regimes. The values generated from these calculations are used along with other information such as
stream condition and channel type to interpret the existing and potential impacts resulting from past,
present and proposed land management activities.
The R1-WATSED was used to predict existing and expected conditions of watersheds from logging, fire
and roads. It was designed to simulate the effects of natural disturbances and land management activities
on average monthly water yields and peak flows.
The R1-WATSED model was used to compare alternatives with regard to changes in stream flow. The
model begins by estimating the average annual water yield for a given watershed in an undisturbed
condition. R1-WATSED assumes a fully forested watershed. These calculations use precipitation in
inches by landtype, hydrologic regime (reflected through a representative gauged stream) and a natural
runoff function (precipitation to annual discharge conversion) to produce acre-feet of average annual
water yield. R1-WATSED uses this estimated natural runoff and the existing computed disturbed areas
(harvest, roads, and other disturbed acreage ECAs) to determine the total water yield increase. Next, R1WATSED uses an Average Water Yield Increase Factor to estimate increases in runoff due to proposed
management and/or fire. This factor expresses changes in evapotranspiration, interception and snow
accumulation and storage resulting from activities in the drainage. In addition, R1-WATSED uses an
equation that is based on reductions of infiltration and increased drainage efficiency due to roads, to
determine the runoff increases resulting from new roads. Logarithmic curves, based on habitat type
groups, are then used to determine the vegetative/hydrologic recovery following logging, site preparation,
and fire activities. Finally, R1-WATSED uses this recovery rate in conjunction with the above
information to aid in the determination of the yearly water yield increase.
R1-WATSED was not designed, nor is it used, to develop exact estimates of flow. The model provides a
consistent method of comparing alternatives to each other as well as to modeled natural conditions and/or
measured stream conditions. The values generated by the model, in concert with other water resource
information such as stream condition and channel type, are used to interpret the potential effects to a
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 136 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

stream channel as a result of implementing a proposed land management activity. Values generated by the
model are not to be considered as an absolute measure against verifiable standards, nor by themselves
provide an answer in regard to the effects land management activities have on peak flow.
Conditions of the Model that require additional evaluation and documentation include episodic climatic
events such as rain-on-snow (ROS), high-intensity thunderstorms, saturation caused mass soil movement,
or shorter-duration peak flow events (majority of these are not prevalent in the analysis area – refer to
existing condition section). Analysis of these, where needed, must be done outside of the model. Refer to
the Soil and Water Project File for additional information on ECA and R1-WATSED models.
It is important to note that effects will be analyzed with regard to normal or average conditions and
impacts to watershed processes in order to focus the analysis and more clearly contrast the alternatives.
Precipitation events with return intervals greater than six years are highly variable in nature and largely
speculative in terms of quantifying effects (Grant et al. 2008). Large fires, major floods and extreme
episodes of bank instability and sediment movement are normal for these larger events (Benda et al.
1998). The magnitudes of these events far overshadow the potential effects of this project proposal.
Project impacts are not analyzed in this context, but rather within the context of the desired conditions in
the watershed – stable banks, healthy riparian and aquatic habitat, and attainment of full support of all
designated beneficial uses.
Stream Channel Condition
Extensive field data including, Rosgen channel classification, stream flow, and water quality, has been
collected in the East Reservoir analysis area for more than ten years. Field data is on file at the Canoe
Gulch Ranger Station. This data was the foundation for the existing condition and the effects analysis for
this project. The stream classification, stability, dimensions and substrate data were collected using the
Rosgen (1996) methodology and the Region 1 Aquatic Ecosystem Unit Inventory (AEUI) technical
guide. This data provides a good indicator of trends in watershed condition. Stream channels change as a
result of both man-caused and natural events; these changes are an indicator of the effects past
disturbance has had on the watershed and/or the sensitivity of the watershed to disturbance. It is important
to note that not all measured parameters have to fall within reference parameters for a stream to be
considered healthy. These are natural systems and even unmanaged reference streams do not fit entirely
within each individual category.
Representative reaches previously identified in the East Reservoir analysis area were resurveyed. These
reaches are assumed to represent the overall condition of the watershed. Other portions on the stream
channel that have not been quantitatively monitored may have varying levels of stability. Stream survey
sites are located throughout the watershed and represent areas that could have no impact and areas that
could be impacted from the proposed activities. Areas that have the highest potential for effects, known as
response reaches, will continue to be monitored following implementation of the proposed activities.
Water Quality
Roads and Motorized Trails
Roads and motorized trails are known to re-route surface runoff and sub-surface flow; and/or increase
sedimentation. Non-point sources of pollution are the primary cause of degraded water quality. For over
25 years, studies have shown that poorly maintained and located roads are often the highest contributors
of non-point source sediment in forested areas (Brooks et al. 1997; Luce and Wemple 2001), and impact
aquatic habitat (Furniss et al. 1991). A study on the KNF found that fine sediment in channels correlated
with road density (MacDonald et al. 1997).
Roads and motorized trails may also affect the hydrologic response of a watershed, including the timing
and magnitude of the hydrograph. Wemple and Jones (2003) found that depending on the nature of storm
events, watershed characteristics and road segment attributes, storm flow response may be more rapid and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 137 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

have greater peaks because of the effect roads have on hillslope flow. The amount of road or motorized
trail adjacent to stream courses is an important indicator of potential impacts. Sediment sources within
300 feet of a water body have higher probabilities of delivering sediment into the water bodies (Belt et al.
1992, Furniss et al. 2000). Roads or motorized trails within RHCAs preclude the growth of trees, decrease
tree density in the riparian area, reduce the availability of LWD for recruitement, decrease shading and
impact riparian and aquatic habitat. Roads or motorized trails immediately adjacent to streams degrade
habitat by increasing fine sediment levels, reduce pool volumes, increase channel migration and
exacerbate seasonal temperature extremes.
Total road density (TRD), riparian road density (RRD), and stream crossing density (SCD) were used in
this analysis to describe watershed conditions and assess potential sediment sources. TRD is the ratio of
road length per watershed area; RRD is the ratio of road length per RHCA area, and stream crossing
density is the ratio of stream crossings per watershed area. The watershed condition factors (Table 3.51)
were acquired from the Upper Kootenai Sub-basin Review.
Table 3.51 - Watershed Condition Evaluation
WATERSHED CONDITION or
INTEGRITY – DISTURBANCE
EVALUATION FACTORS
% ECA for the WATERSHED
STREAM CROSSING DENSITY
(#/mi2 of watershed)

Riparian Area Road Density

Total Watershed Road Density

DISTURBANCE FACTOR SCALING
HIGH

MODERATE

LOW

>30%

15-30%

<15%

>3/MI2

1.5-3/MI2

<1.5/MI2

Factor based on Mean Annual Precipitation (MAP) for the 6th
HUC Watershed:
MAP >40”
>2.0 mi/mi2 = HIGH
0.5-2.0 mi/mi2 = MDT
<0.5 mi/mi2 = LOW
MAP 20-40”
>3.0 mi/mi2 = HIGH
1.0-3.0 mi/mi2 = MDT
<1.0 mi/mi2 = LOW
MAP <20”
>3.0 mi/mi2 = HIGH
1.5-3.0 mi/mi2 = MDT
<1.5 mi/mi2 = LOW
Factor based on Mean Annual Precipitation (MAP) for the 6th
HUC Watershed:
MAP >40”
>3.0 mi/mi2 = HIGH
1.5-3.0 mi/mi2 = MDT
<1.5 mi/mi2 = LOW
MAP 20-40”
>3.5 mi/mi2 = HIGH
1.5-3.5 mi/mi2 = MDT
<1.5 mi/mi2 = LOW
MAP <20”
>5.0 mi/mi2 = HIGH
1.5-5.0 mi/mi2 = MDT
<1.5 mi/mi2 = LOW

The analysis of total road density, riparian road density and stream crossing density was used as a
surrogate for the potential of roads affecting flow alteration and sedimentation. The use of this
methodology does have some limitations:
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 138 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

•
•
•
•

There are site-specific differences on each road that could affect erosion or transport of sediment.
Landtypes vary throughout the watersheds.
Precipitation regimes differ slightly within the watersheds.
There is no differentiation of road distance to streams and therefore, the potential to route sediment to
streams is the same for each road.
• Mapped roads may be overgrown and may not be an active sediment source.

This methodology does not provide absolute numbers. However, it does provide estimates for comparison
of alternatives. In addition, road density calculations are commonly used as a watershed indicator within
the agency as well as among other agencies and researchers.
Additionally, roads identified during the Travel Analysis Process (TAP) for National Forest Management
Act (NFMA) as potential intermittent stored service opportunities were assessed for water resource
concerns. Road stream crossings were surveyed for appropriate structure sizing, alignment and function;
and whether or not best management practices (BMPs) were being met. This information was used to
determine the appropriate treatment

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
REFERENCE CONDITIONS
The watersheds in the East Reservoir analysis area have developed over time by adjusting to changes in
climate, flow regimes, sediment inputs and vegetation. Long before human-induced changes began to
occur, natural disturbances were present across the landscape due to beavers, insects, disease, wildfire and
climate. Pre-settlement conditions in this area were likely to have been a repetitious cycle of disturbance
and recovery, a pattern referred to as a pulse disturbance regime. Under a pulse disturbance regime, a
disturbance occurs, resulting in a quick increase in water and/or sediment delivery that could potentially
trigger some channel destabilization. The affected channel would then recover through time and generally
stabilize until the next disturbance event. These disturbances typically occurred in a patchy, mosaic
pattern (in both time and space), so that some areas remained undisturbed by a given event and provided
refuge habitat for fish and other aquatic organisms.
Historically, the most prevalent large-scale disturbance in the analysis area was wildfire. High-intensity/
stand replacing fires varied in frequency but had pronounced effects. Once high-intensity fire passed
through an area, sediment delivery and water yield increased until forest floor and canopy vegetation had
sufficiently recovered. During the fire disturbance cycle, large woody debris usually remained within
channels and riparian zones and greatly aided the recovery of this area. It is very likely that increased
erosion followed these fires, especially on steep slopes and in headwater channels where most vegetation
would have been removed. More frequent and lower-intensity fires likely had little effect on this
watershed due to the minimal loss of overstory trees and understory duff layers.
Other disturbances that occurred were floods, debris slides, beaver dam failures and beaver dam
construction. Floods may have affected several adjacent drainages or even the entire analysis area at the
same time and occurred in a similar temporal pattern as the wildfires, usually providing time for recovery
between major events. Channel stability and aquatic habitat can be affected by floods. Steep reaches tend
to scour and the material may be deposited in lower gradient reaches. Un-vegetated or unstable
streambanks may be destabilized further and contribute sediment to the system. There are sites in the East
Reservoir analysis area were debris slides may have occurred though not common across the landscape.
There are remnant beaver dams in Fivemile Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland Creek and Dunn Creek;
evidence of historic beaver activity in the analysis area. The failure of beaver dams would result in
flooding and contribute a sediment pulse to the stream system subsequently impacting stream morphology
and function temporarily. Conversely, beaver dam construction would convert free flowing streams (lotic)
to ponds (lentic). Beaver ponds would help capture sediment derived elsewhere in the system, capture
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 139 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

spring runoff, and retain water throughout the year longer thus sustaining flows during the dry season.
Over the last century, there has been an anthropogenic change in the watershed disturbance regime.
Management activities in the analysis area, including road building, forest canopy removal, riparian
harvest, railroad construction, beaver extirpation and cattle grazing have resulted in changes to water and
sediment routing, stream morphology and hydrology. These changes tend to be lower in magnitude than
post-disturbance effects from natural disturbances. However, the watersheds have not returned to a premanagement level due to the persistence of water and sediment increases contributed from roads in the
riparian area and at stream crossings, continued cattle grazing, and other ongoing management activities.
Sustained, moderate increases in water and sediment yields have resulted in the establishment of a ‘press’
disturbance regime (Wegner 1996) that has influenced the watershed for the last 40-50 years.
The existing press disturbance regime is characterized by nearly constant, moderate levels of effects
(increased water and sediment yields). The historic pulse disturbance regime had higher levels of effects,
but the disturbances were less frequent and typically allowed time for system recovery between
disturbance events.
EXISTING CONDITIONS
The existing conditions are the result of past management activities (road construction, timber harvest,
prescribed burning, cattle grazing, fish habitat enhancement, riparian area enclosure, extirpation of
beavers, etc.) and natural events (wildfire, floods, landslides, etc.) that occurred in the analysis area.
Information pertaining to historical timber harvest, prescribed burning and wildfire can be found in
Chapter 3 of this DEIS. Currently, there are cattle grazing allotments in Canyon Creek, Cripple Horse
Creek, Warland Creek, and Fivemile Creek. The only active grazing allotment is in Fivemile Creek. The
other grazing allotments have not been active for several years.
Past fish habitat enhancement projects have included installing large woody debris (LWD), gravel, kdams, and constructing riparian/stream enclosures. LWD was installed in Cripple Horse Creek from 1990
to 1992. Gravel and k-dams were installed in Canyon Creek in 1994, and LWD was installed in 1996. A
riparian/ stream enclosure to keep cattle out of a sensitive area was built in Warland Creek in 1995 and
expanded in 1996; the enclosure encompasses 20 acres. No fish habitat enhancement projects have
occurred in Dunn Creek and Fivemile Creek.
Geology and Climate
The physical environment of streams and lakes is determined by the geologic and climatic characteristics
of the watershed. Geology and climate are important because some watersheds are inherently more
sensitive to disturbance than others. Watersheds with higher mean annual precipitation have greater
potential for flood events and erosion of sensitive areas or steep slopes. For example, all things being
equal, a watershed with 50” of mean annual precipitation is much more susceptible to problems than a
watershed with 20” due to the additional volume of water. The greater the input of water, the greater the
potential for soils to become saturated, leading to surface runoff. In addition, areas with shallow soils
(bedrock) have less water holding capacity and are therefore more likely to have higher runoff.
The analysis area has been influenced by continental glaciers. The glaciers scoured the ridge tops and
noses and filled the side-slopes and valleys. Lacustrine and glacial outwash terraces exist along the
Koocanusa Reservoir and the Kootenai River. Elevation ranges from 2,200 feet near the Kootenai River
to 6,051 feet at the top of Davis Mountain.
The analysis area is underlain by metamorphic sedimentary rocks; quartzites, argillites, and siltites,
known as the Belt Formation. These rocks were formed approximately one billion years ago from fine
sediment deposits of sand, silt, clay, and carbonate that accumulated at the bottom of ancient seas. These
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 140 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

deposits were changed into hard dense rock formations under great pressure and heat. They form a
relatively stable foundation for the watersheds in this area (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995). For more
information on the geology in the analysis area, refer to the Soils Section of the Document.
The analysis area falls within KNF Hydraulic Region III, which is occasionally influenced by rain-onsnow events (USDA Forest Service 1990; Hoffman 1993; MacDonald et al. 1997). The mean annual
precipitation in the analysis area ranges from 15- 20 inches near Lake Koocanusa to 35-40 inches in the
headwaters (Figure 2). At lower elevations, most of the precipitation falls as rain; while in the upper
elevations most of the precipitation falls as snow.
Geological and climatic attributes are discussed here to describe a watershed’s inherent sensitivity to
disturbance. These inherent conditions do not change as a result of management. They merely set the
stage for analysis of effects. Therefore, geology and climate will only be discussed further in this analysis
as they pertain to other indicators.
Figure 2 - Precipitation Ranges for East Reservoir Analysis Area

Stream Flow
Stream flow can be discussed in terms of annual yield or PFIs. The greatest potential for change within a
stream channel occurs during high-flow periods (King 1989). Therefore, increases in magnitude and
duration of peak flows are of the most concern.
Spring peak flows in the analysis area normally occur during May or June (Hoffman 1993), but elevated
flows can occur throughout the year in response to precipitation events. The timing, magnitude and
duration of runoff events may be changed when vegetation is removed by management activities or
natural disturbances.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 141 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

The removal of forest canopy through natural disturbances or management activities affects snow
accumulation and melting processes, commonly resulting in an increase in snow-pack accumulation and
snowmelt rates, thereby increasing runoff magnitude and volume (MacDonald et al. 1997; and Hoffman
1993). Generally, there is an increase in water yield due to the combination of reduced evapotranspiration
and precipitation interception.
Runoff patterns can be affected when water is rerouted by roads. The compacted soils associated with
roads and trails can act as sources of overland flow and can intercept groundwater, converting it to surface
flow. Roads and corresponding ditches, if not properly drained, can extend the stream channel network,
increasing the drainage efficiency of the watershed. Changes in flow patterns can result in higher but
shorter peak flows and/or a series of smaller, more prolonged peak flows depending on aspect, elevation,
precipitation, drainage pattern, etc. Interception and re-direction of runoff by roads, landings, and trails
can contribute additional runoff.
The existing percent ECA was acquired from the KNF Watershed Condition Rating and in the analysis
area indicates that Cripple Horse Creek and Dunn Creek have a moderate disturbance level and Canyon
Creek, Warland Creek and Fivemile Creek have a low disturbance level. The streams in the analysis area
were described as being in fair to good condition. The recommended peak flow increase (RPFI) was set at
a conservative 14% (fair = 12-16%; good = 14 to 18%) for the streams in the analysis area based on
existing ECA and PFI. The KNFP allows for a +/- 2% adjustment based on stream conditions. The peak
flow associated with the existing ECA, calculated for the year 2012, range from 6 to 10. The PFI is within
the allowable range given the existing channel conditions of fair to good. The ECAs, PFIs, and ECA
recovery per year for the East Reservoir analysis area are presented in Table 3.52.
ECAs and PFIs were not calculated for streams that concurrently reside in the proposed analysis area and
in the Lake Koocanusa-Little Jackson and the Upper Kootenai River HUCs because these streams are
intermittent/ephemeral and there is no channel condition data to assess potential impacts.
Table 3.52 - Existing ECA’s, PFI’s, and ECA Recovery by Watershed – 2012
WATERSHED

WATERSHED SIZE
(acres)

TOTAL
ECA

EXISTING
% ECA

EXISTING PEAK
FLOW %

ECA FOR
1% PFI

ECA
RECOVERY
PER YEAR

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

21,666
13,184
21,823
8,520
18,434

2,968
1,678
4,048
867
1,892

14
13
19
10
10

7
7
10
6
6

433
264
436
170
369

143
81
144
50
119

Additionally, there are two active stream flow monitoring locations within the East Reservoir analysis
area, one on Cripple Horse Creek and one on Warland Creek. Cripple Horse Creek and Warland Creek
have been monitored since 1992 and 1994, respectively. Figures 3 and 4 depict the stage/discharge
relationship and R2 values for the stream flow stations in the analysis area for the years of 2002 to 2011.
In a perfect situation (or a concrete flume study) the relationship (R2) would equal 1. That is, an increase
in water stage (ft.) and its corresponding increase in water discharge (cubic feet per second = cfs) would
have a consistent relationship. For natural stream systems, the closer the R2 value is to 1 the better and if
the R2 value can be maintained over the course of many years then the stream channel at that location is
considered to be very stable. Lower values indicate a stream channel in transition (either in a positive or
negative direction). Outliers in the datasets for Warland Creek and Cripple Horse Creek were removed to
get a best fit line; outliers may be attributed to human error during discharge and gage height
measurement collection and/or lack of sufficient high flow data.
Warland Creek and Cripple Horse Creek at the monitoring locations are stable (Figures 3 and 4), with R2
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 142 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

of 0.83 and R2 of 0.87 respectively. Past and current PFIs are not causing channel changes in and around
the monitoring sites in Warland Creek and Cripple Horse Creek, though other locations in the watersheds
may be in a state of transition. Stable conditions at the Warland Creek monitoring location are attributed
to the construction of an enclosure to keep cattle out of a sensitive riparian area. The Warland Creek site
has been fenced off for more than 10 years and in that time the riparian vegetation; alder and willows,
have colonized the streambanks and provide stability during peak flows. The Cripple Horse Creek site is
located in a grazing allotment but active grazing has not occurred there for 10 years. The stable conditions
at the Cripple Horse Creek site are attributed to the lack of grazing activity.
Figure 3 - Stage/Discharge Relationship and R2 Value for Warland Creek (2002-2011)
3

Stage Height (ft)

2.5

R² = 0.8366

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.1

1

10

100

Discharge (cfs)

Figure 4 - Stage/Discharge Relationship and R2 Value for Cripple Horse Creek (2002-2011)
3
2.5

Stage Height (ft)

2

R² = 0.8746

1.5
1
0.5
0
0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

Discharge (cfs)

Stream Channel Conditions
The Rosgen Stream Classification System (Rosgen 1996) was used in this analysis to help explain the
processes, functions and patterns of channels and to predict channel responses. The Rosgen Classification
is derived from field measurements of stream attributes including entrenchment, width-depth ratio (W/D),
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 143 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

sinuosity and slope. These channel attributes are maintained by bankfull flows. Bankfull flows typically
occur every 1.5 to 2 years. The major stream types found in the analysis area are depicted in Table 3.53.
Table 3.53 - Rosgen Channel Types Identified in the East Reservoir Analysis Area
STREAM
TYPE

DESCRIPTION

A

Steep, entrenched,
cascading, step-pool, high
energy debris transport.
Very stable if bedrock or
boulder dominated.

B

Moderately entrenched,
moderate gradient, riffle
dominated channel with
infrequent pools. Stable
banks, stable plan and
profile.

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

W/D

SINUOSITY

SLOPE

<1.4

< 12

1.0-1.2

.04-.10

1.4 – 2.2

> 12

> 1.2

.02-.039

E

Low gradient, meandering
riffle/pool stream with low
width/depth ratio, and high
meander width ration.
Very stable.

>2.2

<12

<1.5

<.02

F

Entrenched, meandering
riffle-pool channel with
low gradient and high
W/D.

<1.4

> 12

> 1.2

< .02

LANDFORM/FEATURES

High relief. Frequently
spaced deep pools in
step-pool sequence. May
be used for rearing by
juvenile fish, if fish are
present.
Moderate relief.
Moderate entrenchment
and W/D. Predominantly
rapids with scour pools.
Important spawning
habitat.
Broad valley/ meadows.
Alluvial materials
w/floodplains. Highly
sinuous, riffle/pool
morphology w/very low
width/depth ratios.
Entrenched. Gentle
gradient, high W/D.
Riffle-pool. Laterally
unstable with high bank
erosion rates.

A numerical classification of particle size is added to the basic Rosgen Level II Channel Type to
characterize the size of the material that makes up the channel bed. Bed material size is important to
channel stability and response because smaller particles can be eroded and transported by lower energy
flows than larger particles. The bed material description and size is depicted in Table 3.54.
Table 3.54 - Rosgen Bed Material Size Categories (from Rosgen 1996)
CATEGORY

DESCRIPTION

PARTICLE SIZES (MM)

1
2
3
4
5
6

Bedrock
Boulder
Cobble
Gravel
Sand
Silt or Clay

N/A
> 256
64 - 256
2 - 64
.062 - 2
< .062

The reach condition (Rosgen 1996, Table 4) is a conversion of the Pfankuch channel stability rating based
on stream type (Table 3.55). The objective of a stream type conversion with the rating values from the
original channel stability rating system is to reflect the naturally inherent and differing value ranges for
each stream type, values shown are simply an index to channel stability (Rosgen 1996). The reach
condition can indicate (1) a stream’s potential departure from typical stability conditions, (2) sensitivity to
potential change associated with channel disturbance, and (3) increased sensitivity and potential for
erosion due to increases in stream flow magnitude and duration. A stability rating of ‘fair’ or ‘poor’ does
not indicate that a channel is currently in ‘fair’ or ‘poor’ condition, but that it has a higher chance to
become destabilized with increased peak flows or sediment delivery. These ratings do not necessarily
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 144 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

indicate departures from natural channel conditions. A stream channel in “poor” condition could be
displaying these effects from natural events, i.e. intense flood event, wildfire induced debris flows, etc.
Table 3.55 - Pfankuch Stability Rating and Rosgen Reach Condition
PFANKUCH STABILITY RATING

ROSGEN REACH CONDITION

< 38
39 - 76
77 – 114
>115

Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor

Stream channels are variable in how they respond to changes in the natural levels of runoff (peak flows)
and/or the amount of sediment that is input into the stream system. The response of streams to increased
levels of these items above natural levels is dependent on the makeup of the stream channel and how that
particular stream channel recovers from disturbances. The response of streams to imposed change is not
uniform among stream types. Table 3.56 lists the interpretations for the stream’s sensitivity to changes in
flows and sediment, recovery potential, natural sediment sources from the stream channel and stream
bank erosion potential for the geomorphic stream type found in the analysis area.
Table 3.56 - Sensitivity of Stream Types in the Analysis Area to Changes
in Streamflow and/or Sediment Supply (Rosgen 1996)
ROSGEN STREAM
TYPE

SENSITIVITY to
INCREASED PEAK
FLOWS and/or SEDIMENT

RECOVERY
POTENTIAL

NATURAL SEDIMENT
SOURCES from STREAM
CHANNEL

STREAMBANK
EROSION
POTENTIAL

A4
B1a
B2a
B3
B3a
B4
B4a
B4b
B4c
E3a
E4
E4a
E4b
F3
F3b
F4
F4a
F4b
G3

Extreme
Very Low
Very Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Moderate
Moderate
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Very High

Very Poor
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Good
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor

Very High
Very Low
Very Low
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High

Very High
Very Low
Very Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
High
High
High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High
Very High

a - Includes increases in streamflow magnitude and timing and/or sediment increases.
b – Assumes natural recovery once cause of instability is corrected.
c – Includes suspended and bedload from channel derived sources and/or from stream adjacent slopes.
d – Vegetation that influences width/depth ratio-stability.

Roads in RHCAs may constrain the stream channel and reduce valley width. Consequently, the stream
profile, pattern and form may adjust and find a new equilibrium to accommodate for the reduced valley
width. This can result in down-cutting and/or lateral migration away from the armored roadbed. Both
processes may contribute to increased sediment loading.
Furthermore, cattle grazing in RHCAs can reduce riparian vegetation which decreases root density and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 145 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

strength. The trampling of streambanks by cattle increases width/depth ratios, while at the same time
weakening stream banks, and making them more susceptible to erosion (Bengeyfield 2007). In-stream
sediment increases also result from the trampling of streambanks by cattle.
Moreover, the elimination of beavers from the watersheds can result in changes to the geomorphology,
hydrology and riparian/wetland structure as well as vegetation. Beaver dams raise local water table
elevations, divert streamflow into the subsurface, enhance surface and groundwater interaction and
increase hydraulic residence time (Apple 1985; Woo and Waddington 1990; Lautz et al. 2006;
Westbrooke et al. 2006). Elevated water tables cause changes in pressure heads of groundwater, which
can result in greater groundwater upwelling downstream of beaver dams which may result in cooler water
temperatures downstream (White 1990). Alternately shallow ponds receive more solar radiation and may
reduce the influence of upwelling on downstream water temperatures (Fuller and Peckarsky 2011).
Beaver dams also reduce water velocity and enable suspended sediment to settle which also supports
riparian vegetation.
With regard to the changes discussed above, the implementation of RHCAs and BMPs are the best
available management tools to improve stream channel conditions within the analysis area. For more
detailed information on BMPs refer to the INFS.
Stream channel surveys at permanent monitoring sites in the analysis area were conducted in 2006.
Stream channel surveys are conducted approximately every five years to assess geomorphic changes,
either due to natural or land management actions. Stream channel condition data for Dunn Creek, Canyon
Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland Creek and Fivemile Creek is displayed in Tables 3.57, 3.58, 3.59,
3.60 and 3.61. Stream channel monitoring locations are displayed in Figure 5.
Figure 5 - Stream Monitoring Locations East Reservoir Analysis Area

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 146 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

Dunn Creek
Reaches monitored in Dunn Creek display a variety of conditions, Table 3.57. The stream types found in
the Dunn Creek area range from Rosgen type A4 to F4b. The Pfankuch stream stability ratings range from
41 to 74 and indicate that the middle and upper reach conditions are either fair or good. Stream channel
conditions in the lower portion of Dunn Creek are being affected by an undersized Montana Department
of Transportation (MDOT) culvert on Hwy 37 and the undersized historical railroad concrete box culvert.
The undersized MDOT culvert has resulted in aggradation and stream channel braiding upstream.
Subsequently, the stream is no longer aligned with the culvert and water is bypassing the culvert and
flowing under Hwy 37 through the large aggregate. Additionally, the MDOT culvert is perched and a
large scour pool has developed at the outlet. The undersized historic railroad concrete box culvert has
resulted in aggradation, stream channel braiding upstream and erosion at the edges of the structure; there
is also a large scour pool at the outlet, and a large head-cut has formed further downstream. The head-cut
is expected to progress upstream towards the structure and potentially undermine it, and streambank
erosion is occurring upstream of the structure. The entire lower reach goes dry during the late summer and
early fall and is an aquatic organism barrier at those times; the historical railroad concrete box culvert is a
barrier during high and low flows; and the MDOT culvert is and aquatic organism barrier year round.
Table 3.57- Channel Conditions in Dunn Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
STREAM
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

WIDTH/
DEPTH
RATIO

SINUOSITY

SLOPE

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

1
2
3
4 (trib)
4A
5
6 (trib)
7
8 (trib)
9
10
11 (trib)

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

B3a
B4c
F4b
A4
B4
B4
F4b
B3a
B4a
F4
F4b
B1a

14
14.8
15.5
6.4
15.6
11.7
9.3
8.2
6
8.1
5.3
8.9

1.8
1.6
1.22
1.25
1.82
1.88
0.89
1.83
2.21
1.32
1.28
1.36

11.4
35.23
19.8
9.41
22.29
15.2
26.57
15.19
20
17.61
22.1
32.5

1.12
1.3
1.07
1.28
1.19
1.4
1.19
1.3
1.2
1.18
1.01
1.28

4
1.5
3.3
5.4
2.7
2.8
8.3
4.4
9.6
0.6
5.2
9.9

74
66
43
46
57
59
55
41
43
74
46
48

Fair
Fair
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Fair

Canyon Creek
Reaches monitored in Canyon Creek display a variety of conditions, Table 3.58. The stream types found
in the Canyon Creek area range from Rosgen type B3 to F4b. The Pfankuch stream stability ratings range
from 48 to 73 and the reach conditions are either fair or good.

Table 3.58 - Channel Conditions in Canyon Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
STREAM
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

WIDTH/
DEPTH
RATIO

SINUOSITY

SLOPE

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

1
2
3
4

2006
2006
2006
2006

F4b
B3
B4
F4b

11.2
10
9
9.4

1.28
2.01
1.77
1.07

28.7
12.65
14.5
33.57

1.26
1.46
1.5
1.07

2.8
2.3
3.4
4

73
64
48
51

Good
Fair
Good
Good

Cripple Horse Creek
Reaches monitored in Cripple Horse Creek display a variety of conditions, Table 3.59. The stream types
found in the Cripple Horse Creek area range from Rosgen type B3 to F4b. The Pfankuch stream stability
ratings range from 42 to 81 and the reach conditions are either fair or good.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 147 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

Table 3.59 - Channel Conditions in Cripple Horse Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
STREAM
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

WIDTH/
DEPTH
RATIO

1
2
3
3A (trib)
4
5
6
6A
7
8
9

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

F4b
F3
B3
G3
F2b
E4b
B3
B3
B4c
E4a
B3a

22.2
18.3
19.3
5.6
18.6
7.6
18.3
18.1
13.5
8.7
11.6

1.34
1.26
1.47
3.45
1.17
4.86
1.57
1.19
1.57
3.18
1.47

23.6
23.46
41.95
7.17
24.8
7.16
20.56
16.16
16.07
8.96
11.2

SINUOSITY

1.4
1.34
1.29
1.21
1.34
1.05
1.39
1.07
2.24
1.04
1.4

SLOPE

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

2.3
2
2.7
7.5
4
3
3
3.3
1.7
6.1
5.2

56
81
72
42
56
69
58
65
56
44
73

Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Good
Fair
Good
Good
Fair

Warland Creek
The stream types found in the Warland Creek area are Rosgen type B4 and E4, Table 3.60. The Pfankuch
stream stability ratings are 56 and 61and the reach conditions are good. The Warland Creek monitoring
site is located in a grazing allotment. The site was initially fenced off in 1995 and was expanded in 1996.
The 20 acre site was excluded from cattle grazing to help restore the riparian habitat and a wetland area
adjacent to the stream. The stream channel conditions within the enclosure still exhibit some of the effects
of cattle grazing though riparian habitat is recovering and the streambanks are slowly stabilizing. This is
also illustrated in the R2 values depicted in Figure 3. Stream channel conditions elsewhere in the
watershed are unknown though also show some impacts from cattle grazing.
Table 3.60 - Channel Conditions in Warland Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
STREAM
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

WIDTH/
DEPTH
RATIO

SINUOSITY

SLOPE

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

1
1

2007
2006

E4
B4

6.8
5.5

3.37
1.89

8.83
7.74

1.31
1.33

1.9
2.4

56
61

Good
Good

Fivemile Creek
Reaches monitored in Fivemile Creek display a variety of conditions, Table 3.61. The stream types found
in the Fivemile Creek area range from Rosgen type B2a to F4b. The Pfankuch stream stability ratings
range from 51 to 75 and the reach conditions are either fair or good.
Table 3.61 - Channel Conditions in Fivemile Creek
SITE

YEAR

ROSGEN
STREAM
TYPE

BFW
(FT)

ENTRENCHMENT
RATIO

WIDTH/
DEPTH
RATIO

SINUOSITY

SLOPE

PFANKUCH
STABILITY
RATING

REACH
CONDITION

2
6
7
9b
10
13A
13B
13C

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

F4
F4
B4c
E4
B4
B2a
E3a
B4a

24.3
18
16
12.2
19
14.4
8.3
12.3

1.14
1.13
1.56
4.48
2.23
1.9
2.49
2.6

16.3
25
23.1
8.59
12.58
12.97
7.34
10.92

1.07
1.02
1.21
1.04
1.16
1.62
1.2
1.68

0.5
1.86
1.13
1.4
2.2
9.7
8
5.6

68
51
66
75
60
51
64
67

Good
Good
Fair
Good
Good
Fair
Fair
Good

Water Quality
The Clean Water Act (CWA) requires states to identify waterbodies they believe are not meeting water
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 148 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

quality guidelines and are at risk of not supporting their designated beneficial uses. These waterbodies are
called Water Quality Limited Segments (WQLS). Cripple Horse Creek is listed on the 1996 303(d) list.
The listed probable impaired uses are aquatic life support and cold water fishery, the cause siltation, and
the source agriculture, natural sources and silviculture. Watersheds in the analysis area do contribute
surface flow to the Kootenai River which is listed as a WQLS. The Kootenai River is listed for flow
alteration and thermal modifications caused by the Libby Dam. Future management actions will not affect
the existing flow alteration or thermal modifications to the Kootenai River therefore it will not be
discussed further.
Roads
There are approximately 121 miles of road in Dunn Creek, 14 miles in the RHCA, and 138 stream
crossings; 59 miles of road in Canyon Creek, 5 miles in the RHCA, and 60 stream crossings; 95 miles of
road in Cripple Horse Creek, 11 miles in the RHCA, and 89 stream crossings; 35 miles of road in
Warland Creek, 3 miles in the RHCA, and 34 stream crossings; 72 miles of road in Fivemile Creek, 9
miles in the RHCA, and 65 stream crossings. The highest road impact, RRD and SCD, is observed in
Dunn Creek. These high densities are partially attributable to the many other roads (Montana Department
of Natural Resources and Conservation, Plum Creek Timber Company) in the watershed. While Cripple
Horse Creek has moderate RRD and SCD compared to other watersheds in the analysis area, it would
have a higher priority for road work as it is a WQLS. The existing watershed condition class, based on the
Upper Kootenai Sub-basin Review evaluation factors, is displayed in Table 3.62. Figure 6 depicts the
stream crossings in the analysis area; they were derived from intersecting the KNF existing road layer
with the National Hydrologic Data layer for streams.
The condition rating indicates the potential impact of roads on water resources; decreased stream buffers,
channel hydraulic changes, reduced floodplain capacity, sediment sources, reduced thermal cover, and/or
decreased large woody debris recruitment. Roads located within the RHCA and road stream crossings are
efficient conduits of sediment to perennial and ephemeral/intermittent streams. Overall, with regard to
road densities, the watersheds in the East Reservoir analysis area have a moderate disturbance factor.
Table 3.62 - East Reservoir TRD, RRD, and SCD - 2010
WATERSHED

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse
Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

ROAD
miles

TRD
(mi/mi2)

DISTURBANCE
FACTOR

RIPARIAN
ROADS

RRD
(mi/mi2)

DISTURBANCE
FACTOR

STREAM
CROSSINGS

SCD
(#/mi2)

DISTURBANCE
FACTOR

121.2
59.1

3.6
2.9

High
Moderate

13.6
4.7

3.2
2.0

High
Moderate

138
60

4.1
2.9

High
Moderate

95.2

2.8

Moderate

10.5

2.7

Moderate

89

2.6

Moderate

35.3
71.9

2.7
2.5

Moderate
Moderate

1.6
8.6

1.5
2.8

Moderate
Moderate

34
65

2.6
2.3

Moderate
Moderate

A streambank erosion and sediment loading survey was conducted in Dunn Creek during the summer
2011 to ascertain and quantify in-stream sediment sources that may impact the proposed watershed
connectivity project (See Appendix J). The Bank Erosion Hazard Index (BEHI) method (Rosgen 2008)
was used to evaluate streambank condition (See Appendix J). The BEHI method integrates data
pertaining to bank length, average bank height, bank condition, bank materials, vegetation type and
density, Near Bank Stress (NBS) and land use into a numerical rating. Cumulatively, these ratings
generate a qualitative assessment of erosion severity. Current bank erosion rates for the Dunn Creek
watershed were determined by calibrating said data to measured bank erosion rates from the Blackfoot
River; based on similar geology and stream type.
The Dunn Creek watershed was divided into five reaches (Snag Gulch, Wyoma, Middle Dunn, Canyon
and River) based on stream type and valley type characteristics. The sediment survey evaluated a total of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 149 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

42 streambanks in these reaches. BEHI qualitative ratings ranged from low to extreme and sediment loss
ranged from 0.13 tons/year to 169 tons/year. The streambanks contributing the majority of sediment, 32
and 33, were identified in the Canyon Reach, on non-FS land in Section 3. Cumulatively, these two
streambanks are contributing more sediment to the system (193 tons/year) than all other measured banks
combined (169 tons/year). These bank occur in the reach where Dunn Creek is constricted by FS Road
#334, it has degraded and migrated laterally to the south and is undercutting the toe of a large deposit of
glacial outwash. The glacial outwash consists primarily of sand and silt, the sediment that results from the
erosion of these soils is particularly damaging to the spawning habitat of fish (Soil Survey of Kootenai
National Forest Area, Montana and Idaho, 1995). Per verbal communication with Montana Fish, Wildlife,
and Parks personnel the lower section of Dunn Creek historically was a primary fish spawning site
(Dunnigan and Hensler 2010). The sediment derived from these banks is being deposited upstream of the
Hwy 37 culvert and is contributing to the channel braiding observed there. For the more detailed Dunn
Creek Sediment Investigation Report (see the East Reservoir Project File and Appendix J for restoration
recommendations).
Figure 6 - Stream Crossing Locations East Reservoir Analysis Area

Motorized Trails
There are currently approximately 37 miles of motorized trails in the East Reservoir project area (Table
3.63). Trail 279 traverses the ridgeline between Warland Creek, Fivemile Creek and Cripple Horse Creek;
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 150 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

the trail has one stream crossing in Warland Creek. Trail 280 traverses the ridgeline between Warland
Creek and Cripple Horse Creek; the trail has no stream crossings. Trail 281 traverses the divide between
Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek; the trail has no stream crossings. Trail 420 traverses the divide
between Cripple Horse Creek and Dry Fork Creek as well as the divide between Canyon Creek and Dry
Fork Creek; the trail has one stream crossing. Trail 426 originates in the South Fork of Fivemile Creek
and connects to trail 279 on the divide between Fivemile Creek and Cripple Horse Creek. Trail 500
traverses the divide between Dunn Creek and Canyon Creek; the trail has no stream crossings.
The motorized trails have minimal stream crossings and are typically located on ridge lines which are
dominated by bedrock. The motorized trial locations limit the potential impacts to water resources.
However, the trails were not designed for motorized traffic (see the Recreation Section), as such there is
an increased potential for soil rutting, rilling and erosion as well as associated downslope impacts. It is
highly unlikely that overland transport of sediment would reach the stream system. For more detailed
information pertaining to landtypes that the motorized trails are located on refer to the Soils Section.
Table 3.63 - East Reservoir Motorized Trails
TRAIL ID

LOCATION

EXISTING STATUS

MILES

279
280
281
420
426
500

Warland Ridge
Warland Peak Lookout
Cripple Horse
Canyon Divide
Fivemile
Hornet Ridge

Motorized
Motorized
Motorized
Motorized
Motorized
Motorized

10.7
2.3
6.22
9.83
1.82
5.69

Riparian Areas and Wetlands
Riparian areas are a transition zone between permanently saturated wetlands and dryer upland areas.
These areas exhibit vegetative or physical characteristics reflective of permanent surface or subsurface
water influence (USDI Bureau of Land Management 1993). Natural, undisturbed or well-managed
riparian/ wetland areas provide values and benefits far in excess of the land area they occupy (Brooks et
al. 1997). Riparian areas maintain the integrity of aquatic ecosystems by (1) influencing the delivery of
coarse sediment, organic matter and woody debris to streams, (2) providing root strength for channel
stability, (3) shading the stream, and (4) protecting water quality (USDA Forest Service 1995).
Depending on the stream channel type and volume (rate of flow), the relative magnitude of these
functions can vary widely. For example, large woody debris (LWD) is often a significant component of
physical channel structure in small streams that do not have enough flow to easily move LWD, but plays
a significantly smaller role in large rivers where LWD is continuously moved through the system.
Riparian areas are defined based on proximity to streams and rivers. Wetlands are defined by having a
water table usually near the ground surface or where the land is at least seasonally covered by shallow
water. Riparian areas and wetlands are important components of the overall landscape, forming some of
the most dynamic and ecologically rich areas on the landscape. No timber harvest, skid trail construction
or firebreak construction would occur in the riparian areas and wetlands. The existing road system has
many miles in riparian areas but no temporary roads or permanent roads would be constructed in the
riparian areas. Table 3.64 depicts riparian areas and wetlands in the East Reservoir analysis area (KNF
Watershed Condition Rating).
Table 3.64 - East Reservoir Riparian Areas and Wetlands
WATERSHED

STREAM (mi)

RIPARIAN (ac)

WETLAND (ac)

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek

72
39
65

2,744
1,447
2,474

25
0
44

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 151 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

WATERSHED

STREAM (mi)

RIPARIAN (ac)

WETLAND (ac)

Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

20
50

721
1,958

0
9

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Direct and indirect effects on water resources are described below for proposed activities identified in
Chapter 2. This section considers the effects of proposed management activities in addition to existing
conditions, including all past activities.
MEASUREMENT INDICATORS
The measurement indicators for compliance with law, regulation, and policy are:
• Changes in stream flow- Peak flow increases
• Changes in stream channel condition – Reach condition
• Changes in water quality –Roads, motorized trails, and stream crossings
STREAM FLOW
ALTERNATIVE 1
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1, there would be no additional impacts to in-stream channel conditions as peak flows
would not be increased because there would be no timber harvest, skid trail construction, prescribed fire,
and fuels and wildlife treatment activities. Existing peak flows would continue to undermine the stability
of eroding streambanks, in particular the large glacial lacustrine deposits in Dunn Creek. As vegetation
continues to grow, the existing PFIs would decrease and hydrologic recovery would occur in past harvest
units. Additionally, no activities would occur in RHCAs and there would be no prescribe fire, or fuels and
wildlife treatment thus any risk of slope failure due to changes in soil properties, increased or
concentrated runoff and reduced root strength. Subsequently, no direct effects to stream channel
conditions. Indirectly, there is the potential for stream channel conditions to change because the potential
for high-severity stand replacing wildland fires would increase due to continued vegetation growth. The
wildland fire risk analysis is located in the Fire and Fuels Section of Chapter 3. Due to the unpredictable
nature of wildfires, effects from this natural disturbance could not be meaningfully quantified in this
document.
Under Alternative 1, no roads would be placed in intermittent stored service or decommissioned; thus
there would be no direct impacts to the stream channel or streambanks from culvert removal and
upgrades, re-establishing stream channels and re-contouring road segments. No management activities
would occur in the RHCA thus there would be no direct effects to stream channel conditions and existing
conditions would be maintained unless a large scale natural disturbance were to occur (fire, insect,
disease, etc.).
Indirectly however, some of the road system and culverts in the analysis area would continue to be a
sediment source to the stream systems, thus possibly impacting stream channel condition. The risk of
undersized culverts failing and/or road failure; contributing sediment to the stream system, and impacting
stream condition would persist. Road BMPs and culvert upgrades would occur under the normal
maintenance program as funding permits. The anticipated reduction in sedimentation would occur at a
slower rate than with Alternatives 2 and 3.
This alternative is expected to maintain beneficial uses at current levels because there would be no
increase in PFIs or other activities that would have potential impacts to stream channel conditions.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
The streams in the analysis area were determined to be in fair to good condition. Under Alternatives 2 and
3, PFIs would increase for each watershed (Table 3.65); all action alternatives are below the RPFIs of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 152 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

14%. The PFIs for all action alternatives reflect as if the project were implemented in 2012; the project is
anticipated to be implemented in 2014 thus there would be more ECA recovery (Table 3.52). Alternative
2 would have the highest increase in PFIs posing a higher risk to water resources. However, the
differences between the alternatives are small and a 1% to 2% difference would probably not be
measurable in the stream channel at the larger scale. Alternatives 2 and 3 are anticipated to maintain
beneficial uses because proposed PFIs are within the allowable range identified for streams in fair to good
condition.
Table 3.65 - Changes in Peak Flow by Alternative (% PFI) for 2012
WATERSHED

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

ACRES

2012 PFI

RECOMMENDED
PFI (%)

PFI
ALT 1

PFI
ALT 2

PFI
ALT 3

21,666
13,184
21,823
8,520
18,434

7
7
10
6
6

14
14
14
14
14

7
7
10
6
6

10
11
13
12
9

10
11
12
13
8

Roads can substantially alter hillslope hydrology by reducing soil infiltration, concentrating water through
road drainage structures, and converting subsurface flow to surface flow (Luce 2002). The existing road
system has extended the stream network and contributes to the PFIs in the analysis area; 1 mile of road is
equivalent to 4 ECAs. All action alternatives include specific BMPs which are designed to disconnect the
road system from the stream (e.g. prevent sediment from going down ditches directly into the stream).
The implementation of BMPs may also diffuse the effects of roads intercepting and rerouting water. In
addition, upgrading undersized culverts would enable the streams to accommodate higher flows more
readily without resulting in aggradation or degradation at the inlets and outlets of culverts. The
implementation of BMPs identified in the NFMA process would reduce the impact of roads on streams.
Additionally, stream crossing upgrades and road decommissioning proposed under Alternatives 2 and 3
would help reduce the existing hydrologic connection between the road system and stream system as well
as road contributions to PFIs.
With regard to PFIs, all action alternatives are expected to maintain beneficial uses because PFIs would
be kept within the RPFI for the given stream channel conditions.
Proposed prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife treatments can be found in Chapter 2 of the DEIS.
Prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife treatments would not result in changes to PFIs because
implementation would be conducted within predetermined limits on fuel moisture, wind and other
variables to minimize fire intensity subsequently reducing the potential for crown removal. The proposed
burning activities would incorporate firelines, excavator and hand dug. Firelines have the potential to
intercept shallow groundwater, concentrate overland flow and potentially increase PFIs. All firelines
would adhere to RHCA guidelines and BMPs; in addition they would be re-vegetated following burning
activities. Subsequently, no direct or indirect effects to PFIs are anticipated from prescribed burning and
fuels and wildlife treatments.
STREAM CHANNEL CONDITION
ALTERNATIVE 1
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1, there would be no additional impacts to in-stream channel conditions as peak flows
would not be increased because there would be no timber harvest, skid trail construction, prescribed fire,
and forest wide fuels activities. Existing in stream sediment regimes would continue to contribute
sediment; with respect to Dunn Creek the high volumes of sediment would contribute to instability in the
lower reaches. As vegetation continues to grow the existing PFIs would decrease and hydrologic recovery
would occur in past harvest units. Additionally, no activities would occur in RHCAs and there would be
no prescribed fire, or fuels and wildlife treatments, thus any risk of slope failure due to changes in soil
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 153 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

properties, increased or concentrated runoff, and reduced root strength. Subsequently, no direct effects to
stream channel conditions. Indirectly, there is the potential for stream channel conditions to change
because the potential for high-severity stand replacing wildland fires would increase due to continued
vegetation growth. The wildland fire risk analysis is located in Chapter 2 of the DEIS.
Under Alternative 1, no roads would be placed in intermittent stored service thus there would be no direct
or indirect impacts to the stream channel or streambanks from culvert removal and upgrades, reestablishing stream channels, and re-contouring road segments. No management activities would occur in
the RHCA thus there would be no direct effects to stream channel conditions and existing conditions
would be maintained unless a large scale natural disturbance were to occur (fire, insect, disease, etc.).
However, some of the road system and culverts in the analysis area would continue to be a sediment
source to the stream systems thus possibly impacting stream channel condition. The risk of undersized
culverts failing and/or road failure; contributing sediment to the stream system and impacting stream
condition would persist. Road BMPs and culvert upgrades would occur under the normal maintenance
program as funding permits. But the anticipated reduction in sedimentation would occur at a slower rate
than with Alternatives 2 and 3.
This alternative is expected to maintain beneficial uses at current levels because there would be no
increase in PFIs thus potential impacts to stream channel conditions.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2 and 3 would have a higher potential for changes, either positive or negative to stream
channel conditions. The magnitude, type and frequency of channel adjustments are specific to a reach and
unique to each stream channel. The spatial distribution of reach types within a drainage basin influences
the distribution of potential impacts and responses to disturbance (Montgomery 1998). However,
measureable geomorphic changes to the streams are not anticipated because the allowable PFI for each
watershed are based on the existing stream condition (fair and good, Tables 3.57 to 3.61) and are below
the PFI threshold (KNFP) in which degradation is anticipated to occur.
Additionally, no timber harvest and skid trail construction would occur in RHCAs; thus, there would be
no direct effects to the stream channel condition. The establishment of RHCAs maintains a physical
barrier between the stream and timber harvest and skid trail construction thus minimizing any indirect
effects to stream channel condition. RHCAs are intended to provide vegetative roughness and maintain
infiltration rates than can slow or absorb overland flow and filter sediment out of the overland flow before
it reaches a stream or waterbody (Litshcert and MacDonald 2009). Likewise, the protection of RHCAs
maintains the vegetative component that contributes to streambank stability including bankfull width, and
width to depth ratios.
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife treatments are proposed. Prescribed
burning, and fuels and wildlife activities would avoid direct ignition in RHCAs and would occur during
the springtime or late fall when high fuel moistures would minimize fire intensity. Prescribed fire and
underburning associated with fuels and wildlife activities however, may burn into to RHCAs thus
reducing shrubbery, small diameter trees and other material that intercept overland flow, increase
infiltration and capture sediment. A reduction in riparian vegetation may result in a short-term (generally
less than 1 to 2 years) increase of sedimentation to water resources but over the long-term there is a
reduction in the potential of stand replacing wildland fires which could significantly contribute sediment
to the watersheds. The proposed burning activities would also incorporate firelines, excavator and hand
dug. Firelines are potential sources of sediment to streams depending on location and design thus may
impact stream channel conditions. Under Alternatives 2 and 3, all firelines would adhere to design
criteria, BMPs and RHCAs in order to minimize direct and indirect effects to stream channel conditions.
Following all prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife treatments, firelines would be rehabilitated; drainage
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 154 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

ditches installed and reseeded in order to reduce the potential for short-term sediment impacts which may
impact stream channel condition.
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, there would be road maintenance, improvements and BMPs (Appendix D) to
all haul routes (Table 3.69) and roads placed in intermittent stored service. These activities may include
installation of water bars, drivable dips, ditch relief culverts, culvert upgrades and ditch clearing. Road
maintenance, improvements and BMPs may contribute short-term sediment but would help reduce longterm sediment derived from roads and ditches, disconnect roads and ditches from the stream system, and
disperse overland flow captured by the road system; all of which would reduce potential impacts to
stream channel conditions. Some activities particularly culvert upgrades or removal, stream reestablishment and road re-contouring, would have direct and indirect effects to the stream condition at
specific locations. At sites where the culvert is upgraded, cross-veins may be installed to maintain the
stream gradient and to prevent degradation of the channel upstream and downstream of the structure.
Increased pipe size also allows for flood flows and debris to more freely pass through reducing the risk
for impounding water at the inlet and/or accelerating through the pipe. At sites where the culvert is
removed, the natural stream profile would be restored to include low flow bank, bankfull benches,
floodplain (Figure 12) and in-stream features such as woody debris or rock gardens. Road re-contouring
would occur at sites where the cut and fill banks are unstable and are eroding. Stabilization of these sites
would re-connect surface and subsurface flow, and eliminate a sediment source that undermines stream
channel condition. Although minor sedimentation is possible, the long-term (generally more than 1 to 2
years) effects of these activities would be beneficial because stream connectivity would increase, aquatic
organism passage improved, and natural fluvial geomorphic function enabled such as channel adjustment,
sediment transport and woody debris transport. Additionally, the potential risk of culvert or road failure
would be reduced and sediment sources. Short-term sediment inputs are expected to be minimized or
eliminated through the use of BMPs and adhering to INFS guidelines (USDA Forest Service 2002; USDA
Forest Service 1995). For further analysis please refer to project file documents “Road/Sediment
Analysis” and “Short vs. Long-term Effects” in the Water Resources Project Record.
All action alternatives are expected to maintain or improve channel conditions and beneficial uses at
current levels because all PFIs are within the KNFP range, RHCA guidelines provide a buffer around
streams which capture overland flow and sediment; road maintenance, improvements and BMPs would
reduce sediment and disconnect roads and ditches from the stream system.
WATER QUALITY
ALTERNATIVE 1
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1 there would be no timber harvest, skid trail construction, prescribed fire, or fuels and
wildlife treatments, thus there would be no direct effect to water quality. No sediment would be generated
from timber harvest and skid trails, no vegetation in RHCAs removed from burning or sediment generated
associated with vegetation removal, no chances of hazardous waste being spilt in RHCAs, and no
sediment generated from fireline construction. Indirectly, continued fuel loading has the potential to
increase wildland fire risk and the possibility of a crown replacing fire; consequently, there is the
potential for water quality impairment (See Fire and Fuels Section for risk analysis). Alternative 1 would
maintain existing beneficial uses.
Under Alternative 1, no new road construction, temporary road construction and/or subsequent
decommissioning, and intermittent stored service would occur. There would be no short-term sediment
increases due to road construction, culvert upgrades or development of stream crossings; likewise, there
would be no long-term benefits to water quality from increased road improvements and BMP application.
The road density, riparian road density and stream crossing density would remain the same. Regular
district road maintenance (approximately 3 to 4 miles per year) would continue as funding becomes
available. The proposed road maintenance levels associated with all action alternatives exceeds that
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 155 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

associated with regular road maintenance.
Under Alternative 1, no motorized trails would be converted to non-motorized trails. The continued
access of motorized traffic on trails not designed to accommodate said activity could result in increased
rutting, rilling and erosion. However, due to trail location, minimal stream crossings, and the distance
from water resources, it is unlikely that increased erosion would contribute to water quality degradation.
This Alternative is expected to maintain beneficial uses and water quality at current levels.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, there would be timber harvest, skid trail construction, temporary road
construction, new road construction, upgrades to stream crossings, prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife
treatments which have the potential to impact water quality. Timber harvest, skid trail construction and
temporary road construction expose soil to erosion, capture and concentrate overland flow and reduce
infiltration. Stream crossing upgrades expose soil to erosion and result in temporary increases to turbidity
from working in the stream channel. Prescribed fire requires fireline construction, a potential sediment
source which can remove vegetation in RHCAs which intercept overland flow and sediment and utilize
fuel to ignite fires, a contaminant. The incorporation of design criteria, BMPs and RHCA guidelines are
anticipated to minimize or eliminate potential risks to water quality from the aforementioned activities.
Design criteria include rehabilitation of disturbed soils, hydrologically stabilize skid trails and firelines by
installing waterbars, placing woody debris to deflect overland flow and capture sediment. There would be
no ignitions in RHCAs (other design criteria are listed in Appendix A). BMPs are displayed in Appendix
C. As a result of these measures, no direct or indirect effects to water quality are anticipated from timber
harvest, skid trail construction, prescribed burning and forest-wide fuels treatments.
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, there are roads designated for intermittent stored service and
decommissioning (Table 3.66). The objective of road intermittent stored service and decommissioning
would be to hydrologically stabilize the road in a manner to reduce connectivity to water resources,
restore overland drainage patterns, restore groundwater flow and minimize soil erosion. All activities
associated with intermittent stored service and decommissioning would adhere to BMPs identified in FSH
2509.22 (USDA FS 2010). Roads utilized as haul routes for the proposed project would have all
necessary BMPs implemented prior to being placed in intermittent storage or decommissioned following
use. BMP treatments on roads that are not haul routes but are identified for intermittent storage or
decommissioning are contingent on future funding.
Techniques that may be implemented under intermittent stored service and decommissioning include
culvert upgrades or removal, re-establish stream channels, road re-contouring on unstable fills,
installation of water bars, road surface ripping, woody debris placement, seeding and fertilizing. Culvert
upgrades would be sized at a minimum for a 100 year event to meet KNFP standards and/or stream
simulation. All roads identified for decommissioning would at a minimum be closed to traffic and have
the stream crossing culverts removed and road segments within the RHCA re-contoured.
Culvert upgrades or removal would include diversion of the stream, removal of the fill and removal of the
existing culvert. There is the potential for short-term sediment increases to the stream system and
decreased water quality. Re-establishing the stream channel would include reshaping the stream channel
and streambanks to pass expected flows, to minimize potential for undercutting or slumping of
streambanks, and maintain continuation of channel dimensions and longitudinal profile through the
crossing site. Re-establishing stream channels would also result in short term in-stream sediment
increases and decreased water quality but over the long-term benefit water resources. Road recontouring
would occur on some road segments, particularly at stream crossings and areas with shallow groundwater.
Road re-contouring, installation of water bars and road surface ripping exposes soil and may increase the
risk of erosion. Depending on location and soil type these activities could potentially increase erosion and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 156 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

decrease water quality in the short-term but over the long-term would benefit water resources. Woody
debris placement and seeding would also benefit water quality by reducing potential overland flow.
Fertilizing is not anticipated to have a measureable impact on water quality because the application is
small in quantity, would occur during the dry season, and the area is small.
Table 3.66 - Proposed Intermittent Stored Service and Decommissioning by Alternative
WATERSHED

ALTERNATIVE 1

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

0
0
0
0
0

1.46/1.9
1.01/1.3
7.2/3.7
5.58/2.3
7.9/2.5

0.89/1.3
101/1.1
5.6/3.7
5.58/2.1
7.9/2.5

Under Alternatives 2 and 3, there would be new road construction and temporary road construction (Table
3.67). New system roads and temporary roads would be built to FS standards, the culverts sized at a
minimum for a 100 year event and/or designed for stream simulation, and all applicable BMPs would be
implemented. New system roads would remain on the landscape whereas proposed temporary roads
would be used for one season, not allowed to sit over the winter after harvest completion, and then
decommissioned. The overall TRD, RRD and SCD in the watersheds would be slightly increased due to
new road construction but temporary roads would not impact TRD, RRD, and SCD.
The proposed construction of temporary roads would result in a short-term (generally less than 1 to 2
years) impact on water resources due to the alteration of overland drainage patterns, interception and
alteration of groundwater flow, and increased soil erosion. Temporary roads would be designed to
minimize the potential impacts to water resources, the road template would be short and stream crossings
avoided as much as possible. In addition, the implementation of design criteria and BMPs is anticipated to
minimize the impact to hydrologic recovery and the amount of sediment generated. All roads would be
designed to prevent water and sediment generated by the road, particularly ditch water, from entering
streams.
The KNFP and INFS recommend not constructing temporary roads in RHCAs except at stream crossings.
Roads in RHCAs may contribute to the bank destabilization, concentration of overland and subsurface
flow, and concentrated sedimentation near water resources. The temporary construction of new culverts
would result in a short-term increase in sediment and silt; and alter stream dimension, pattern, and profile.
The subsequent decommissioning of temporary roads would require suitable measures to re-establish
slope contours, as well as surface and subsurface hydrologic pathways where necessary to avoid or
minimize adverse effects to soil, water quality, and riparian resources (Forest Service BMP, 2010).
Table 3.67 - Proposed New and Temporary Roads, and Temporary Stream Crossings
WATERSHED

ALTERNATIVE 1

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

0
0
0
0
0

0.9/0.51/0
2.6/2/1
0.4/0.95/0
2.1/0.25/0
2.3/0.51/0

0.9/0.5/0
2.6/2/1
0.2/0.39/0
1.8/0.25/0
1.5/0.51/0

Overall there is not a significant change in TRD, RRD and SCD under all action alternatives; the
disturbance factors (Table 3.51) do not change for any of the watersheds (Table 3.68). On the ground
some roads, roads in the RHCA, and stream crossings would be created and at other sites removed. The
localized sediment inputs may be increased or decreased, but a measureable reduction in sediment on the
watershed scale is not anticipated because the overall changes to the road network are not substantial.
Table 3.68 displays the potential changes to the road system by alternative.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 157 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

Table 3.68 - East Reservoir TRD, RRD, and SCD by Alternative
WATERSHED

AREA
(mi2)

ROADS
(mi)

RHCA
ROADS RHCA
(mi2)
(mi2)
EXISTING CONDITION

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

34
21
34
13
29

121.2
59.1
95.2
35.3
71.9

4.3
2.3
3.9
1.1
3.1

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

34
21
34
13
29

120.9
62.4
92.5
36
75.2

4.3
2.3
3.9
1.1
3.1

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

34
21
34
13
29

121.4
62.4
92.3
35.9
73.5

4.3
2.3
3.9
1.1
3.1

13.6
4.7
10.5
1.6
8.6

STREAM
CROSSINGS

TRD

RRD

SCD

130.0
55.0
98.0
33.0
63.0

3.6
2.9
2.8
2.7
2.5

3.2
2
2.7
1.5
2.8

4.1
2.9
2.6
2.6
2.3

130.0
54.0
105.0
36.0
65.0

3.6
3
2.7
2.7
2.6

3.3
2.2
2.6
1.3
2.9

4
3.1
2.6
2.8
2.3

130.0
54.0
105.0
37.0
63.0

3.6
3
2.7
2.7
2.6

3.2
2.2
2.6
1.5
2.9

4
3.1
2.6
2.8
2.3

ALTERNATIVE 2

14.1
5
10.2
1.4
8.9

ALTERNATIVE 3

13.6
5
10.3
1.7
8.9

All action alternatives were designed to reduce the impacts that roads have on aquatic resources by
identifying and treating known sources as well as potential sources of road-derived sediment through
BMP upgrades, culvert upgrades, intermittent road storage and road decommissioning. Road drainage
improvements would focus on preventing water and sediment generated by the road network, particularly
ditch water, from entering streams. Improvements would emphasize disconnecting storm water runoff
from perennial and intermittent/ephemeral streams. The primary methods for accomplishing this are
improvements to road surface and ditch drainage, surfacing, and modifying stream crossings (Furniss et
al. 1991). These activities fall under the definition of road maintenance. Improvement activities
contractually required under timber sales would occur prior to the commencement of harvest activities
and would be inspected after harvest to ensure they still meet specifications.
Alternatives 2 and 3 include road BMP improvements on all haul routes that are contractually required
under timber sales (Table 3.69). All alternatives are similar, with regard to potential BMP improvement
road miles and stream crossings improved. This work is assured and the timing would be tied to the
timber sales, distributed over the next 10 years. Because the timber sales would accomplish road work,
contractual road improvements done with timber sales would be in a shorter timeframe compared to
Alternative 1, and above and beyond what the Forest road maintenance budget could achieve in any given
year. Therefore it is expected that Alternatives 2 and 3 would have a greater potential to benefit water
quality in a shorter time-frame than Alternative 1 due to BMPs tied to timber sales and proposed
intermittent road storage.
Research has shown that improved road design and road maintenance can reduce road-related erosion
(Gucinski et al. 2001; Kennedy 1997). Road maintenance in Alternatives 2 and 3 would focus on reducing
the distance water flows in ditches, reducing road surface erosion, disconnecting ditch water before
entering streams and reducing the probability of stream crossing failures. Although inputs of sediment
into streams are possible during maintenance operations, the long-term benefit is a reduction in routed
water and sediment. Short-term sediment inputs into streams are expected to be minimized or eliminated
through the use of BMPs and adhering to INFS guidelines (USDA Forest Service 2002; USDA Forest
Service 1995). Road related improvements in Alternatives 2 and 3 would at least maintain, and probably
improve, water quality and beneficial uses in the analysis area. Table 3.69 displays the proposed road
maintenance and improvements by alternative.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 158 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

Table 3.69 - Road Maintenance/Improvements by Alternative
TIMBER SALE FUNDED ACTIVITIES

ALT. 1

ALT. 2

ALT. 3

Potential Miles of Road BMP Improvements
Total Miles of Road in Analysis Area
Potential % of Roads being Improved
Potential Stream Crossings Improved

0
561
0
0

176
561
31
232

168
561
30
210

*BMP improvements would only be implemented on haul roads; haul roads may change as the purchaser has the choice.

Under Alternative 2, all the motorized trails (approximately 37 miles) would be converted to nonmotorized status. Under Alternative 3, approximately 27 miles of motorized trails would be converted to
non-motorized status. Trail 281 would remain open to motorized traffic. Soil rutting, rilling and erosion
associated with motorized use would be reduced on all the trails except Trail 28. Sediment derived from
non-motorized traffic would be less than the existing condition. The conversion of motorized trails to
non-motorized would probably improve, water quality and beneficial uses in the analysis area.
All action alternatives are expected to maintain beneficial uses and water quality at current levels or
improve them because RHCA guidelines provide a buffer around streams which capture overland flow
and sediment, BMPs minimize the amount of sediment generated from timber harvest related activities;
road maintenance, improvements, and BMPs would reduce sediment and disconnect roads and ditches
from the stream system; and intermittent road storage and road decommissioning would reduce the
hydrologic impact roads have on the stream system.
ALTERNATIVES 1, 2 and 3
Cumulative Effects
Cumulative effects are the result of all the impacts past, current and reasonably foreseeable activities have
on a resource. A summary of activities are listed in Chapter 3 of the EIS. Past activities have resulted in
the “Existing Condition” described previously. The anticipated effects from proposed activities were then
added to the existing condition and described in the sections titled “Direct and Indirect Effects.” The sum
of the existing condition and the direct and indirect effects of proposed actions in combination with
current and reasonably foreseeable actions result in the cumulative effects described in this section.
The analysis area for cumulative effects with regard to water resources consists of the same watersheds
identified earlier in the document. The East Reservoir watersheds are tributaries to Lake Koocanusa and
the Kootenai River.
Overall, the existing condition to water resources is anticipated to be maintained or improved under all
action alternatives. This is based on past monitoring of stream flow, water quality and channel stability
and all laws, regulations and policies being met. Rationale for this conclusion follows.
CURRENT and REASONABLE FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
In the following discussion, the effects of past, current and/or reasonably foreseeable activities are
considered cumulatively with activities proposed in this project. The effects were either described as not
contributing effects, contributing indiscernible effects or having a measurable effect on water resources.
Those actions that may have measureable effects were then analyzed further, by the same indicators used
in the Direct and Indirect Effects Sections.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are no current or reasonably foreseeable FS commercial timber sale projects planned within the
analysis area. Therefore, no additional effects would be contributed from these activities to stream flow,
stream channel condition, and/or water quality.
It is expected that there would be salvage of blown-down trees within the analysis area. Treatment acres
are not expected to exceed 20 acres per year over the next 10 year. Removal of blown-down trees does
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 159 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

not affect peak flows and therefore would not contribute additional effects to water resources. However,
some short-term sediment could be generated from ground disturbance related to mechanized equipment.
Such equipment is typically restricted to existing trails, roads and firelines, but there are cases where new
disturbance is created. It is expected that BMPs, riparian buffers and design criteria would minimize or
eliminate the risk of generated sediments reaching live streams. This assumption is supported by the KNF
BMPs (Appendix C) and the KNF BMP Monitoring Summary (Appendix D). Therefore, with regard to
sediment, the salvage of blown-down trees is expected to contribute indiscernible effects to water
resources.
In 2011, three Forestwide Fuels units (2001 Forestwide Fuels Reduction and Wildlife Habitat
Enhancement EA) were slashed in preparation to be burned (910 acres). These units are FWF545 (Gopher
Hill) which is 265 acres, FWF536 (Warland Peak) which is 195 acres and FWF52403 (Warland Peak)
which is 450 acres. These units are scheduled to be underburned between 2013 and 2015. In 2010, 170
acres of FWF589 was slashed. Twenty-five of those acres are in old growth and are expected to be burned
in 2013. Burning associated with post-harvest fuel treatment and wildlife improvement does not result in
crown removal that would change water yields but may burn into to RHCAs thus reducing shrubbery,
small diameter trees, and other materials that intercept overland flow, increase infiltration, and capture
sediment. A reduction in riparian vegetation may result in a short-term increase of sedimentation to water
resources but over the long-term there is a reduction in the potential of stand replacing wildland fires
which could significantly contribute sediment to the watersheds. Burning activities have the potential to
impact water resources but the implementation of design criteria and BMPs are anticipated to mitigate
these activities and protect beneficial uses.
Approximately 760 acres of precommercial thinning has been approved and contracts have been awarded
in the Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek drainages. This thinning is will be on-going over the next five
years. Precommercial thinning does not result in measurable crown removals thus any significant ECAs
or PFIs and there is no additional ground disturbance. All thinning projects would allow INFS direction.
Ongoing and reasonably foreseeable precommercial thinning activities within the analysis area would
contribute indiscernible effects to riparian vegetation and structure, peak flows, sediment delivery and
water quality within the analysis area and beneficial uses would be protected.
Christmas trees/boughs can be harvested for individual use or commercially on National Forest land.
Each of these activities requires a permit. These activities are both current and are reasonably foreseeable
within the analysis area for the next ten years. Commercial permits include design criteria (i.e. follow
INFS direction) to minimize impacts on associated species. This activity does not remove tree overstory
or create additional ground disturbance and therefore would not contribute additional effects to water
resources.
Cattle Grazing
The analysis area provides range for four grazing allotments including the Canyon, Cripple Horse,
Warland, and Fivemile allotments. Currently, only the Fivemile allotment is actively grazed and the
trends in livestock grazing numbers are stable in Fivemile Creek. The Warland allotment has had sporadic
use over the years, though currently there is renewed interest to graze 22 cow calf-pairs. Both the Canyon
and Cripple Horse allotments have been inactive for many years. Much of the forage in the allotments is
transitory and occurs along roads and in harvest openings. Because of road construction and past harvests
in the riparian areas, cattle can readily access the streams. Most of the wetlands and ponds within the
analysis area are also easily accessed by cattle. Because the Fivemile allotment is active, there is a higher
risk of streambank destabilization and sedimentation due to loss of vegetation cover and trampling. The
potential for the Warland allotment to become active would result in a higher risk of streambank
destabilization and sedimentation. The Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek grazing allotments have
been closed and disturbed sites in Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek would continue to recover.
Current and reasonably foreseeable grazing activities within the analysis area would not contribute
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 160 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

additional PFIs, however due to a higher risk of streambank destabilization as a result of cattle grazing; an
increase in PFIs from other activities may result in increased W/D ratios. Additionally, grazing could
contribute measureable effects to riparian vegetation and structure, sediment delivery and/or water
quality. Currently, there is a single enclosure in Warland Creek that was installed in 1993 to protect a
stream segment that was degraded due to grazing.
The cumulative effects of continued livestock grazing in Fivemile Creek in conjunction with proposed
management activities may have measureable effects on water resources. Potential impacts from cattle
grazing in Fivemile Creek would be mitigated by monitoring stream channel conditions, minimizing
grazing in the RHCA and following the Fivemile Creek Grazing Allotment Plan (Project File). Further
analysis and conclusions can be found in the Water Quality Section further on in this section of the DEIS.
Noxious Weed Treatments
The control of noxious weeds on National Forest System (NFS) land is an ongoing activity that normally
occurs from late spring to early fall. Most herbicide treatments are conducted along existing roads
although some treatments occur in harvest units. The 2007 Kootenai National Forest Invasive Plant
Management ROD provides direction for noxious weed control on the District. Noxious weed control is
expected to continue over the next ten years.
This activity is expected to contribute indiscernible effects to water resources as defined by the Kootenai
National Forest Invasive Plant Management Project (USDA Forest Service 2007). Approved application
methods and design criteria would be used. Water quality monitoring has shown that no chemical
contamination has occurred. Although new weed infestations may occur due to ground disturbance
activities, improvements in treatment chemicals and use of BMPs during timber sale and burning
operations should minimize the occurrence and effects of new infestations. The level of noxious weed
control within the analysis area is not expected to increase over the next ten years. Therefore, no
measureable effects are anticipated.
Wildfire and Fire Suppression
One large fire has occurred recently within the analysis area. The Dry Fork Fire in 1988 burned
approximately 13,000 acres, primarily in Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek. The Cripple Horse Fire
in 1994 burned approximately 590 acres in the Cripple Horse Creek watershed. Multiple fires of various
sizes have occurred in the analysis area prior to 1988.
The probability of a large fire occurring within the next 10 years is considered low due to recent wildfire
activity, improved fire detection and suppression techniques, existing transportation system, and recent
vegetation management and fuel treatment. A large fire within the analysis area could have measurable
effects on water resources in the future. These effects could include higher sedimentation rates and/or
higher nutrient levels. However, due to the unpredictable nature of wildfires, cumulative effects from this
natural disturbance could not be meaningfully quantified in this document.
Fire suppression activities would occur as needed and may include the construction of firelines, helispots
and safety zones by hand or equipment. Effects from wildfire suppression would vary with location and
size of the fire. Suppression activities are expected to follow KNFP direction. Retardants would be used
outside of RHCAs when feasible. Suppression of small fires would contribute indiscernible effects to
water resources within the analysis area. The suppression of large fires could have measurable effects to
water resources. These effects could include bank destabilization and/or bank erosion. However, due to
the unpredictable nature of wildfires, cumulative effects from future wildfire suppression activities could
not be meaningfully quantified in this document.
Road Management
Routine road maintenance would occur as needed on the 561 miles of road in the analysis area. This is
separate from any road maintenance identified in this project. Maintenance includes road blading, gate
repair/replacement, cleaning ditches and culverts, installing culverts, replacing culverts with larger
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 161 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

diameter culverts, installing drain dips and surface water deflectors, placing riprap to armor drainage
structures, placement of aggregate, brushing and debris removal. Road maintenance follows BMPs
identified in the Soil and Water Conservation Handbook and INFS direction. In the long-term, road
maintenance reduces the risk of road failures that can contribute large quantities of sediment into live
channels by disconnecting storm water flows from streams. No significant changes in road maintenance
are expected over the next 10 years. Ongoing and reasonably foreseeable road maintenance activities
within the analysis area could contribute measurable effects to water resources, primarily short-term
increases in sedimentation rates and a long-term benefit by reducing sediment sources, within the analysis
area. Short-term increases in sediment may temporarily reduce water quality. In the long-term (generally
more than 1 to 2 years) reduced sediment sources would improve water quality.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance would occur on approximately six miles of existing non-motorized trails in the
project area. Maintenance of the trails may include brushing, removing blowdown, debris and hazard
trees, repairing or adding waterbars, repairing treads, repairing or replacing signs, and improving vistas.
Routine trail maintenance would have indiscernible effects to water resources because trails are
individually small, scattered across many watersheds, primarily located on ridge tops away from water
resources, and activities are not all occurring in the same year.
The Koocanusa Marina and Resort, is permitted for 70 acres in the Lake Koocanusa-Little Jackson HUC,
part of the analysis area. Marina expansion is anticipated to occur within the next ten years. The
expansion would encompass 3 to 4 acres, and include the addition of 33 new seasonal RV sites,
construction of an access road to the sites, extension of an existing waterline, new septic drain fields and
lines and a new well. Additionally, all asphalt surfaces would be chip sealed. Appropriate design criteria,
RHCA boundaries and all applicable BMPs would be implemented. No measureable impacts to water
resources are anticipated from the marina expansion because the area proposed to be developed is small in
scale, the receiving waterbody is large is scale, there would be no increase in PFIs, the drain fields would
be sufficiently setback from water resources, and project implementation would occur during the dry
season.
Public Uses
Recreational use of the analysis area is expected to include hiking, camping, fishing, hunting,
photography, small forest product gathering (berries, mushrooms, cones, boughs), Christmas tree cutting,
firewood gathering, driving for pleasure, mountain biking, sightseeing, wildlife viewing, cross-country
skiing, snowshoeing, trapping and snowmobiling. These activities are expected to continue over the next
ten years. Because of the increasing number of people moving into the local communities, it is expected
that some of these activity levels would increase. Recreational activities would contribute indiscernible
effects to water resources within the analysis area and would protect beneficial uses. This conclusion is
based on the fact that these activities are individually small and scattered across the watershed. In
addition, terms of the firewood cutting permit prohibit cutting within 100 feet of a live channel. This
ensures streambanks are protected, LWD is available and minimizes the potential for sediment
production.
Off-highway vehicle (OHV) use was left off the list because it is currently limited only to existing trails
and open roads (OHV Record of Decision and Plan Amendment for Montana, North Dakota, and Portions
of South Dakota 2001). There is the potential for illegal OHV use to impact water resources, though the
level of impact can vary from year to year.
The proposed Cripple Horse Small Stone Sale would occur within the next ten years. This project would
involve the collection of 20 to 200 tons of stone from the talus slopes along FS Road 835 between MP 5
and MP 7.5. Design criteria and BMPs were established for this project to minimize soil disturbance, the
potential for erosion and associated impacts to water resources. Criteria included no removal of
vegetation in RHCAs, implementation during the dry season, and preferred rock removal was either by
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 162 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

hand or using a crane system. This project is not anticipated to cumulatively impact water resources
because there would be no increase in PFIs, and the projected is limited in scope and time.
Private Property
Private land accounts for approximately 8,986 acres in the East Reservoir analysis area, 7,604 acres
belong to Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC), primarily in the Dunn Creek watershed. The other 1,381
acres are scattered throughout the watersheds. At this time PCTC has no plans to harvest their lands.
Though continued development on other private land is expected and could include commercial timber
harvest, land clearing, home construction, road construction, septic field installation, water well drilling,
livestock grazing and stabilization of migrating stream banks.
The construction of roads, clearing of vegetation, construction of residences and installation of
improvements during the development process can create a variety of changes to the landscape. Land
development can have varied effects on the aquatic environment depending on the magnitude of the
development, the type of development, and the amount of private land on the landscape. Montana State
BMPs apply to some of these activities. In consideration of recent trends in land development, the
activities on private land have the potential to impact water resources by increased ECAs, PFIs and
sediment, but are not quantifiable due to a number of unknown attributes.
State Land
The Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) manage 4,049 acres in the
East Reservoir analysis area. There are no current timber sales however, there are plans to harvest
approximately 228 acres within the next ten years,198 acres in Cripple Horse Creek and 30 acres in
the Lake Koocanusa-Little Jackson HUC. The timber harvest prescriptions would either be
regeneration or sanitation/salvage. For the purpose of this analysis, regeneration was assumed to be
99% crown removal (99% ECA) and sanitation/salvage was assumed to be 10% crown removal (less
than 1%ECA). The amount of timber harvest proposed by the DNRC would not contribute to a
significant ECA or measureable increase in PFIs. Skid trail construction, 0.89 miles of road
construction, ditch construction and development of a stream crossing have the potential to contribute
sediment to Cripple Horse Creek. However, the DNRC is required to following MT BMPs and water
quality standards. The implementation of BMPs is anticipated to minimize potential impacts to water
quality. Table 3.70 displays the proposed ECA and associated PFI for timber harvest on DNRC lands.
Table 3.70 - ECA and PFI’s from DNRC Lands
WATERSHED

DNRC ACRES

HARVEST ACRES

ECA

PFI

Cripple Horse Creek

335

198

196

1

STREAM FLOW
Cumulative effects water yield analysis includes ECAs from past, present, proposed and reasonably
foreseeable activities on federal, state timber and private lands. Effects of timber harvest, prescribed fire,
forest-wide fuels reduction and road management were incorporated into the cumulative effects analysis
of peak flow through consideration of: effects from past, proposed, current and reasonably foreseeable
activities and disturbances; past decisions and analyses; monitoring data; and KNFP standards and
guidelines. The results of cumulative effects analysis of past, present, proposed, and reasonably
foreseeable activities are displayed in Table 3.72.
The PFI numbers displayed in Table 3.72 represent the maximum PFI that would occur if all harvest,
including the federal, state and private activities identified previously, took place in 2012. Realistically,
the harvest on federal lands would most likely not begin until 2014, activity would be spread over the
next five to ten years, and areas that contribute to the existing condition ECA levels would proceed to
recover. In addition, the DNRC activities would take place in either 2013 or 2014. Under all alternatives,
there would be a measureable increase in PFIs as a result of cumulative activities. Alternative 2 does not
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 163 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

meet the KNFP RPFI as calculated for 2012, however given ECA recovery for Cripple Horse Creek is
144 acres by the time the project is anticipated to be implemented in 2014 an additional 432 acres of
recovery would have occurred and RPFIs would be met. Alternative 2 would have the highest increase in
PFIs of all the alternatives, posing a higher risk to water resources. The PFIs for Alternative 3 are within
KNFP ranges. The differences between the alternatives are small and a 1% to 2% difference is not
anticipated to be measurable in the stream channel at the larger scale. Given proposed implementation of
BMPs and the protection of RHCAs beneficial uses are anticipated to be protected.
Table 3.71 - Changes in Peak Flow by Alternative (% PFI) for 2012
WATERSHED

Dunn Creek
Canyon Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Warland Creek
Fivemile Creek

ACRES

EXISTING
PFI 2012

RPFI

ALT 1
PFI

CUM
ALT 1 PFI

ALT 2
PFI

CUM
ALT 2 PFI

ALT
3 PFI

CUM ALT
3 PFI

21,666
13,184
21,823
8,520
18,434

7
7
10
6
6

14
14
14
14
14

7
7
10
6
6

7
7
11
6
6

10
11
13
12
9

10
12
14
12
9

10
11
12
13
8

10
11
13
13
8

The proposed Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project would result in immediate changes to
stream flow due to channel condition changes for the last ½ mile. This project is unfunded at the time and
would require a technical stream channel design. In the interim, the MDOT culvert on Hwy 37 and the
historic railroad concrete box culvert would continue to be an aquatic organism barrier; Dunn Creek
would stay braided upstream and downstream of the culvert and continue to not flow perennially; water
would continue to bypass the culvert and flow under Hwy 37; and the streambanks would continue to
erode near the historic railroad concrete box culvert.
If implemented, the Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project would not result in measureable
ECAs and PFIs, as 433 ECAs are required for a 1% PFI (Table 3.52). All action alternatives are expected
to maintain beneficial uses because proposed PFIs are within the RPFI for the given stream channel
conditions unless a large scale natural disturbance were to occur (fire, insect, disease, etc.).
STREAM CHANNEL CONDITION
Stream channel conditions are the culmination of cumulative effects within a watershed. Stream channels
are formed and maintained by physical interactions between valley slopes, riparian vegetation, stream
flow regime and channel materials. Over time, stream types can be altered in their dimension, pattern and
profile by various influences. These influences can affect factors such as stream flow, sediment supply
and channel stability (Rosgen 1996). Activities such as timber harvest, road construction and livestock
grazing are examples of such influences that can alter stream channel processes and lead to changes in
channel processes.
The Rosgen Classification provides management interpretations for various stream types based on
sensitivity to disturbance (including increases in stream flow magnitude, timing and/or sediment
increases), recovery potential (assumes natural recovery once the cause of instability is corrected),
sediment supply (including suspended and bed-load from channel derived sources and/or from adjacent
slopes), stream bank erosion potential, and vegetation as a controlling influence for stability (vegetation
that influences width/depth ratio). These elements suggest the manner in which channels could respond to
disturbance (Table 3.56).
When analyzed cumulatively in all alternatives, the proposed construction of temporary roads in areas
where roads were stored could delay hydrologic recovery at stream crossings depending on the road
location and how the stream crossings and ditch relief are designed. Roads in high precipitation zones,
RHCAs, and with multiple stream crossings would have a greater impact than roads located in low
precipitation zones, outside of RHCAs, and with no stream crossings. Temporary road construction in
RHCAs at stream crossings would also be a short-term source for sediment. The implementation of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 164 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

design criteria and BMPs is anticipated to minimize the impact to hydrologic recovery and the amount of
sediment generated. All roads would be designed to prevent water and sediment generated by the road,
particularly ditch water, from entering streams. The proposed construction of temporary roads in RHCAs
is not recommended and is not supported by INFS and the KNFP. Roads in RHCAs can contribute to the
destabilization of these areas with loss of riparian vegetation for LWD recruitment, pool production,
thermal protection and bank stabilization; capture and concentration of overland flow as well as
subsurface flow, and concentrated sedimentation and siltation near water resources.
Road maintenance, decommissioning and intermittent stored service work would occur under Alternatives
2 and 3, both with the timber sales and when funding becomes available. Where culvert removal occurs
the streams would be restored to match natural channel form (width, depth, and gradient); where culvert
upgrades occur the new structure would be sized for a 100 year flood event and/or stream simulation.
Restoration of stream crossings would benefit stream channel function and help disconnect the road
system from the stream system. Road maintenance in Alternatives 2 and 3 would focus on reducing the
distance water flows in ditches, reducing road surface erosion, filtering ditch water before entering
streams and reducing the probability of stream crossing failures. Stream crossing improvements would
improve the ability for streams to handle stream flow and sediment that may be restricted in some cases
due to undersized structures. With all road work, there would be some short-term sediment introduction
from crossing restoration, but the long-term potential sediment yield from each site would decrease.
Under all action alternatives, the closure of the Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek grazing
allotments would eliminate the future potential for stream channel degradation by cattle. Streambank
vegetation and stability would continue to improve, soil compaction would be reduced, and in-stream
sediment would be reduced with intact riparian areas benefit stream channel conditions. However, the
Fivemile Creek grazing allotment would be active and in conjunction with the proposed project activities
there is a greater risk to stream channel condition. Potential impacts from cattle grazing in Fivemile Creek
would be mitigated by monitoring stream channel conditions, minimizing grazing in the RHCA and
following the Fivemile Creek Grazing Allotment Plan (Project File).
In summary, Alternatives 2 and 3 have the potential to affect stream channel processes. However, the
implementation of design criteria, BMPs, RHCA standards, road maintenance and improvements, and
road intermittent storage are anticipated to mitigate these potential impacts. This conclusion is based on
the analysis of direct, indirect, and cumulative effects to sediment delivery, stream flow, riparian
condition, and/or channel stability.
The proposed Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project would result in immediate changes to
stream channel conditions for the last ½ mile. This project is unfunded at the time and would require
additional analysis. In the interim, the MDOT culvert on Hwy 37 and the historic railroad concrete box
culvert would continue to be an aquatic organism barrier; Dunn Creek would stay braided upstream and
downstream of the culvert and continue to not flow perennially; water would continue to bypass the
culvert and flow under Hwy 37; and the streambanks would continue to erode near the historic railroad
concrete box culvert.
Depending on the level of implementation the following would occur; approximately 0.7 miles of FS
Road 334 would be re-located up on the hillside starting at approximately milepost (MP) 1.4, the existing
roadbed removed and/or approximately 500 feet of stream channel would be moved away from Banks 32
and 33 (Appendix J) and wood cribbing would be installed at the base of said banks; pending private
landowner consent, approximately 900 feet of braided stream channel would be relocated into a historic
single channel and LWD would be placed in the channel; on COE land the historic railroad concrete box
culvert would be removed and the last ½ mile of Dunn Creek would be fully reconstructed into a single
channel and LWD would be placed in the channel. These activities are expected to improve aquatic
habitat by stabilizing riffles and pools. The project would create a step into the large Hwy 37 culvert to
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 165 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

remove the hydrologic barrier to fisheries passage. The proposed project(s) would result in a stream
channel similar to that depicted in Figure 7.
Figure 7 - Natural Stream Cross-Section

In the long-term, implementation of the Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project would benefit
stream channel conditions. Relocation of FS Road 334 would permit bankfull benches and a small
floodplain to be reconstructed, riparian vegetation would be re-established on the floodplain and provide
bank stability, and the channel could migrate laterally. Installation of wood cribbing would prevent the
stream from migrating laterally to the base of Banks 32 and 33. The wood cribbing would eliminate the
largest in-stream sediment sources to Dunn Creek which subsequently may minimize aggradation
downstream of the existing Hwy 37 culvert. The relocation of approximately 900 feet of Dunn Creek into
the historic single channel would facilitate sediment transport, improve aquatic habitat, and may improve
stream flow during the dry season. Removal of the concrete box culvert would eliminate aggradation
upstream and degradation downstream, stream constriction and lateral upstream migration.
Reconstruction of a single stream channel would facilitate sediment transport, improve aquatic habitat, reestablish a floodplain, and may improve stream flow during the dry season. Removing the hydraulic drop
at the Hwy 37 culvert would reduce velocities through the culvert and reduce scouring/degradation below
the structure. Reducing velocities would reduce bank stress, channel migration and braiding.
WATER QUALITY
Cumulative effects to water quality analysis include ECAs from past, present, proposed and reasonably
foreseeable activities on federal, state timber and private lands. Effects of timber harvest and road
management were incorporated into the cumulative effects analysis of water quality through consideration
of: effects from past, proposed, current and reasonably foreseeable activities and disturbances; past
decisions and analyses; monitoring data; and KNFP standards and guidelines. The findings of this
assessment conclude that timber harvest related activities, prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife
treatments within the analysis area would cumulatively contribute indiscernible effects to sediment
delivery because of proposed design criteria, effective BMP implementation (Appendix C) and RHCA
standards. Road related activities would cause some short-term increases in sedimentation but an overall
reduction in long-term sedimentation because the roads would be disconnected from the stream system.
Streambank destabilization would continue to contribute sediment to the stream system. The Dunn Creek
aquatic habitat improvement project would contribute discernible short-term impacts to water quality but
over the long-term reduce sedimentation and improve stream function. Therefore, overall water quality
within the analysis area would be maintained and may be improved.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 166 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

Under Alternatives 2 and 3, timber harvest related activities, prescribed fire, and fuels and wildlife
treatments have the potential to create soil disturbance and increase overland flow, resulting in soil
erosion and sediment delivery to streams. This is primarily due to soil compaction and disturbance
associated with skid trails and landings. Studies of erosion and sediment transport in harvest units have
shown that application of BMPs, including installing skid trail drainage and designating riparian buffers,
results in sediment retention within the harvest unit and riparian buffer (Croke et al. 1999; Wallbrink and
Croke 2002; Litschert and MacDonald 2009) and adequately protect streams from sediment introduction.
Additional research has shown that the level of sediment production resulting from timber harvest is
dependent on the level of planning and attention to site-specific conditions (Chamberlin et al. 1991). All
proposed harvest and fuels treatment activities would be conducted with strict adherence to applicable
BMPs (Appendix C). KNF monitoring has shown that BMPs have been properly implemented 97% of the
time and have been 95% effective in reducing and/or eliminating sedimentation (Appendix D). A list of
BMPs, specific to this project, can be found in Appendix C. These measures, combined with specified
design criteria (Appendix A), adherence to INFS Standards and Guidelines for RHCAs (USDA Forest
Service 1995), and the Water Resources Monitoring Plan (Appendix I) are expected to prevent negative
impacts to water quality and beneficial uses. The proposed timber harvest activities are not expected to
measurably affect sedimentation levels in streams through the use of design criteria, RHCA buffers, and
BMPs.
Studies have shown that roads are often the highest contributors of non-point source sediment in forested
areas (Brooks et al. 1997; Luce and Wemple 2001; Reid and Dunne 1984; Waters 1995), and impact
aquatic habitat (Furniss et al. 1991; Schnackenberg and MacDonald 1998). A study on the KNF found
that fine sediment in channels correlated with road density (MacDonald et al. 1997). Roads can affect
streams directly by accelerating erosion and sedimentation, altering channel morphology, and/or changing
the runoff characteristics of the watershed (Furniss et al. 1991; Gucinski et al. 2001); roads can also
intercept groundwater and convert it to surface flow. Water flowing on roads often picks up and carries
sediment that is more readily available on non-vegetated native road surfaces. Sediment laden water can
be delivered directly into the stream channel where roads cross streams. Additionally, ditch relief culverts
in riparian areas can also deliver water and sediment if they carry enough water to scour a channel that
eventually connects to a stream. Improperly drained and/or located roads can accelerate erosion rates and
increase sedimentation in streams. The frequency and amount of sediment delivery to streams is highly
variable and is largely influenced by road segment length, slope and location within the watershed (Luce
and Black 1999; King and Tennyson 1984; Reid and Dunne 1984; Schnackenberg and MacDonald,
1998).
The effects of roads on stream systems can be minimized once the interactions of water, soil, vegetation,
and topography are understood. A single road surface gully that forms can contribute large amounts of
road-derived sediment to a stream channel. Predicting the probability of these types of failures is difficult.
Reducing the likelihood or risk of these occurrences through road maintenance and application of BMP
standards protects both the roads and the stream systems.
Under all action alternatives, the closure of the Cripple Horse Creek and Canyon Creek grazing
allotments would eliminate the future potential for water quality degradation by cattle. Streambank
vegetation and stability would continue to improve, soil compaction would be reduced, and in-stream
sediment would be reduced; intact riparian areas benefit water quality. However, the Fivemile Creek
grazing allotment would be active and in conjunction with the proposed project activities there is a greater
risk to water quality. Potential impacts from cattle grazing in Fivemile Creek and Warland Creek would
be mitigated by monitoring stream channel conditions, minimizing grazing in the RHCA, and following
the Fivemile Creek Grazing Allotment Plan (Project File). If the Warland Creek Grazing Allotment
becomes active, a Warland Creek Grazing Allotment Plan would be drawn up to be least impactive.
Mass soil movement associated with roads is rare in the analysis area, but could occur due to culvert
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 167 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

failure. There are approximately 517 miles of existing road within the analysis area. Alternatives 2 and 3
propose approximately 9 and 8 miles of new road construction, respectively; 4 miles of temporary road
construction; 16 and 18 miles of intermittent stored service, respectively; and 6 miles of road
decommissioning. Additionally, the action alternatives propose approximately 176 and 168 miles of haul
routes, respectively. In order to reduce the likelihood of road failure and minimize sediment sources, all
new roads, temporary roads and haul routes would have appropriate BMPs applied.
Cumulatively, there is the potential for measurable short-term negative effects and long-term positive
effects to water quality (Wegner 1999; Hickenbottom 2001). Over ten years of monitoring has shown that
similar levels of activity have maintained or improved conditions within the watersheds (refer to Existing
Condition). All alternatives are anticipated to maintain or improve existing conditions to water resources.
The proposed Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project would result in short-term impacts but
long-term benefits to water quality for the last ½ mile. This project is unfunded at the time and would
require additional analysis. In the interim, the MDOT culvert on Hwy 37 and the historic railroad concrete
box culvert would continue to be an aquatic organism barrier; Dunn Creek would stay braided upstream
and downstream of the culvert and continue to not flow perennially; water would continue to bypass the
culvert and flow under Hwy 37; and the streambanks would continue to erode near the historic railroad
concrete box culvert.
Implementation of the proposed Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project(s) would have shortterm impacts but long-term benefits to water quality. This project is unfunded at the time and would
require additional analysis. Depending on the level of implementation, the following would occur; the
relocation of FS Road 334 would result in sediment being temporarily deposited in the stream channel
during project implementation but long-term sediment from the road surface would be reduced; and/or the
installation of wood cribbing at the base of Banks 32 and 33 would result in sediment temporarily being
deposited in the stream channel but over the long term significantly reduced. The relocation of Dunn
Creek into the historic channel above the Hwy 37 culvert would result in a short-term sediment increase
but an increase in stream capacity. Removal of the historic railroad concrete box culvert and complete
channel reconstruction would result in short-term sediment increases due to newly excavated streambanks
and streambed; over the long-term sediment would be reduced due to stabilization of banks and
elimination of multiple channels.
The sediment increases are not anticipated to have a measureable impact on Dunn Creek compared to the
current levels of sediment entering the stream. The project(s) are located in the lower most section of the
watershed and travel distance is short. The project(s) duration would be short and occur during the low
flow season to minimize the sediment transport. Sediment discharged to the Kootenai River system is not
anticipated to have a measureable impact on water quality given the size of the receiving water and the
short duration of the project(s). Additionally, project(s) design criteria such as timing restrictions and low
flow restrictions would minimize the amount of sediment associated with implementation. Overall the
Dunn Creek aquatic habitat improvement project(s) is anticipated to enhance stream function in the lower
½ mile.

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
COMPLIANCE with the CWA – PROTECTION of BENEFICIAL USES
The Clean Water Act (CWA) established federal water quality policies, goals and programs. The
objective of the CWA is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the
nations’ waters.” The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the State of Montana have the
responsibility to implement the intent of the CWA. States are required to establish water quality standards
that allow for the protection of beneficial uses. Any action within a given watershed should maintain or
improve stream conditions within that watershed. All alternatives comply with the CWA. Each
alternative is expected to maintain and potentially improve stream conditions in the analysis area. This
expectation is based on: surveys of existing watershed conditions; the conclusion of the Water Yield
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 168 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WATER RESOURCES

analysis that PFIs would not exceed recommended levels; the designation of RHCAs, the application of
BMPs to all proposed road work, timber harvest and underburning activities; evidence from Forest
monitoring results and the literature regarding the effectiveness of BMPs; and the conclusion that the
effects of BMP improvements to roads would reduce existing water and sediment contributions from
the road network.
The CWA requires states to identify waterbodies that do not fully support all their designated beneficial
uses. These impaired waterbodies are called Water Quality Limited Segments (WQLS). Cripple Horse
Creek is a WQLS stream. Implementation of the proposed activities, including the design criteria and
BMPs specified in the DEIS and Soil and Water Project File, would at least maintain beneficial use
conditions and may improve them.
In a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the FS and the State of Montana, the FS has been
designated as the management agency responsible for water quality protection on NFS lands. In the
MOU, the FS has agreed to follow State Water Quality Standards established under the Montana Water
Quality Act, primarily through implementation of BMPs. These are designed to ensure that water quality
and beneficial uses are protected both during and after implementation of land management activities.
The EIS and Soil and Water Project File outline the BMPs designated for each potential activity.
These measures are fully expected to minimize soil disturbance and erosion. The 2011 KNF
Monitoring Summary (USDA Forest Service 2011) states that monitoring between 1991 and 2011
shows that 95% of the BMPs implemented during that time were effective. Road drainage
improvements are designed to disconnect storm water flow from the stream network. The
improvements are expected to reduce chronic sediment delivery in the long-term, which is anticipated
to improve aquatic habitat conditions in Dunn Creek, Canyon Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Warland
Creek and Fivemile Creek. Based on Wegner (1999), a measurable decrease in percent fine sediment
in pool tails is expected. The monitoring plan for this analysis area is in Appendix I.
Compliance with Protection of Riparian Areas and Wetlands
Section 404 of the CWA authorizes the Secretary of the Army to issue permits for the discharge of
dredged or fill material into wetlands (33 CFR 323). Silviculture activities are exempt from the 404
permit process, as are associated road construction and maintenance that adhere to BMPs (33 CFR
323.4a). Silviculture treatment and roadwork near wetlands would be done in accordance with the
KNF Riparian Guidelines, as amended by the Montana SMZ Law and INFS.
The Riparian Area Guidelines in Appendix 26 of the KNFP (USDA Forest Service 1987b), as amended
by the Montana Streamside Management Zone (SMZ) Law and INFS (USDA Forest Service 1995),
provide standards and guidelines for activities in riparian areas and wetlands. These regulations would be
strictly followed during sale design and layout and any other action resulting from the decision.
Forest Plan Consistency
All alternatives are consistent with the KNFP direction for maintaining water quality and protecting
wetland and riparian areas. Implementation of any alternative would at least maintain, and action
alternatives over the long-term would likely improve, the support of beneficial uses. For additional
information with regard to KNFP Monitoring refer to the following website:
http:www.fs.fed.us/r1/Kootenai/publications and look for Forest Plan Monitoring Reports.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 169 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMENT

FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION
The fuels in the East Reservoir analysis area, like any forested environment, are dynamic and change over
time. These changes occur slowly over the course of many years unless a major disturbance event occurs.
Expected fire behavior changes as stands age and succession leads to changes in structure, function,
species composition and fuel loading. Tree mortality caused by any number of natural and human caused
events can lead to increases in standing and down woody debris; thereby, increasing surface fuel loads.
Ingrowth of new trees and other vegetation can affect the abundance of ladder and crown fuels over time.
This report describes the regulatory framework of fire and fuels management and the affected
environment as it relates to expected fire behavior under existing conditions and post-treatment conditions
by alternative.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
National Fire Plan
The National Fire Plan (USDI and USDA 2000) provides the national direction for hazardous fuels
reduction, restoration, rehabilitation, monitoring, applied research and technology transfer. It also
established the framework for a 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy (USDI and USDA 2001). Four priority
goals were established from the 10-Year Comprehensive Strategy which includes:
• Improve Prevention and Suppression;
• Reduce Hazardous Fuels;
• Restore Fire Adapted Ecosystems;
• Promote Community Assistance.
Federal Policy
Federal wildland fire policy is guided and directed by the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy
(1995 and revised in 2001). Applicable guiding principles include:
• Firefighter and public safety is the first priority in every fire management activity.
• The role of wildland fire as an essential ecological process and natural change agent will be
incorporated into the planning process.
• Sound risk management is a foundation for all fire management activities.
• Fire Management Plans and activities incorporate public health and environmental quality
considerations.
The Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy clearly states that wildland fire analysis will carefully
consider the long-term benefits in relation to risks both in the short- and long-term:
“Fire, as a critical natural process, will be integrated into land and resource management
plans and activities on a landscape scale, and across agency boundaries. Response to wildland
fire is based on ecological, social, and legal consequences of fire. The circumstances under
which a fire occurs, and the likely consequences on firefighter and public safety and welfare,
natural and cultural resources, and values to be protected dictate the appropriate management
response to fire.”
The Healthy Forest Restoration Act
The Healthy Forest Restoration Act (2003) directs agency personnel to reduce hazardous fuels in the
wildland urban interface (WUI) and municipal watersheds and restoring fire adapted vegetation
communities.
Kootenai National Forest Plan
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) provides the overall direction of management activities on the
Forest. Specific goals in the KNFP in relation to fire management are to use prescribed fire to emulate
natural ecological processes, prevent excessive natural and activity fuel buildup, create habitat diversity
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 170 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

for wildlife, reduce suppression costs and maintain ecosystems (page II-2). Objectives identified in the
KNFP state that the fire protection program will seek to minimize the number of acres lost to damaging
wildfire and to provide for the safety of the public and personnel engaged in fire protection activities. The
fuels management program intends to treat both activity fuels and natural vegetation to the degree needed
to facilitate implementation of the fire protection program and other dependent activities of the KNFP
(page II-11).
The analysis area contains Management Areas (MAs) 2, 3, 5, 6,
10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24 and private land. KNFP
direction, in regards to fire suppression strategy for the MAs in
the project boundary, is for unplanned ignitions during critical
fire season to normally be controlled. Critical fire season is
defined in the KNFP when the Energy Release Component
(ERC) exceeds 39 for the past four days and the Burning Index
(BI) is 30 or greater, or the 1,000 hour time lag fuel moisture is
below 16% (page VI-7). Only MAs 2 and 3 in the analysis area
allow for a contain or confine strategy during the critical fire
season but they are not large enough areas to be considered by
decision makers. During the non-critical fire season, a contain
and/or confine strategy may be used in the above MAs if an
analysis of the time of year and expected fire behavior disclose
no effect to the area or adjacent MAs, and it is more cost
effective to do so.

Energy Release Component – A number
related to the available energy (BTU) per
unit area (ft2) of the flaming front at the
head of a fire. It evaluates the contribution
of various fuel loadings represented
mathematically in the National Fire
Danger Rating fuel models. It is a good
indicator of seasonal trends because it
does not change dramatically from day to
day unless precipitation is received
(which affects fuel moistures).
Burning Index – An estimate of the
potential difficulty of fire containment as
it relates to the potential flame length at
the head of a fire. Doubling the burning
index indicates that twice the effort will
be required to contain a fire in that fuel
type as was previously required,
providing all other parameters are held
constant. BI is widely used to help
determine staffing levels for initial attack

All MAs in the analysis area except for MAs 13 and 24
encourage the use of prescribed fire (planned ignitions) as the
primary tool for fuels management and/or to maintain or
enhance wildlife habitat. The purpose of prescribed fire in MA
13, as identified in the KNFP, is to maintain old growth characteristics. MA 24, low productivity
areas, does not usually allow the use of prescribed fire.

ANALYSIS AREA
The East Reservoir analysis area lies within the Koocanusa Physiographic Area. The East Reservoir
analysis area is approximately 92,400 acres. National Forest System (NFS) lands consist of 78,546 acres,
4,032 acres are State of Montana Department of Natural Resource and Conservation (DNRC) lands, 7,672
acres are owned by Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC), 802 acres are Corp of Engineer (COE) lands
and 1,355 acres are in private ownership. The East Reservoir analysis area consists of five major
drainages: Fivemile Creek (northern most), Warland Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Canyon Creek and
Dunn Creek (southern-most).

ANALYSIS METHODS
Vegetative Response Units (VRUs) as described in detail in the Vegetation Section of this document were
used to describe existing vegetation characteristics and their relationship to disturbances and fire regimes,
which help determine the desired future conditions of a given landscape. VRUs are more appropriate to
use in a fire and fuels analysis than MAs because they are more tied to vegetation and disturbance
processes.
Fire history for the East Reservoir analysis area was derived from records maintained in the GIS library.
Records in the GIS library were derived from the Kootenai Fire History Atlas and fire records maintained
at the national database in Kansas City.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 171 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

Fire behavior modeling was accomplished with FlamMap (version 3.0) for the pretreatment landscape and
BehavePlus (version 5.0.5) for unit specific post treatment comparisons. FlamMap is a fire behavior
mapping and analysis program that computes potential fire behavior characteristics (spread rate, flame
length, crown fire activity, etc.) over an entire landscape for constant weather and fuel moisture
conditions. It is designed to examine the spatial variability in fire behavior assuming that fuel moisture,
wind speed and wind direction are held constant. This allows for a more direct comparison of different
fuel treatments and their effects on fire behavior and fire movement (Stratton 2004). It does incorporate
spatial variability in fuels and topography. FlamMap is more useful in determining how a fire might burn
across a landscape rather than giving a fire perimeter or final fire size (Scott 2006). It does not simulate
the effects of ember transport and spotting on overall fire growth (Scott 2006). Some literature states that
FlamMap is known for under-predicting active crown fire as compared to other models and observed
conditions (Stratton 2004, Scott 2006). This is mostly due to a poor understanding of crown fire modeling
which is an area of research that is in its infancy (Stratton 2006).
FlamMap incorporates the following fire behavior models that have been scientifically validated and used
by fire managers for many years (www.firemodels.org):
• Rothermel’s 1972 surface fire model
• Van Wagner’s 1977 crown fire initiation model
• Rothermel’s 1991 crown fire spread model
• Nelson’s 2000 dead fuel moisture model
The BehavePlus fire modeling system is a computer program that is based on mathematical models that
describe wildland fire and the fire environment. It
20-ft Wind- is the wind measured 20 feet
incorporates over 40 models and is best described by
above the average top of the dominant
Heinsch and Andrews (2010). BehavePlus has been in use
vegetation. It is usually a combination of
in various versions for fire management application that
general and local winds.
involves modeling fire behavior and effects, projecting the
Mid-flame Wind- the wind measured at
behavior of an ongoing fire, planning prescribed fire,
½ of the flame height. It is almost always
assessing fuel hazard, and training (Andrews 2007). It was
lighter than the 20-ft wind speed.
used in this analysis to model post-treatment fire behavior
All wind directions are the direction the
characteristics at the stand level.
wind is coming from.
A 20 mph 20-ft wind blowing upslope was used for both models. This equates to a mid-flame wind speed
of 2-12 mph depending on stand height and stand density (affects sheltering from the wind). Since wind is
extremely variable it cannot be accurately forecasted across the entire analysis area; thus, it is more
important that a constant 20-ft wind speed be used for equal comparison of pre and post-treatment fire
behavior.
Fuel moistures were developed for each fuel model. In
general, low fuel moistures were used to represent drought
summer conditions: 1 hour = 3-6 percent, 10-hour = 4-6
percent, 100-hour = 7-10 percent, Live Herbaceous = 60-90
percent, Live Woody 90-120 percent. The live fuel moisture
content represents fuels that are 1/3rd to 2/3rd cured. This is
very typical of live fuel moisture conditions within the
analysis area in August for native species. Generally, lower
fuel moistures were used for more open stands and higher
fuel moistures were used for denser, moist site stands.

Dead Fuel Size Classes
1-hour fuels: 0 to ¼ inch diameter
10-hour fuels: ¼ to 1 inch diameter
100-hour fuels: 1 to 3 inches diameter
1000-hour fuels: 3 to 8 inches diameter
1-hr and 10-hr fuels are the primary
carrier of most fires and the biggest
concern for fire spread. 100-hr and 1000hr fuels are good indicators of drought
and add significantly to fire intensity,
severity, and resistance to control.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 172 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
Fire History
There have been approximately 285 fires recorded in the East Reservoir analysis area since the early
1900s. Most of the fires have been caused by lightning but a significant portion of the fires occurring
from early 1900s until about 1930 were human-caused due to active timber harvesting, homesteading and
poor fire prevention controls. After the 1930s, human-caused fires account for less than 20% of the fires
in the analysis area.
Over 22 large fires have been documented in the analysis area. In general, the large fires ranged in size
from 50-1,000 acres and occurred primarily on the south, southeast and southwest aspects. The first large
fire on record occurred during 1872 and burned a significant portion along the eastern boundary of the
analysis area (1872 was a significant fire year for the Northern Rockies). Large fire activity remained
high from 1910 thru the 1920s, with 15 of the 22 large fires occurring during this period. The next
documented fire to burn any significant amount of acres was the Dry Fork Fire of 1988 (approx. 15,000
acres). The most recent large fires to occur in the analysis area were the 1994 S.F. of Cripple Horse Creek
(approx. 600 acres) and the Warland Fire of 2000 (approx. 50 acres).
Historic Versus Present Fire Regimes
The East Reservoir analysis area would have historically exhibited low, mixed and stand-replacing fire
severities across the landscape. Table 3.72 uses Vegetation Response Units (VRU), as described in detail
in the Vegetation Section, to classify historical fire regimes and the potential number of fire cycles
missed. Missed fire cycles are largely attributed to fire suppression. Other causes include logging, grazing
and land conversion to agriculture or housing developments.
Table 3.72 - Historical Fire Regimes, Potential Missed Return Intervals by VRU
VRU (% of AREA)

HISTORICAL FIRE REGIME* by ASPECT

POTENTIAL MISSED RETURN INTERVALS

1 (1%)

All- I
South - I
North - III
South - III
North, valley bottoms - IV
South- III
North, valley bottoms - IV
South- IV
North, valley bottoms - V
South- III
North - IV
Valley bottoms and rounded ridge tops - V

1-10
1-6
1-6
1-3
0-2
1-2
0-1
0-2
None likely
0-2
0-1
None likely

2 (23%
3 (22%)
4 (10%)
5 (1%)
7 (29%)
and
9 (13%)

*

Fire Regime I- return intervals of 0-35 years, low severity
Fire Regime III- return intervals of 35-100+ years, mixed severity
Fire Regime IV- return intervals of 35-100+ years, stand replacement severity
Fire Regime V- return intervals of 200+ years, stand replacement severity

The greatest departure from historical conditions is occurring mostly in VRUs 1, 2, 3 and to a lesser
extent in VRU 4S, due to the number of missed fire return intervals due to suppression. According to
Peterson et al. (2005), deviation from historical fire regimes caused by fire suppression has been most
impactive to drier forests dominated by ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir. In these forest types, fires of low
to mixed severity would have controlled regeneration of shade-tolerant tree species (Arno and AllisonBunnell 2002) and promoted fire-tolerant species such as ponderosa pine, western larch and larger
diameter Douglas-fir. Today, these dry forest types in the analysis area have an accumulation of
understory fuels and vegetation, increased ladder fuels, fewer large trees and an increased potential for
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 173 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

crown fires (Agee 1993, Arno and Brown 1991). This increased potential for surface fires to develop into
crown fires is because the understory ladder fuels lower the effective canopy base height and the
overstory trees are denser, allowing for crown fire initiation and spread. Scott and Reinhardt (2001)
define canopy base height as the lowest height above ground at which there is significant canopy fuel to
propagate fire vertically through the canopy. Put more simply, it means having enough ladder fuels to
allow a surface fire to transition into a crown fire.
Crown fires are considered the main threat to ecological and human environment values and they are one
of the biggest challenges of fire management (Graham et al. 2004). Fire managers recognize three
different types of crown fires. Passive crown fires kill individual trees or small groups of trees. Passive
crown fires are often referred to as “torching.” Active crown fires are continuous. They burn the entire
tree canopy but they are dependent on heat from surface fires for continued spread. Independent crown
fires also burn the entire tree canopy but they are independent of surface fires. Independent crown fires,
which are rare, only occur in the most extreme situations and are poorly understood. Passive and active
crown fires are the main concern for the analysis area because of the current conditions of the stands
proposed for treatments (dense, high coarse fuel loads, lots of ladder fuels).
Fuel Condition
The material referred to as "fuels" are those portions of plants that are available to be consumed by fire.
This includes both live and dead material. The amount and size of fuels that contribute to fire spread and
intensity vary by time of year and weather conditions. During late summer, when many plants have
finished their seasonal growth and the lack of precipitation (perhaps as a result of extended drought)
combined with hot weather, much of the live and dead fuel is available for consumption by fire.
Conversely, during the spring when most plants are growing vigorously and moisture is abundant,
available fuels are limited to the most flammable dead fuels on the driest sites. During the fall season the
increase in rainfall as well as the change to shorter days and cooler weather limits the availability of fuels.
Across these seasonal changes in fuel availability there is a range of possible outcomes should a fire
occur. While it is not possible to predict when a fire will occur it is true that most lightning fires do occur
during July and August. Fire season is usually halted by an episode of rainy weather that traditionally
occurs between the third week of August and the third week of September. The exceptional years when
this rain does not occur will see the fire season extending perhaps as late as mid-October.
Fuel models are used by fire specialists to predict fire behavior and characterize the amount of fuels
available to burn during a surface fire. A fuel model is chosen by the primary carrier of the fire (e.g. grass,
brush, timber litter, slash) and its fuel characteristics (e.g. fuel loading, surface area to volume ratio, fuel
depth, etc.). In some cases a fuel model is chosen because it accurately reflects the expected fire behavior
even though it does not fit the visible description of the stand or area. Fuel models are simple tools to help
fire managers realistically estimate fire behavior.
Rothermel (1983) has a detailed discussion on fuel models
and how they are used to predict the spread and intensity of
forest and range fires.
Fuel models, canopy base heights, canopy bulk densities,
crown cover and stand heights for the East Reservoir
analysis area were developed from LANDFIRE (see box to
the right) and then verified with ground reconnaissance
and/or aerial photos and adjusted if needed. The fuel models
contained within the project boundary are described below
by Scott and Burgan (2005). Since the fuel models within

LANDFIRE (Landscape Fire and
Resource Management Planning Tools
Project) is an interagency vegetation, fire,
and fuel characteristics mapping project.
It is a shared project between the Dept. of
Interior and Forest Service wildland fire
management programs. LANDFIRE is
producing a comprehensive, consistent,
scientifically credible suite of spatial data
layers for the entire United States and
covers all land ownership.
For more information on LANDFIRE
visit http://www.landfire.gov/index.php

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 174 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

the project boundary are numerous, this report will briefly describe the most common fuel models
currently existing in the analysis area. A detailed map of all the fuel models across the analysis area is
contained within the project file.
Fuel Model GR2 (102 Low load, dry climate grass): Primary carrier of fire is grass, small amounts of
fine dead fuel may be present. This is the primary fuel model on open, south aspects where overstory
vegetation is sparse.
Fuel Model GS2 (122 Moderate load, dry climate grass-shrub): The primary carrier of fire is grass
and shrubs combined. Shrubs are 1 to 3 feet high and grass load is moderate. This fuel model can also
represent a younger regeneration stand that has had past fuel treatment and a grass understory. This is
the most abundant fuel model in the analysis area because it does represent grass-shrub lands and most
of the past regeneration harvest.
Fuel Model TU1 (161 Low load, dry climate timber-grass-shrub): The primary carrier of fire is a low
load of grass and/or shrubs with timber litter. TU1 is commonly used to replace Fire Behavior Fuel
Model 8 from the original 13 fuel models as described by Anderson (1982). This fuel model usually has
a very low load of surface fuels in the understory and fire behavior is usually minimal. The addition of
ladder fuels and/or a high density overstory (high crown bulk density) can cause this fuel model to
exhibit a crown fire. It is the third most abundant fuel model in the analysis area.
Fuel Model TU5 (165 Very high load, dry climate timber-shrub): The primary carrier of fire is heavy
forest litter with a shrub or small tree understory. This fuel model is the second most dominate fuel
model in the project boundary. It replaces Fire Behavior Fuel Model 10 from the original 13 fuel
models. TU5 best represents stands with an overstory and heavy component of ladder fuels and/or a
high load of dead and downed surface fuels. It is very common to expect a crown fire with this fuel
model.
Fuel Model TL3 (183 Moderate load conifer litter): The primary carrier of fire is a moderate load of
conifer litter and a light load of coarse fuels. It is similar to Fire Behavior Model 8 from the original 13
fuel models. TL3 best represents closed canopy stands with very little surface fuels.
Fuel Model TL4 (184 Small downed logs): The primary carrier of fire is a moderate load of fine litter
and coarse fuels. Includes small diameter downed logs. TL4 represents stands that have started to
unravel and include conifer litter and coarse woody fuels. It is the fourth most abundant fuel model in
the analysis area.
Fuel Model TL8 (188 Long needle litter): The primary carrier of fire is a moderate load of long-needle
pine litter. It may include a small amount of herbaceous fuels. This fuel model tends to occur in stand
with a heavy component of ponderosa pine without an accumulation of coarse fuels.
The following fuel models would be present in some of the post-treatment units along with some of the
fuel models identified previously:
Fuel Model TL5 (185 High load conifer litter): The primary carrier of fire is a high load conifer litter
and light slash or mortality fuel. TL5 is similar to TL4 except it has an even higher load of coarse fuels
and would exhibit higher fire behavior if all else were equal. It can be used to represent precommercial
thinning slash after the red needles have fallen off.
Fuel Model SB1 (201 Low load activity fuel): The primary carrier of fire is light dead and downed
activity fuel. Fine fuel load is 10-20 tons/acre, weighted towards fuels in the 1 to 3 inch diameter class.
Fuel bed depth is less than 1 foot. SB1 represents a lighter load of post-harvest activity fuels that have
not been treated by piling or prescribed fire.
Fuel Model SB2 (202 Moderate load activity fuel or low load blowdown): The primary carrier of fire
is moderate dead and downed activity fuel or light blowdown. Fine fuel load is 7 to 12 tons/acre, evenly
distributed across 0-0.25, 0.25-1 and 1-3 inch diameter classes. Fuel bed depth is about 1 foot.
Blowdown is scattered, with many trees still standing. This fuel model will only exist in the analysis
area if harvest activity fuels are not treated or to represent the red needle stage of precommercial
thinning slash.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 175 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

Wildland Urban Intermix (WUI)
The East Reservoir analysis area has many homes scattered throughout the area in what has been labeled
a Wildland Urban Intermix. The Intermix Community exists where structures are scattered throughout a
wildland area. There is no clear line of demarcation and wildland fuels are continuous outside of and
within the developed area. The development density, in the intermix, ranges from structures very close
together to one structure per 40 acres or more. In the East Reservoir analysis area, the largest
concentration of homes is in Warland Creek. Homes also exist in Fivemile Creek, Dunn Creek, between
Boundary and Canyon Creek, and between Canyon Creek and Dunn Creek. The Koocanusa Marina is
located on leased NFS land and is located on Lake Koocanusa near the mouth of Cripple Horse Creek.
Numerous proposals for additional access to private property are also occurring at this time and would
eventually mean additional homes in the analysis area. Other miscellaneous structures such as historical
sites or developed recreation sites also exist within the planning area. There have been some treatments to
the hazardous fuels on Forest Service (FS) land adjacent to private property, but most of the land has not
been treated recently. Areas immediately adjacent to private property that have not had recent hazardous
fuel reduction treatments would be high priority areas for treatment.
All of the LANDFIRE data used for fire behavior modeling on NFS lands can also be acquired for other
ownerships including private. The potential fire behavior modeling maps included in the Fire/Fuels
project file includes expected fire behavior for all ownerships. The caveat with this expected fire behavior
is that some of the data used as inputs into the fire models could not be ground verified for non-NFS
lands.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1 there would be no new proposed treatments. Natural processes would continue and
accumulation of forest debris would increase natural fuel loadings. Many of the forested stands in the
analysis area would remain overstocked and ladder fuels would continue to fill-in and crowd the
understory. The drier forest stands would continue to lose vigor due to competition from a dense
understory of shade tolerant species. This understory would serve as ladder fuels that would permit a
surface fire to expand into the canopy of overstory trees. This could result in the mortality of many of the
existing overstory trees that would have otherwise survived a surface fire of lower intensity.
The cooler and more moist sites would continue to decline. Additional mortality from insects and disease
in these stands would lead to even higher fuel loading over time. Timber harvest would not be used to
reduce crown densities and ladder fuels. Existing surface fuels would not be treated and would remain a
hazard. Fire suppression would continue in the analysis area, as directed by the KNFP.
Because there would be no new fuel treatments to reduce the fire hazard in the analysis area, the potential
for high-severity wildland fires would continue and be more likely than under the action alternatives. Any
fire start inside the analysis area or start outside and moving into the analysis area would likely be more
expensive, difficult and dangerous to suppress. Development of private lands would continue, increasing
the complexity and expense of fire suppression.
Fire modeling indicates that there is at least 24,000 acres at risk of crown fire under the existing
conditions and modeled weather scenario. These areas would also exhibit flame lengths and rates of
spread that would require indirect suppression tactics utilizing mechanized equipment and aviation
resources. As time progresses and stand conditions continue to deteriorate in the analysis area due to
insects, disease, wind and snow, the fire hazard would continue to increase. Eventually, conditions would
arise and another fire such as the 1988 Dry Fork Fire would occur.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 176 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

Cumulative Effects
Cumulatively, fire suppression and timber management have had and would continue to have the most
effect on fire regimes and fuels in the analysis area. Table 3.2 in Chapter 3 of this document shows past
timber sale activities for the analysis area. Past harvest activities on NFS land that were followed up with
fuel reduction activities, such as piling and burning or underburning, are still providing a slowing effect
on fire spread. The most effective treatments with the greatest longevity for reducing fire behavior are
regeneration harvest followed by broadcast burning.
Map 17 shows past burning in the East Reservoir analysis area. Broadcast burning as shown on this map
is associated with regeneration harvest. Although regeneration harvest followed by broadcast burning did
not mimic all of the ecological processes that occur during a mixed or stand replacing wildfire it was
effective at reducing fuels and maintaining an individual stand in a mixed or stand-replacing fire regime.
Underburning, on the map, is associated with intermediate harvest or wildlife burning. These typically
occurred in areas within Fire Regimes I or III. In most cases, timber harvest or noncommercial slashing of
ladder fuels eliminated the ladder fuels and burning was done to reduce fuels and improve wildlife habitat
and/or browse. This type of treatment was effective at maintaining or returning individual or multiple
stands to a low or mixed severity fire regime. In general, underburning has a much shorter lifespan on
treatment longevity because the lower severity of the burning consumes less fuels, keeps most of the
overstory in place and stimulates the growth and vigor of fire adapted native plants allowing for surface
fuels to accumulate.
In 2010, Forestwide Fuels unit 589 (170 acres) was slashed in preparation to be underburned as part of the
2001 Forestwide Fuels Reduction and Wildlife Habitat Enhancement EA. An additional three units were
also slashed in 2011 under the same EA. This included: FWF 545 (Gopher Hill, 265 acres), FWF 536
(Warland Peak, 195 acres) and FWF 53403 (Warland Peak, 450 acres). All these units are scheduled to be
underburned between 2013 and 2015. As of the spring of 2013, a partial burn for 170 acres had occurred
in FWF 545. The rest of the slashed units still have potential to exhibit passive and active crown fire.
Once underburning has occurred, these units would be restored back to a low to mixed severity fire
regime.
Firewood cutting is also expected to continue in the analysis area. Cumulatively, this has been effective at
decreasing hazardous fuel loads within 200 feet of many of the open roads.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
The purpose and need specific to the fire and fuels section of the East Reservoir Project is to reduce
hazardous fuels adjacent to private property and across the landscape while reintroducing fire to the
ecosystem. In order to meet this purpose and need, the action alternatives are designed to apply the
principles of a fire-resilient forest as defined in Table 3.73. Reintroduction of fire to the ecosystem would
be accomplished through the use of prescribed fire and natural fire as allowed on a limited basis by the
current KNFP.
Table 3.73 - Principles of Fire-Resilient Forests (Agee and Skinner 2005)
OBJECTIVE

EFFECT

Reduce surface and
ladder fuels
Increase canopy base
height
Decrease crown density
Increase proportion of
mature fire-resilient tree
species

ADVANTAGE

COMMENTS

Reduces potential flame
length
Requires longer flame
length to ignite tree crowns
Makes independent crown
fire less probable

Fire control easier,
less torching

Reduces crown fire
propagation

Surface disturbance less with
fire than other techniques
Opens understory, may allow
surface wind to increase
Surface wind may increase,
surface fuels may be drier

Thicker bark, taller crowns,
higher canopy base height

Increases
survivability of trees

Removing smaller trees is
sometimes difficult and costly

Less torching

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 177 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

Under the treatment alternatives, the existing fuel models were converted to post-treatment fuels models
for each unit. Table 3.74 includes some of the most abundant stand characteristics by treatment type.
Table 3.74 – Pre- and Post-Treatment Stand Characteristics Used for Fire Behavior Modeling
REGENERATION HARVEST

Fuel Model

Canopy Bulk
Density*
Canopy Base
Height**
Canopy
Cover
Crown Fire
Potential

IMPROVEMENT HARVEST

FUEL REDUCTION ONLY
UNITS

PRETREATMENT

POST
TREATMENT

PRETREATMENT

POST
TREATMENT

PRETREATMENT

POST
TREATMENT

TU1(161),
TU5(165),
TL4(184),
TL8(188)

TU1(161),
TL3(183),
TL4(184),
TL8(188)

TU1(161),
TU5(165),
TL4(184),
TL8(188)

TU1 (161),
TL3 (183),
TL4 (184),
TL8 (188)

GR2(102),
GS2(122),
TU1(161),
TU5(165),
TL4(184),
TL8(188)

GR2(102),
GS2(122),
TU1(161),
TL4(184),
TL5(185),
TL8(188)

Fuel
Model
Number

0.10-0.290

0.020-0.030

0.080-0.20

0.040-0.10

0.020-0.290

0.020-0.220

Kg/m3

1-10

20-30

1-10

10-30

1-10

6-15

feet

40-60

10-20

40-60

30-40

40-60

30-50

Percent

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Limited to
passive
crown fire

* Canopy Bulk Density is the mass of available canopy fuel per unit of canopy volume (Scott and Reinhardt 2001).
**Canopy Base Height is the lowest height above the ground at which there is a sufficient amount of canopy fuel to propagate fire vertically into the
canopy. It is an effective value that incorporates ladder fuels such as shrubs and understory trees (Scott and Reinhardt 2001).

Under the action alternatives, none of the proposed harvest units are expected to be able to initiate or
carry a crown fire because canopy base heights would be raised and crown bulk densities would be low
enough that they would not sustain a crown fire after treatments are completed. Units for fuels and fuels
and wildlife objectives would still exhibit limited crown fire potential. They are not designed to reduce or
thin overstory trees that would further reduce canopy bulk densities. Because surface fuels and ladder
fuels would be reduced, the crown fire potential should be limited to passive crown fires (single and/or
group tree torching).
Peterson et al. (2005) suggest there is strong support in the scientific literature and case studies that fuel
treatments reduce the probability of crown fire. This has been supported as recent as 2005 with the Camp
32 fire on the Rexford Ranger District of the KNF. However, it is very important to recognize that
without treatment of slash created by harvest activities and thinning, it is possible that wildfire severity
could increase (Omi et al. 2006).
The post-treatment areas would result in low to moderate surface fire conditions and would be unlikely to
initiate or sustain a crown fire. Expected flame lengths would be less than four feet and the fire is
expected to be a surface fire which would be more conducive to fire suppression activities. These two
criteria are the thresholds of fire control for ground-based suppression personnel directly attacking the
fire. Also, these conditions would substantially reduce the potential for long range and short range
spotting from firebrands, which are associated with high fire intensities, torching, crowning and fire
whirls (Rothermel 1983). Fires exhibiting long range spotting pose some of the greatest threats to
firefighter and public safety because they are extremely difficult to control.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 178 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

None of the alternatives can influence the time and place where ignitions may occur. Wildland fire is a
natural, ongoing process whose time and location can never be precisely predicted by fire behavior
science. There would still be untreated areas of high fuel accumulations that could lead to high-intensity
fires. Blowdown, insect and disease mortality, and other causes of fuel accumulation would likely
continue in the analysis area. However, treated stands would help reduce fire effects. Omi et al. (2006),
found treatments that include thinning followed by slash treatment were the most impressive in reducing
fire intensity and severity and can last up to a decade in mixed-conifer sites. Beyond this time,
maintenance fuel reduction treatments may be needed. These periods of effectiveness could be extended
by future thinning with simultaneous fuel treatments.
Residence Time- The time, in seconds,

Under all action alternatives, activity fuels and natural fuels
required for the flaming front of a fire to
pass a stationary point at the surface of the
would be present for a time before they are treated. This
fuel. The total length of time the flaming
would likely be short-lived but it would be a high hazard.
front of the fire occupies one point.
High burn severity would be expected if a wildfire were to
occur before fuel treatments (underburning, grapple piling,
Resistance to Control- The relative
difficulty of constructing and holding a
masticating) are completed. Untreated fuels would be
control line as affected by resistance to line
similar to a slash-blowdown fuel model SB1 or SB2. Given
construction and by fire behavior.
the same weather scenario and fuel moistures of the
http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/pubs/glossary
previous model runs, flame lengths of 8-13 feet and rates of
spread of 30-50 chains/hour could be expected within the
proposed units. In addition, heavy surface fuel loading would allow long residence time and a high
resistance to control.
Commercial thinning, which is a type of intermediate harvest, is proposed in both action alternatives. The
intent is to improve tree vigor, increase tree spacing, increase fire and insect resiliency, favor desirable
species and reduce ladder fuels. Due to the younger age and size class of these stands, prescribed fire is
not desired at this time because it could cause unacceptable levels of mortality from burning and increase
the risk of attack by insects such as the Mountain Pine Beetle. Whole tree yarding would be utilized to
minimize any increase in activity fuels. As soon as a commercially thinned stand is not at risk from
unacceptable levels of mortality, prescribed fire should be used to further reduce hazardous fuels and to
reintroduce fire to the landscape as appropriate. This would generally be within 15 years of the harvest
treatment. Since prescribed fire may not be used immediately after harvest activities, an increase in
surface fuels is expected in these stands. This would likely cause an increase in fire behavior but it is
expected to remain a surface fire because ladder fuels would be reduced (raising canopy base heights) and
crowns spacing would be increased (reducing canopy bulk density).
Precommercial thinning is also proposed in all of the action alternatives. Precommercial thinning would
definitely cause a short-term increase in expected fire behavior in the thinned stands. The undesired trees
are thinned and then lopped to reduce fuel heights but they are left on site to decompose. Most young
stands proposed to be precommercial thinned in the analysis area can be characterized by a fuel model
TU1 (161). Given similar fuel moisture and weather condition as described previously under “Analysis
Methods”, an unthinned stand would exhibit flame lengths of 2-3 feet and a rate of spread of 3-7 chains
per hour. After thinning has occurred and the needles on the slash have turned red, the fuel model would
be represented by a SB2 (202- Moderate load activity fuel). Expected fire behavior would increase
significantly to flame lengths of 7-10 feet and a rate of spread of 17-40 chains per hour. This condition
would only occur while the red needles are still on the slash. Experience has shown this red needle stage
to last 1-3 years after thinning. Once the red needles have fallen off and the fuels start to become more
compacted from winter snow, the fuel model will shift to a TL5 (185). Expected fire behavior would
include flame lengths of 2-4 feet and a rate of spread of 5-12 chains per hour. This condition would likely
exist 2-5 years after thinning has occurred. Stands treated with daylight thinning around desirable species
such as western white pine, tend to exhibit pockets of fuel concentrations versus the continuous fuels of a
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 179 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

fully precommercial thinned stand. Stands which are daylight thinned will have the same pre and post
treatment fuel models as other precommercially thinned stands, but the post-treatment fuel model will be
in smaller concentrations. Since the daylight thinned fuels are not as continuous and more sheltered and
shaded from the leave trees the expected fire behavior will likely be isolated and less severe versus stands
with complete precommercial thinning.
As part of the East Reservoir Project, the KNF is also analyzing proposed treatments on U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (COE) land east of the Koocanusa Reservoir and the Kootenai River. The COE would be
responsible for selecting their preferred alternative and documenting that decision. If one of the action
alternatives is chosen by the COE, it would complement the FS land in a landscape approach to reducing
hazardous fuels and reintroducing fire to the ecosystem.
An indirect effect of the proposed treatments in each action alternative is the potential to increase surface
winds (Albini and Baughman 1979) and more drying of both live and dead surface fuels (Pollet and Omi
2002). This effect would be more impactive in the regeneration harvests than other treatments due to the
level of overstory removed. These potentially drier and windier conditions are factored into the posttreatment fire behavior modeling. Most fire managers believe these conditions are offset by the reduction
or elimination of crown fires in the post-treatment stands. These same conditions that allow for more
drying also allow for more moist conditions during diurnal weather patterns (night time), after
precipitation, and seasonal variation (spring and fall). The more open stand conditions after treatment also
allow for more effective delivery of aerial retardant or water during wildfire suppression operations.
Another indirect effect of the proposed treatments is their impact on adjacent non-treated stands. Omni
and others (2006) suggest that fuel treatment effects may extend beyond the treated area. This would most
likely occur on the downwind side of a treated area.
All action alternatives propose numerous fuel reduction activities immediately adjacent to private
property in order to meet the purpose and need of this project. Besides reducing fuels on NFS lands the
treatments would likely enhance treatments on private property adjacent to NFS lands or benefit them as
described previously. It is important to note that the most important factors of a home’s ignitability during
wildland fires depend on the characteristics of the home and its immediate surroundings. For this reason,
it is imperative that landowners do their part in making their homes firewise. More information for
landowners can be found at http://www.firewise.org/.
Cohen (2000a) addresses home ignitibility, or the potential for a home to ignite, in the wildland urban
intermix. Cohen concludes that homes most often ignite via one of two processes, direct flame contact
with the structure and lofted firebrands landing on receptive fuel such as a house. The Structure Ignition
Assessment Model (SIAM) developed by Cohen (1995) and results from the International Crown Fire
Modeling Experiment generally concur that a flaming front at a distance of 130 feet or more from a
structure does not deliver sufficient heat energy to ignite the exterior of a home. This recommendation is
based on preventing home ignitions from radiant heat, not protecting firefighters or the homeowner who
may be present (in a safe location) as the fire passes.
In some cases this project proposes treatments on federal land that are contained within the home ignition
zone of private landowners because of their close proximity to federal land. Radiant heat from high
intensity wildfires could cause homes to ignite or cause damage if they are within the home ignition zone.
Proposed treatments for this project in the home ignition zones or farther out are designed to reduce a
wildland fire’s intensity so that it remains a surface fire and does not develop into a crown fire. A crown
fire would loft more firebrands into the air than a surface fire due to the amount and type of fuel being
consumed. A crown fire would likely be more intense, thus producing more wind and convective heating.
These forces alone or combined would carry firebrands greater distances. Cohen’s analysis (modeling,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 180 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

experiments, case studies) did not explicitly address firebrand ignitions but he does recognize that
firebrand ignitions can originate from distances of ½ mile or more (Cohen 2000a).
The previously-cited research exclusively addresses home ignitibility. Not addressed in the research are
some of the other issues and problems faced by resource managers, fire professionals and residents when
considering fire in the WUI. When fire enters the WUI, there remains the potential for loss of life,
property and other values even if homes have been made fire safe. When fire enters areas adjacent to
private land, there is a high probability that firefighting resources would be deployed due to social and
political pressures. Numerous treatment units are proposed that will improve ingress and egress routes for
firefighters and the public during a wildfire event.
Because of the problems and complexities associated with the Intermix Community, resource managers
and fire managers find it desirable to exclude, to the extent possible, wildland fire from these areas, and
prefer to use prescribed fire to manage fuels; however, sociopolitical constraints may preclude or limit its
implementation (Kalabokidis and Omi 1998, DellaSalla et al. 1995).
With the potential for more flexibility in the use of wildland fire under the new proposed Kootenai Forest
Management Plan (not currently in effect), treatments like those proposed in all action alternatives would
allow fire managers and decision makers more options. If adequate fuel reduction activities have occurred
in or near values at risk, such as private property, then a decision maker may be more comfortable
utilizing other options rather than full fire control.
Fuel treatments are proposed in Alternative 2 for areas designated as old growth. These would occur in
dryland old growth such as south aspects of VRU2 and VRU3. Treatments are designed to reduce ladder
fuels via a combination of slashing and prescribed burning. By reducing ladder fuels and surface fuels the
treatments are expected to maintain or enhance some of the dryland old growth attributes and help ensure
the survivability of the old, large diameter trees in these individual stands. The overall goal is to work
towards returning these stands to their appropriate fire regime and increase fire resiliency.
Lastly, Alternatives 2 and 3 include the storage and decommissioning of roads and the addition of newly
constructed permanent roads. Alternative 2 includes the storage of 16 miles of road and the
decommissioning of 15.49 miles (includes undetermined roads). Under Alternative 2, 9.25 miles of new
road will be constructed. Alternatives 3 includes 17.62 miles of road storage, 12.41 miles of
decommissioning (includes undetermined roads), and 8.06 miles of new, permanent roads. Road access is
important for a quick initial attack response; thus, road storage and decommissioning is rarely beneficial
from a fire suppression standpoint. The roads identified for storage or decommissioning in these
alternatives are not vital to wildfire suppression resources. Most of the roads proposed for storage or
decommissioning are not maintained enough for engine access. Due to yearlong or seasonal closures they
have become overgrown with vegetation or damaged due to a lack of maintenance. The majority of the
roads are short spurs less than ½ mile in length or longer roads that are within ¼ mile and run parallel to
other roads that would not be changed. None of the roads proposed for storage or decommissioning in the
action alternatives provide sole access to ridgetops nor are they immediately adjacent to private property.
ALTERNATIVE 2
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 2 would implement various vegetation treatments types on about 26,895 acres of the East
Reservoir analysis area. Intermediate harvests including commercial thinning would occur on 6,316 acres
and are designed to reduce ladder fuels, crown fuels, surface fuels and favor fire resilient tree species.
Regeneration harvests are proposed on 2,529 acres and they are designed to trend vegetation towards
more fire resilient species such as western larch, ponderosa pine and western white pine while also
reducing ladder fuels, crown fuels and surface fuels. Regeneration harvest would occur in stands where
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 181 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

intermediate harvest is not feasible due to poor quality trees and undesirable overstory tree species.
Fuel reduction units (Fuels (F) and Fuels and Wildlife (FW) units) would account for about 11,427 acres
of treatment under Alternative 2. These proposed treatments are designed to reduce surface and ladder
fuels through a combination of slashing small diameter understory trees (less than 6” DBH) and/or
utilizing prescribed fire (underburning or pile burning). The units identified in Table 2.4 of Chapter 2 as
Mechanical Fuel Treatment could include machine piling or machine mastication to reduce ladder fuels
prior to burning. In addition to reducing fuels and reintroducing fire, the FW units (10,049 acres) are
intended to improve wildlife habitat and browse and maintain or enhance old growth characteristics.
Precommercial thinning is proposed on 5,775 acres. This treatment is intended to reduce tree density and
improve the growing conditions of the remaining trees by reducing competition for light and nutrients.
These treatments respond to the need to maintain the vigor and long-term productivity of forest stands.
Thinning would also address ecosystem restoration objectives of restoring fire resilient species, restoring
stand density to conditions consistent with historic disturbance regimes, favoring species that are most
resistant to insect and disease infestation for specific site conditions, and generally improve stand health.
The long-term effect is a stand that is more resilient to fire. In addition, 1,060 acres of white pine daylight
thinning is proposed to feature this species where it exists.
Alternative 2 includes the use of prescribed fire on about 18,011 acres of NFS lands. This includes about
3,840 acres of pile burning and 14,171 acres of underburning. Approximately 2,744 acres of the
underburning is associated with timber harvest units. The rest of the underburning is associated with fuel
reduction units and fuels and wildlife habitat enhancement units.
This alternative includes 261 acres of intermediate harvest with prescribed burning and 137 acres of fuel
reduction units with prescribed burning on COE lands. The intent of these treatments units is the same as
those described previously for NFS lands.
Alternative 2 proposes multiple regeneration harvests that exceed 40 acres in size. These units were
proposed to try to implement treatments that would have been more commensurate to historical patch
sizes while also favoring more fire resilient species. They are proposed on more moist sites that would
have typically experienced mixed to stand replacing fire severity at a scale of hundreds to thousands of
acres in size. Additionally, Units 147, 148, 149 and 150 in Upper Fivemile Creek and Unit 170 in
Warland Creek were designed to tie in with past regeneration harvests to simulate a fire that would have
burned from the creek bottom to the ridge top due to continuous fuels and favorable topography.
Treatments of this scale are also more likely to disrupt large fire growth and spread and assist in the
efficacy of suppression efforts when a fire occurs in these areas. Fire modeling indicates these areas are at
risk of experiencing stand-replacing crown fire behavior if left untreated. In addition to the benefits
described previously, Unit 362 near Hornet Ridge (Dunn Creek) was partially designed to provide a fuel
break immediately adjacent to a major power transmission line. The other regeneration harvest units
exceeding 40 acres were not specifically designed with fire and fuels as the primary purpose; thus, they
do not have as significant of a level of benefit to this resource but they will assist in reducing fuels,
restoring fire to the landscape, and restoring fire resilient tree species.
ALTERNATIVE 3
Alternative 3 was designed to meet all standards and guidelines of the current KNFP. In order to meet
these criteria, fuel treatments in old growth, lynx analysis units and areas that would negatively impact
other sensitive, threatened or endangered fauna were eliminated from this alternative. In addition, further
on the ground reconnaissance caused some units to be dropped and others to be added as described in
Chapter 2. No regeneration harvest over 40 acres are proposed under this alternative.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 182 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

Fuel reduction activities specific to Alternative 3 include:
• Intermediate harvest on 5,881 acres (including commercial thinning);
• Regeneration harvest on 1,901 acres;
• Fuel reduction units without timber harvest on 1,309 acres;
• Fuels and wildlife units totaling 10,049 acres;
• Precommercial thinning on 5,563 acres;
• Prescribed burning on 17,205 acres (2,457 acres of pile burning, 3,390 acres of underburning with
timber harvest, and 11,358 acres of fuels and wildlife burning);
• 421 acres of treatment on COE lands (261 acres of intermediate harvest with underburning, 137 of
fuel reduction activities with underburning, and 23 acres of grapple piling and burning).
All the treatments described under fuel reduction activities have the same objectives and direct and
indirect effects as those described previously under Alternative 2.
Notable differences include a reduction in the proposed treatment acres and the elimination of treatments
in dryland old growth. These areas dropped would continue to exhibit crown fire potential. Old growth
units dropped from this proposal would continue to see an increase in surface and ladder fuels. Fire return
intervals would continue to be missed, causing a trend away from historical fire regimes. When a wildfire
does occur, it is more likely to cause excessive mortality in the old, large diameter trees common in old
growth stands. In addition, this alternative eliminates the daylight thinning in white pine which has seen a
significant reduction in abundance due to many decades of white pine blister rust. Since the short-term
impact of precommercial thinning is an increase in expected fire behavior, this would not occur on 1,060
acres under Alternative 3. The long-term benefit of daylighting white pine is an increase in fire resiliency
of the thinned stands due to the increase in tree spacing and a preference to leave this fire dependent, seral
species.
ALTERNATIVES 1, 2 and 3
Cumulative Effects
The cumulative effects under the Alternative 1 (no-action) also apply to the action alternatives. The major
difference is that the action alternatives, in combination with past harvest activities and fuel treatments,
would provide for a more significant reduction in expected fire behavior and fire movement by
addressing landscape level fuel treatments. The combination of location and juxtaposition of past and
proposed treatments would be more effective at reducing the potential of a high severity wildfire from
having negative impacts to the analysis area. Again it must be reiterated that this is based on the
understanding that natural and activity fuels will be adequately reduced to lower fire severity and
intensity.
In order to maintain the treated areas for effectiveness, maintenance treatments would be required.
Treatments such as precommercial thinning, reduction of surface ladder fuel accumulations, and thinning
overstory crowns as they begin to close-in and provide enough canopy fuels to sustain a crown fire would
be needed. Maintenance treatments are not likely to be warranted for another decade or more depending
on the type and extent of the initial treatments.
Summary of Analysis
From a fire and fuels management perspective, Alternative 1 would not meet the purpose and need of the
project. Alternatives 2 and 3 reduce fuels, trend the vegetation towards fire resiliency, decrease expected
fire behavior at the stand and landscape level, and enhance wildlife habitat and browse. Both action
alternatives trend the East Reservoir analysis area towards the desired future conditions but Alternative 2
does this on the greatest number of acres.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 183 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
FIRE and FUELS MANAGEMNT

CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN and OTHER MANAGEMENT DIRECTION
Alternative 1 is not likely to meet the following direction in the KNFP:
…to use prescribed fire to simulate natural ecological processes, prevent excessive
natural and activity fuel buildup, create habitat diversity for wildlife, reduce suppression
costs, and maintain ecosystems (page II-2).
…the fire protection program will seek to minimize the number of acres lost to damaging
wildfire and to provide for the safety of the public and personnel engaged in fire
protection activities. The fuels management program intends to treat both activity fuels
and natural vegetation to the degree needed to facilitate implementation of the fire
protection program and other dependent activities of…
Alternatives 2 and 3 would be consistent with the fire and fuels management direction in the KNFP as
long as natural and activity fuels are properly treated.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 184 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

PTES PLANTS INTRODUCTION
The activities proposed under the East Reservoir project (tree removal, road decommissioning and
storage, temporary and permanent road construction, road repair and BMPs, fuel treatments; slashing,
piling and burning, road management, noxious weed control, recreational proposals) have the potential to
effect proposed, threatened, endangered and sensitive (PTES) plant populations. These activities are
described in detail in Chapter 2 of this DEIS
The purpose of this analysis is to:
1) Determine if the alternatives will adversely affect any of the PTES plant species that have potential to
occur in the analysis area, and if so, list design features to be implemented to reduce potential effects.
The analysis area is the East Reservoir project area.
2) Insure that the alternatives do not contribute to the loss of viability of any sensitive plant species or
cause a trend toward federal listing;
3) Comply with USDA Forest Service Region 1 policy to insure that sensitive plant species receive full
consideration in the decision-making process;
4) Comply with the Endangered Species Act.
This analysis considers the short- and long-term effects of the proposed action on:
• Existing and potential habitat;
• The welfare of existing plants.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Endangered Species Act
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973 declares, “…all Federal departments and agencies shall seek
to conserve endangered species and threatened species and shall utilize their authorities in furtherance of
the purposes of this Act.” Under the Act, Federal agencies must consult with the Secretary of Interior
whenever an action authorized by such agency is likely to affect a species listed as threatened or
endangered.
Although no proposed, threatened or endangered plant species are known to occur on the Kootenai
National Forest (KNF) two plant species listed as threatened are suspected to occur.
National Forest Management Act
The National Forest Management Act (36 CFR 219.19) directs that the Forest Service (FS) must maintain
viable populations of all native and desired non-native wildlife, fish and plant species in habitats
distributed throughout their geographic range on National Forest System (NFS) Lands.
Agency Direction
In addition Forest Service Manual 2670.5 section 19 defines sensitive species as “those plants and animal
species identified by a Regional Forester for which population viability is a concern, as evidenced by:
1. Significant current or predicted downward trends in population numbers or density; or
2. Significant current or predicted downward trends in habitat capability that would reduce a species’
existing distribution.
Effects to these sensitive species must be analyzed.
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) (USDA 1987) addresses sensitive species under its
forest-wide management direction. In its goals it states that we will "determine the status of
Sensitive species and provide for their environmental needs as necessary to prevent them from
becoming Threatened and Endangered" (KNFP p. II-1). It goes on to say that we will maintain
diverse age classes of vegetation for viable populations of all existing native species. The KNFP
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 185 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

also supports the protection and maintenance of important riparian zone features, marshes, and
water bodies, where sensitive plants often exist.

ANALYSIS METHODS
The following steps were taken to complete this analysis for PTES plants:
1. The assessment of sensitive plants and sensitive plant habitat followed the methods outlined for the
KNF by Leavell and Triepke (1995). Suitable habitats for each sensitive species known or
suspected of occurring on the KNF have been identified by consultation with sensitive plant field
guides (USDA 1992) and published and unpublished literature on sensitive plants (Lesica and
Shelly 1992; Vanderhorst 1996, 1997) information from the Montana Natural Heritage website
(http://nhp.nris.state.mt.us/plants/guidebook.asp) as well as through extensive field experience.
Probability of occurrence (Leavell and Triepke 1995) of sensitive species was estimated, including
both historic and existing location information. Rare plant inventories were conducted subsequent
to these assessments (USDA 1998). These took into consideration all rare plants and rare habitats in
addition to sensitive species. They took place in addition to other past and concurrent surveys of
sensitive plants in and around the analysis area (Vanderhorst 1996, 1997; R. Ferriel, pers. comm.).
The species included in this assessment are those with a moderate to high probability of occurrence
in the analysis area. The probability analyses took into consideration the following factors:
• Past disturbance;
• Locations of known populations - District records, past surveys and the Montana Natural Heritage
Program database were scanned to determine species already known to exist in the analysis area.
These populations are included on the analysis map.
• Ecological requirements of the individual species (e.g., elevation, potential vegetation, landtype,
lithology, shade and moisture regimes).
Areas proposed for treatment were reviewed for places with moderate to high potential for providing
habitat for PTES plant species.
2. Field surveys were completed for most proposed activity areas with emphasis on areas with moderate
to high potential to provide habitat for PTES plants. In general, these areas are streams, wetlands, and
riparian zones, mesic coniferous forest with a component of mature western red cedar, moist cliffs and
talus slopes, dry meadows, park-like ponderosa pine forest, and dry south facing rocky areas. Unique
landscape features have more potential to provide habitat for PTES plants than more common landscape
features, so these are emphasized during surveys.
3. This analysis was completed using the maps, surveys completed to date, literature, experts, and
personal knowledge about the requirements of each suspected plant species of concern. Plant surveys
have been performed in this area for nearly 20 years.
Assessment Area and Time Frame
The East Reservoir analysis area is the context for the present analysis (see map in map section).
Current conditions will be considered against an historical reference period. Reference conditions give
resource managers an idea of the environments that native plant species have adapted to (Morgan et al.
1994). As described by Federal Planning Regulations (CFR 219.20) and the KNF (USDA 1995), the
reference period used with this analysis is based on the period extending back approximately 2,500 years
before present, when climate and environmental conditions more or less stabilized. Forest processes have
been affected accordingly, contributing to characteristic patterns of forest structure, composition, and
habitat abundance and spatial distribution.
Project implementation should occur over the next five to ten years (except in the case of the no-action
alternative).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 186 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The habitat requirements for many sensitive plant species are often narrowly defined. When this is the
case, decisions as to the probability of occurrence and the potential sites to survey are easily and
confidently determined. Some sensitive plant species have wider ecological amplitudes and their potential
extends through a variety of habitats.
Overall Description of the Analysis Area
Please see chapter one for description of analysis area.
Habitat Descriptions of Proposed Activity Areas
Within the East Reservoir analysis area are five recognized habitats with the potential to support sensitive
plant species:
Aquatic Plant Species Guild
This guild occurs generally in littoral (< 2 meters) zones of vernal pools, small ponds and lakes, usually
at lower elevations. Psilocarphus brevissimus (dwarf wooly heads) also occurs in drying mud of ponds
and other vernally wet soil. Other species of this guild are found at varying depths in the quiet shallow
water of ponds, lakes, marshes and/or slow-moving rivers; some, such as Bidens beckii (water
marigold) may occur in deeper littoral to limnetic (> 2 meters) zones of these water bodies.
No treatments are proposed near any of the small ponds that occur in the East Reservoir analysis area.
Most of these wet areas occur along Cripple Horse Creek and the upper reaches of that drainage. There
are also some small ponds in the Dunn Creek area. No treatment areas are close enough to have any
impact on this type of aquatic habitat so these areas were not surveyed.
Peatland Plant Species Guild
Many peatland species of interest are generally secure, and are common, when their entire worldwide
range is considered (Chadde et al. 1998). However, species of this guild are narrowly restricted to one
or more peatland types, and peatlands themselves are rare in the analysis area. There are no activities
close to these habitats and they are in fact very rare in the East Reservoir planning area. There were no
surveys conducted in this type and there would be no impact to species associated with peatlands.
Deciduous Riparian Plant Species Guild
This guild is associated with streams and their related floodplains that have regular flooding and
deposition of sediments. Habitats include streams that have Populus trichocarpa (black cottonwood),
riparian shrub (willow, dogwood, birch, alder, huckleberry, etc.), and shrub/herbaceous communities
along them. Gentle gradient riffle/pool streams typically are sinuous and have exposed stream bars
along some part of their reach.
Steeper step/pool streams, typically associated with conifers in the overstory, do not have well
developed floodplains, and because of their steep slopes, sediments are rarely deposited adjacent to
them. As a result, these streams lack the germination surfaces and also the full sunlight that some
species require for either germination or vegetative establishment. The plant species in this group are
thus most often found in lower-gradient settings. These species also generally require moist (or
saturated) soil conditions throughout the growing season. In some cases, shade or partial shade (such as
along ecotonal margins) is an important habitat component.
Collema curtisporum (short-spored jelly lichen) occur on twigs and bark of deciduous trees such as
Populus trichocarpa (black cottonwood) and Alnus rubra (red alder). There is riparian habitat in the
East Reservoir analysis area and tree harvest and road construction has the potential to affect species
associated with this habitat.
Wet and Moist Forest Plant Species Guild
Wet forest guild species are found in wet, generally riparian, often mid- to late-successional western
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 187 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

redcedar and western hemlock forests generally at less than 4,000 feet. Certain habitat types within
these systems, including Thuja plicata/Oplopanax horridum (cedar/devil's club), Thuja plicata/
Athyrium filix-femina (cedar/ladyfern), Thuja plicata/Adiantum aleuticum (cedar/maidenhair fern),
Tsuga heterophylla/Gymnocarpium dryopteris (western hemlock/oakfern) and Thuja plicata/
Gymnocarpium dryopteris (cedar/oakfern), have a high potential to support rare plants. Rare ancient
cedar groves that occur in this habitat guild often support a high diversity of rare plant species.
Moist forest guild species are found in more mesic Thuja plicata (western redcedar) and Tsuga
heterophylla (western hemlock) forests, generally in mid- to late-successional stages below 4,800 feet.
Most rare plants of this guild occur in Thuja plicata/Clintonia uniflora (western redcedar/queencup
beadlily), Tsuga heterophylla/Clintonia uniflora (western hemlock/queencup beadlily), Thuja
plicata/Asara caudatum (western redcedar/wild ginger) and Tsuga heterophylla/Asara caudatum
(western hemlock/wild ginger) habitat types. A few species can also be found in moist Abies
grandis/Asarum caudatum (grand fir/ginger) and Abies grandis/Clintonia uniflora (grand fir/queencup
beadlily) habitat types. Certain members of the wet forest guild can also be found in these more mesic
upland forests.
Most rare plants of this species group prefer closed-canopy conditions and undisturbed mineral soils.
Many also appear to depend on well-developed soil mycorrhizae (symbiotic relationships between the
root systems of some vascular plants and soil fungi). Some vascular plants, lichens and bryophytes in
this species group occupy decaying logs, wet rock or dry rock substrates in the above plant
communities. Several lichens are epiphytic (i.e. growing on tree trunks, branches or twigs), while others
grow on mossy rock or downed wood.
There is a population of northern beechfern, Phegopteris connectilis in the Davis Mountain area.
Surveys did not identify any other populations within or adjacent to activity areas.
Dry Forest Plant Species Guild
This species group encompasses the dry forest plant habitat guild, which includes dry, open sites in
Pinus ponderosa (ponderosa pine), Pseudotsuga menziesii/Physocarpus malvaceus (Douglasfir/ninebark), P. menziesii/Calamagrostis rubescens-Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (Douglas-fir/pinegrasskinnikinnick) and P. menziesii/Festuca idahoensis (Douglas-fir/Idaho fescue) or /Elytrigia spicata
(bluebunch wheatgrass) communities, generally below 4,500 feet.
Non-lethal fires in these habitats historically occurred at intervals as short as 25 years or less; these
frequent low-severity fires helped to maintain grasslands, maintain open forest structures and enhance
regeneration of ponderosa pine (Smith and Fischer 1997). Mixed-severity and stand-replacing fires
occurred where fire return intervals were longer (Smith and Fischer 1997).
There are two known sensitive plant species within the East Reservoir analysis area. Western
pearlflower, Heterocodon rariflorum is found in the Warland area and Taper-tipped onion, Allium
acuminatum, is found in the Fivemile, Warland and Cripple Horse drainages on the open dry sites.
Cold and Forested Subalpine Plant Species Guild
The cold forest guild includes the more productive and mesic phases of Abies lasiocarpa/Menziesia
ferruginea (subalpine fir/menziesia) and Abies lasiocarpa/Xerophyllum tenax (subalpine fir/beargrass)
community types, mostly above 4,800 feet; however, they can occur below 4,800 feet in cold, northfacing drainages. This includes cold riparian areas that can extend well below 4,000 feet and are
dominated by cold and wet Abies lasiocarpa/Calamagrostis canadensis (subalpine fir/bluejoint
reedgrass) and Abies lasiocarpa/Streptopus amplexifolius (subalpine fir/twisted stalk) habitat types. The
subalpine guild includes the following higher elevation plant communities:
Lycopodium dendroideum (groundpine) occurs in the cold forest guild in cold air drainages, and is
associated with subalpine fir forests at lower elevations. It has not been found in the planning zone at
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 188 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

the higher elevations usually associated with this species group.
Habitat types in this species group historically experienced stand-replacing fire at widely varying
intervals from 50 to 200 years (Smith and Fischer 1997). Nonlethal fires historically occurred more
frequently, with fire-free intervals as short as 30 years (Smith and Fischer 1997).
There is little of this habitat in the East Reservoir analysis area but a few units in the Davis Mountain
area are proposed for treatment. Surveys in this area did not identify any of the species that occur in this
habitat.
POTENTIAL SPECIES
Threatened, Endangered and Proposed Plant Species
Currently, two species in Montana, water howellia (Howellia aquatilis) and Spalding’s catchfly (Silene
spaldingii) are federally listed as threatened. Only Silene spaldingii is suspected to occur on the KNF, but
have not been found on KNF lands. The term 'threatened species' means any species that is likely to
become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its
range.
Table 3.75 summarizes findings for threatened and endangered plant species. Table 3.75A displays the
findings for the Sensitive plant species.
Table 3.75 - Threatened and Endangered Species Findings
SPECIES

HABITAT

Howellia aquatilis
(Water howellia)
Silene spaldingii
Spalding’s catchfly

Ephemeral glacial ponds and abandoned
river oxbows below 4,500 ft.
Remnant Palouse Prairie and canyon
grassland habitat

CONCLUSION

No Impact
No Impact

JUSTIFICATION

*Not known in the PA or found
during project surveys
*Not known in the PA or found
during project surveys.

Table 3.75A - Sensitive Plant Species of the KNF and Status in the East Reservoir Analysis Area
COMMON NAME

Taper-tipped onion
Round-leaved orchis
Water marigold
Deer fern
Upswept moonwort
Wavy moonwort
Western moonwort
Peculiar moonwort
Stalked moonwort
Watershield
Big-leaf sedge
Creeping sedge
Prairie sedge
Beaked sedge
Sheathed sedge
Common clarkia
Sand Springbeauty
Lichen

SCIENTIFIC NAME

Allium acuminatum
Amerorchis rotundifolia
Bidens beckii
Blechnum spicant
Botrychium ascendens
Botrychium crenulatum
Botrychium hesperium
Botrychium paradoxum
Botrychium pedunculosum
Brasenia schreberi
Carex amplifolia
Carex chordorrhiza
Carex prairea
Carex rostrata
Carex vaginata
Clarkia rhomboidea
Claytonia arenicola
Collema curtisporum

STATUS

POTENTIAL/
FOOTNOTE

*HABITAT
GUILD

Known
Suspected
Not Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Not Suspected
Suspected
Not Suspected
Suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected

Known
Low
NS2
Very Low
High
High
Low
Low
Low
NS2
Low
NS2
Low
NS2
NS5
Moderate
Very Low
Moderate

D
M
A
M
M
M
M
M
M
A
M
P
M
A
DR
D
M
DR

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 189 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

COMMON NAME

Pink corydalis
Clustered lady’s-slipper
Small yellow lady’s-slipper
Sparrow’s egg lady’s-slipper
English sundew
Linear-leaved sundew
Crested shield fern
Giant helleborine
Slender cotton grass
Green-keeled Cottongrass
Western boneset
Hiker’s gentian
Mouse moss
Howell’s gumweed
Western pearlflower
**Water howellia
Latah tule pea
Geyer’s biscuit root
Bog club moss
Prickly tree club moss
Running Pine
Moss
Stalked Leaved Monkeyflower
Short-flowered Monkeyflower
Bank Monkeyflower
Old Man’s Beard
Northern adder’s-tongue
Northern beechfern
Whitebark Pine
Dwarf wooly heads
Pod grass
Water bulrush
Moss
**Spalding’s catchfly
Tufted bulrush
Flat leaved bladderwort
Great-spurred Violet

SCIENTIFIC NAME

STATUS

POTENTIAL/
FOOTNOTE

*HABITAT
GUILD

Corydalis sempervirens
Cypripedium fasciculatum
Cypripedium parviflorum
Cypripedium passerinum
Drosera anglica
Drosera linearis
Dryopteris cristata
Epipactis gigantea
Eriophorum gracile
Eriophorum viridicarinatum**
Eupatorium occidentale
Gentianopsis simplex
Grimmia brittoniae
Grindelia howellii
Heterocodon rariflorum
Howellia aquatilis
Lathyrus bijugatus
Lomatium geyeri
Lycopodiella inundata
Lycopodium dendroideum
Lycopodium lagopus
Meesia triquetra
Mimulus ampliatus
Mimulus breviflorus
Mimulus clivocola
Nodobryoria subdivergens
Ophioglossum pusillum
Phegopteris connectilis
Pinus albicaulis
Psilocarphus brevissimus
Scheuchzeria palustris
Schoenplectus subterminalis
Scorpidium scorpioides
Silene spaldingii
Trichiophorum cespitosum
Utricularia intermedia
Viola selkirkii

Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Not Suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not Suspected
Not suspected
suspected
Not Suspected
Not Suspected
Not suspected
Known
Not Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Not suspected
Suspected
suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Suspected
suspected
Not Suspected
Not suspected
Suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Not Suspected
Not suspected
Not suspected
Suspected

Low
Moderate
Low
Low
NS2
NS2
NS2
NS8
NS2
NS2
low
NS2
NS3
NS8
Known
NS2
Low
Low
NS2
Low
Low
NS2
NS4
Low
Low
NS7
NS2
High
NS7
NS8
NS2
NS2
NS2
NS5
NS2
NS2
Low

D
D
DR
DR
P
P,S
P
P
P
P
S
A,DR
D,M
D
D
A
D
D
P
C,DR,M
M
P
M
M
D
S
P
M
S
A
P
A
P
D
A,DR
A
M

Footnotes: NS2 - Not suspected due to lack of associated wetland habitat, floating moss mats, fens
NS3 - Not suspected due to lack of calcareous influence
NS4 - Not suspected due to lack of associated open habitat
NS5 - Not suspected due to lack of associated forest type
NS7 - Not suspected due to lack of subalpine or alpine habitat
NS8 - Not suspected/Has not been found on the KNF
High Potential = Habitat appears to be suitable and plant known from several occurrences on the KNF, or a known site is within one mile of analysis
area boundary.
Moderate Potential = Habitat appears suitable and plant known on the KNF
Low Potential = Habitat appears to be suitable but plant is very rare on the KNF, or known occurrences on the forest are considerably distant or
confined to specific geographic area.
Very Low Potential = Habitat appears suitable, but plant is not known to occur on the KNF.
Habitat Guilds: A=Aquatic, P=Peatland, DR=Deciduous Riparian, M=Moist Forest, D=Dry Forest, C=Cold Forested Subalpine, S=Subalpine
Grassland

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 190 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Sensitive species with low or no probability of occurrence in the project impact area will not be
considered further in this analysis.
TABLE 3.76 – Known and Suspected Sensitive Plant Species in East Reservoir Analysis Area
COMMON NAME

SCIENTIFIC NAME

STATUS

POTENTIAL/FOOTNOTE

Warland, 5-mile, Cripple
Moderate-High
Moderate-High
Moderate

Cypripedium fasciculatum

Known
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected
Suspected

Collema curtisporum
Heterocodon rariflorum
Phegopteris connectilis

Suspected
Known
Suspected

Moderate
Warland
Known in Davis

Taper-tipped Onion
Upswept moonwort
Wavy moonwort
Common clarkia

Allium acuminatum
Botrychium ascendens
Botrychium crenulatum
Clarkia rhomboidea

Clustered lady’s-slipper
Lichen
Western pearl-flower
Northern beechfern

Moderate

KNOWN SPECIES
Allium acuminatum: This species was first discovered in 2011 during surveys for this project. There are
extensive populations in Fivemile, Warland and Cripple Horse drainages on the southwest facing slopes
in the dry types. Many of these areas are proposed for underburning.
Heterocodon rariflorum: The first known district population of western pearl-flower was located on the
Libby District in June 2004. The site was in a dry, grassy-rocky opening located near the Koocanusa
Reservoir. The plants were found growing in small depressions that provide a bit more shade and
moisture than the surrounding vicinity. This type of micro-site can exist in many dry, grassy-rocky
openings. Several more populations were observed in the Warland, Fivemile and Cripple Horse drainages
during project surveys. These populations are found in areas proposed for underburning.
MODERATE-HIGH POTENTIAL
Populations of the Sensitive plant species Botrychium ascenden, and B. crenulatum, have been found
growing in roadsides across a variety of habitats. However, a few factors seem to be constant among all
known roadside locations. All sites are in wetter habitats, as compared with open hillsides. Cedar,
hemlock, subalpine fir and even spruce habitat types are very common at these sites. Also, shade is found
consistently at all of these sites. Generally, there is shade in the mornings and early afternoons. This shade
can be from vegetation growing along the roadside (alder, willow, etc.) or via the surrounding landforms.
Plus, the slope of the road is never extreme; the actual location of the plants is generally in areas having
slopes less than ten percent. And finally, the density of the ground cover is such that there are patches of
exposed soil. There are a couple of occurrences north of the analysis area on the Fortine Ranger District.
These conditions can occur whenever a stream channel or a draw, crosses a road. Other situations where
these conditions can be found are at roadside seeps (created by the cut-slope) or on any gentle stretch of
road where shade and moisture conditions fall into the above parameters. No new populations were found
during project surveys.
Phegopteris connectilis - This species is typically found under older closed red cedar canopy in low
gradient, braided riparian zones. The species has been found along a small meandering creek just outside
of the project boundary in the Davis area. No populations of this species were found during project
surveys.
MODERATE POTENTIAL
Clarkia rhomboidea - This species has been found on the Cabinet and Three Rivers Districts of the KNF.
It also has been found on dry open slopes on the Lolo Forest south of the analysis area. No populations of
this species were found during project surveys. No populations have been found on the Libby District.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 191 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Cypridpedium fasciculatum - This species can be found in warm, dry mid-seral montane forests of grand
fir and Douglas-fir. Elsewhere in its range it can be found in western red cedar habitats. No populations of
this species have been found on the Libby District or in the East Reservoir analysis area.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Design Features: refer to Table 2.34 in Chapter 2 of this DEIS for design feature regarding proposed,
threatened, endangered and sensitive (PTES) plant populations.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
This alternative proposes no ground disturbing activity. The no-action alternative would have no direct or
indirect effects to plants listed as known or suspected status in the preceding Table 3.73, since no
activities would occur.
Cumulative Effects
The response of each of the PTES plant species to management activity varies by species, and in some
cases, is not fully known. We do know that these rare plants and all the native vegetation of the KNF
evolved with and are adapted to the climate, soils and natural processes that took place prior to settlement
of this area by Europeans. Any management or lack of management that causes these natural processes to
be altered may have a negative impact on native vegetation, including rare plants. An example of altered
natural processes would be the removal of fire from the ecosystem. If Alternative 1 is selected and fire is
continuously excluded from the analysis area, there could be a negative impact on PTES plant species due
to an unnatural buildup of fuels, increased canopy closure with a resulting decrease in light to the forest
floor, and a decrease in naturally occurring open meadows.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
PLANT SPECIES in DECIDUOUS RIPARIAN HABITATS
Implementation of the action alternatives may impact individuals or habitat but willl not likely contribute
to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species for suspected
species with moderate potential to occupy wetland, riparian or wet forest habitats (Collemia
curtisporum).This species is a lichen found on cottonwood in moist riparian areas. Any activity that might
affect cottonwood has the potential to affect this species although it was not found during surveys.
Key stressors affecting this species group include timber harvest (especially regeneration of late seral and
old growth cedar and hemlock forests), prescribed fire, road and trail construction, and other activities
that could impact populations either directly through loss of individuals or indirectly through canopy
removal or ground disturbance that disrupts soil mycorrhizae. Air pollution and removal of large old trees
may negatively affect lichens in this species group.
Stressors beyond FS control include short- and long-term climate change (which may increase the risk of
desiccation due to increased and prolonged summer temperatures and/or drought conditions), and
activities as described previously that occur or originate on other ownership lands. These are other
stressors that may affect this species.
Direct Effects
No populations were discovered in the riparian habitats. These systems are protected by Inland Native
Fish Strategy (INFS) and Riparian Habitat Conservation Act (RHCA) buffers in Alternatives 2 and 3.
These required buffers are expected to protect potential sensitive plant habitat from direct effects of
activities by restricting activities in riparian and wetland habitat. The retention of all cottonwood is
prescribed for silvicultural prescriptions.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 192 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Proposed road storage may affect both the habitat in which these species occur and any potential habitat
for these species by causing subtle hydrologic changes. These activities are intended to restore more
historic habitat conditions to riparian and wetland systems, and is expected to help offset negative effects
to riparian and wetland habitat caused by previous road building.
Indirect Effects
• Management actions that alter hydrologic regimes.
• Alterations to riparian plant community succession through vegetation manipulation.
• Changes to natural disturbance regimes such as flooding.
Refer to the chapter on watershed concerns for areas where hydrologic regimes may be altered. Potential
flooding in areas where trees are removed may kill some cottonwood but the harvest units should be
spread out enough not to cause severe flooding.
There are no known populations of rare plants within any proposed treatment units, road locations or
stream channels so it is anticipated that there would no effects to PTES plant populations.
Cumulative Effects
Some PTES plant species may have previously occupied suitable habitat in the analysis area. Past timber
harvest, reforestation, road construction and recreational activities in the analysis area on lands of all
ownership has likely had detrimental effects to potential habitat for some of the previously mentioned
species to an unknown extent. Wetland and riparian habitat on private land would continue to be
threatened by these activities. The INFISH and RHCA buffers applied to wetland and riparian areas in the
East Reservoir analysis area would greatly reduce the potential for proposed activities to contribute to
cumulative effects to the previously mentioned species or their habitat. These buffers are expected to help
protect sensitive plant populations and potential habitat by minimizing direct and indirect effects to
wetland and riparian habitat. Cumulative effects from project activities are not expected to threaten the
presence or viability of riparian and wetland species within the analysis area.
SENSITIVE PLANTS in MOIST FOREST AREAS
Implementation of the action alternatives may impact individuals or habitat but will not likely contribute
to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species for suspected
species with moderate potential to occupy roadsides or moist forest habitats (Botrychium ascendens
(upswept moonwort), Botrychium crenulatum (wavy moonwort)).
Direct Effects
Road maintenance and use may directly affect plants or potential habitat of Botrychium ascendens and
Botrychium crenulatum since they tend to occur along roads in moist habitat. Mechanical disturbance
during road storage activities may injure or kill sensitive plants and alter potential habitat. Logging
activities that disturb areas along roadsides can also injure or kill plants. There is a chance that these
species could occur adjacent to riparian areas. These required buffers are expected to protect potential
sensitive plant habitat from direct effects of activities by restricting activities adjacent to riparian habitat.
No plants were observed during project surveys and past survey so direct effects from project activities
are not expected to threaten the presence or viability of these species within the analysis area.
Indirect Effects
The possible indirect effects relate only to potential habitat for sensitive species, since this species is not
known to occupy the analysis area. Therefore, the East Reservoir project activities are not expected to
threaten the presence or viability of this species within the analysis area.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 193 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Road maintenance and use during project activities may alter potential habitat of sensitive species, which
occupy roadsides. Road storage may reduce the availability of potential habitat for these species. Indirect
effects of the East Reservoir project on potential habitat for these species is not expected to threaten the
presence or viability of these species within the analysis area because the plants are secure in habitat in
other locations and none were found in the area during surveys.
Cumulative Effects
Road building can mimic natural processes that provide opportunity (bare soil) for colonization by
these sensitive species. Subsequent road maintenance activities can be beneficial or detrimental,
depending on the nature and degree of disturbance. Disturbance from road building, maintenance and
use on lands of all ownership in the East Reservoir analysis area has caused many acres to become
infested with noxious weeds, reducing opportunity for sensitive species to colonize and inhabit
roadsides.
Herbicide use for weed control could injure or kill roadside sensitive species, depending on the
species and the herbicide used. Weed spread is an expected result of East Reservoir activities, and of
all foreseeable activities on lands of all ownership, further compromising potential habitat for these
species. The amount of potential habitat that would be affected cannot be predicted. Weed design
features (described in Chapter 2) are expected to reduce, though not eliminate, the effects of
additional weed infestation. Road storage activities may reduce the availability of potential habitat for
these species. The degree to which the activities of the East Reservoir project would contribute to
cumulative effects of weeds on potential habitat cannot be quantified. Cumulative effects of the East
Reservoir project to potential habitat for these species are not expected to threaten their presence or
viability within the analysis area. The plants are secure in their habitat in other locations and none
were found during surveys for this project
Phegopteris connectilis
Phegopteris connectilis (northern beechfern), is found just outside the analysis area along low gradient
braided stream. This type of habitat is fairly common in the Davis Mountain area of the project.
Direct Effects
Riparian areas were surveyed in units 317, 318 and 319 in the Davis mountain area and no plants were
identified but the habitat is present and there is a high likelihood the plants could occur. These units have
been designed with RHCAs that should reduce the potential for impact to unobserved northern beechfern
populations.
Indirect Effects
Harvest activities have the potential to change hydrologic regimes in the low gradient areas. This plant
seems adapted to small flooded and braided streams so if water flow is increased temporarily by
harvesting it should not adversely impact habitat.
Cumulative Effects
These cumulative effects are similar to those described for species in deciduous riparian habitat.
Implementation of the action alternatives may impact individuals or habitat but will not likely contribute
to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to this species or population.
SENSITIVE PLANTS in DRY FORESTS or OPEN AREAS (along RIDGES and in the FOREST)
The Proposed Action, (Alternative 2) and Alternative 3, may impact individuals or habitat but will not
likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species
for the sensitive plant listed in the table as suspected with a moderate potential to occupy dry forested or
open habitat, (Clarkia rhomboidea (common clarkia) and Cypripedium fasciculatum (clustered lady’sslipper)). These species are not known to occur in the East Reservoir analysis area, and were not observed
during sensitive plant surveys.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 194 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Direct Effects
Since this sensitive plant species is not known to occur in the analysis area, it is assumed there would be
no direct effects to this species. If some plants were undetected they could possibly be affected by
activities in the dry habitats.
There is over 12,000 acres of fuel treatment and burning and over 2,500 acres of improvement harvest in
dry types. The use of prescribed burning for fuels reduction or site preparation for reforestation would
influence potential sensitive plant habitat. In general, the sensitive plants that inhabit dry forest types are
adapted to fire, and low intensity fire would increase habitat suitability for these plants. These activities
have the potential to directly impact individuals and habitat for these species. Road construction and
storage efforts in dry habitat could also impact individuals or habitat.
Indirect Effects
Indirect effects may influence potential habitat for sensitive species. Ground disturbance from harvest and
road storage activities would remove vegetation and expose bare mineral soil. Several sensitive species
are adapted to colonization of disturbed soil, but noxious weed species that now reside throughout the
analysis area have the advantage. The possibility of weed migration into potential sensitive plant habitat
would be increased, reducing opportunities and habitat suitability for sensitive species. Adherence to
design features for noxious weeds in the East Reservoir analysis area (see Chapter 2) would be helpful in
reducing indirect effects of weed encroachment, though would not preclude weed encroachment. Please
refer to potential weed impacts described in regard to Allium acuminatum a rare plant that has been found
on dry types in the analysis area.
These possible indirect effects relate only to potential habitat for sensitive species, since these species are
not known to currently occupy the analysis area. Therefore, the East Reservoir project is not expected to
threaten the presence or viability of these species within the analysis area.
Cumulative Effects
It is likely that timber harvest, reforestation and road construction activities in the analysis area on lands
of all ownership have affected some sensitive plants and potential habitat. In some cases, these activities
may have created disturbances reflecting natural processes that provide opportunity for colonization by
sensitive species. Disturbance from activities on lands of all ownership in the East Reservoir analysis area
has caused many acres to become infested with noxious weeds, reducing opportunities for sensitive
species to colonize disturbed areas. Weed spread is an expected result of East Reservoir activities, and of
all foreseeable activities on lands of all ownership, further compromising potential habitat for sensitive
species. The amount of potential habitat that would be affected cannot be predicted. Weed design features
(Chapter 2) are expected to reduce, though not eliminate, the effects of additional weed introduction. The
extent of previous and future effects of weed invasion cannot be quantified, though is likely considerable.
The degree to which the East Reservoir project would contribute to these effects is unknown.
Timber harvest and road construction is expected to continue to affect these plants and their habitat. Road
construction proposed on FS lands in the East Reservoir analysis area is minimal, and not expected to
contribute to cumulative effects to these plants. Road storage, proposed in all action alternatives, may also
result in negative cumulative effects; but overall is expected to improve habitat suitability by reducing
weed migration into potential habitat. Basal area and fuels reduction in dry forest habitats would help to
restore more historic overstory conditions in potential habitat for sensitive plants that occupy dry forest
types.
Heterocodon rariflorum
Direct Effects
Heterocodon rariflorum (western pearl flower) generally occurs in dry forests but is located in vernally
moist seepages or rocky cliffs where there might be seasonal pooling of shallow water. This species was
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 195 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

located within Fuel and Wildlife Units FW524, FW522, FW50602 and FW533 in the East Reservoir
analysis area One occurrence is in an old ditch on a dry open site in the Warland drainage and in vernally
moist areas in Blue Sky Creek Area and Southern exposures in the Warland drainage. Moisture gathers in
these areas in the spring and doesn’t dry as quickly as adjacent sites. Both action alternatives (2 and 3)
would have similar impacts to known populations. Direct impacts could occur during burning activities.
Although effects of burning are unconfirmed there is a possibility that this plant would be unaffected or
only temporarily affected since it has likely evolved with periodic disturbance caused burning. There is an
additional 4,483 acres of fuel treatment and burning in the following units that are located in suspected
habitat for this rare plant: FW502, FS503, FW53403, FW340, FW3402, FW51101, FW51102, FW51103,
FW5111, FW5109 and FW540. This plant is also suspected to occur in harvest Units 18, 157 and 158.
Logging could impact individuals during skidding operations but would not affect viability of the species
since it also occurs in adjacent areas where only prescribed burning would occur.
Weed spraying of noxious weeds, if not done carefully, can kill other forbs such as this small plant.
Indirect Effects
There are currently several weed species in and adjacent to the plant location. Indirect effects would
likely result from the introduction and spread of undesirable non-native species. Weed species are already
abundant on many roads and on the dry land types in the analysis area. Ground disturbing activities from
timber harvest, burning, as well as road storage activities would remove vegetation and expose bare
mineral soil. Though many native species are adapted to colonizing disturbed soil, noxious weed species
now residing throughout the analysis area have the advantage. Weed infestations are adjacent to almost
every proposed activity area. The seed bank in native communities may already contain weed seeds that
would take hold when conditions, such as soil disturbance, permit. Machinery is likely to be a primary
vector, bringing weed seeds from infested roads or portions of units into native communities. Even
revegetation along roads and skid trails would have effects to the native community, as nonnative,
potentially invasive species can be introduced in seed mixes. Please see the discussion that addresses
weed concerns for Allium acuminatum which is also found in all units where the pearl flower has been
found.
Cumulative Effects
Additional activities in the area are likely to exacerbate negative effects to the rare plant habitat caused by
past activities. In particular in the location of this population is the potential increase in ATV use when
adjacent areas are logged and opened up next to a highly used recreational area. ATVs can spread weeds
as well as trample plants. Implementation of the action alternatives may impact individuals or habitat but
will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to this species or
population because the plant is secure in its habitat in other locations. Current grazing and potential
grazing in the Fivemile and Warland drainages has the potential to spread weeds. If cows graze on the dry
open slopes, there is the potential for trampling damage and grazing of the rare plant. Typically, cows stay
along the road and in the shadier, moister sites. Some grazing management can be used to reduce
potential impact to the western pearl flower. Keeping cattle off the site is the best way to prevent damage.
Allium acuminatum
Direct Effects
This species is generally found on open dry types, which are quite common on the lower south and west
facing slopes of the analysis area. The species is thought to be adapted to periodic fire since they occur in
habitats that were subject to historic periodic burning every 10-20 years (Odegard 2011). This species had
never been previously identified on the KNF. Several new locations of Allium acuminatum (taper-tipped
onion) were located in the summer of 2012 during project plant surveys. This onion was located within
Fuel and Wildlife Units FW50602, FW524, FW522, FW533, FW340, FW53401 and FW53402 and
proposed harvest Unit 20 which is both in Alternative 2 and 3. There is an additional 5,566 acres of fuel
treatment and burning in the following units that are located in suspected habitat for this rare onion:
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 196 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

FW53403, FW502, FW503, FW51101, FW51102, FW51103, FW551103, FW5111, FW5109 and
FW540. Harvest Units 157,158, 18, 2B and 2D are also suspected habitat for taper-tipped onion. Plants
were not found during field surveys but plants may have been missed. Skidding operations and weed
infestation could impact plants and habitat in these units but should not affect overall viability since there
are plants in adjacent burn only areas. All effects are similar for both action alternatives (2 and 3).
Burning can have the direct impact of killing the flowering portion of the plant. However, most onions
can regenerate vegetatively from bulbs or by seeds sexually produced by pollination and fertilization
(USDA FEIS, 2012). As stated previously, the burning is likely a disturbance that the plant is used to and
may actually prepare a seed bed if burning occurs in the spring. Road building and timber harvesting can
also directly impact plants and habitat. It appears that this species occurs primarily on high energy sites
and doesn’t thrive as well under a canopy cover. There are no new roads proposed in the onion habitat.
There is some tree removal planned in some of the fuel units. There is a chance that the harvest may
impact some individual plants.
ATV use has the potential to impact individual plants especially in FW533 which is located next to a
heavily used recreational site.
Weed spraying of noxious weeds, if not done carefully, can kill other forbs such as this onion.
Indirect Effects
There are currently several weed species in and adjacent to the onion locations. Centaurea maculosa,
Hypericum perforatum, Potentilla recta, Bromus tectorum, as well as others in the mustard family have
been identified in the onion habitat. Indirect effects would likely result from the introduction and spread
of undesirable non-native species. Weed species are already abundant on many roads and on the dry land
types in the analysis area. Ground disturbing activities from timber harvest, burning, as well as road
storage activities would remove vegetation and expose bare mineral soil. Though many native species are
adapted to colonizing disturbed soil, noxious weed species now residing throughout the analysis area have
the advantage. Weed infestations are adjacent to almost every proposed activity area. The seed bank in
native communities may already contain weed seeds that would take hold when conditions, such as soil
disturbance, permit. Machinery is likely to be a primary vector, bringing weed seeds from infested roads
or portions of units into native communities.
In general, most rare plants are adapted to fire, tolerant of fire or indifferent to fire, especially in our fire
disturbance driven areas in northwest Montana (Owen 2000). Since fire may be an important component
for propagation of the onion, burning may be viewed as a positive impact to its habitat.
However, concern for weed spread requires a well-thought out plan to control weed spread along with the
burning program. Bromus tectorum is especially able to take advantage of burned sites. It is a prolific
invader and able to germinate in spring and fall and out-compete natives in the spring (Pellant 1996). A
study on the effects of the spread of Potentilla recta on site north of the analysis area suggests that
prescribed fire can have a positive effect of the spread and germination of weeds (Lesica and Martin
2003).
In an effort to address the concerns of weed spread the district would develop a decision matrix for
treating all of the proposed burning treatments that addresses potential weed spread. Rice and Gauer
(2008) found that a combination of herbicide treatments, in conjunction with the burning, could result in
no net gain of noxious weeds. A well-thought out plan to limit weed spread and continue with the use of
fire is the best strategy for these dryland habitats. Refer to the project file for the draft Decision Matrix for
fuel treatment in the East Reservoir analysis area.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 197 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

Cumulative Effects
Additional activities in the area are likely to exacerbate negative effects to the rare plant habitat caused by
past activities. In particular, in the location of this population, is the potential increase in ATV use when
adjacent areas are logged and opened up next to a highly used recreational area. ATVs can spread weeds
as well as trample plants. Logging and continued road use and weed spraying in the East Reservoir area
have the potential to cumulatively affect habitat and individual onion plants. Overall if management
features are followed, the proposed action and the action alternatives may impact individuals or habitat
but will not likely contribute to a trend toward federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population.
Current grazing and potential grazing in the Fivemile and Warland drainages has the potential to spread
weeds. If cows graze on the dry open slopes there is the potential for trampling damage and grazing of the
rare plant. Typically, cows stay along the road and in the shadier, moister sites. Some grazing
management can be used to reduce potential impact to the taper tipped onion. Keeping cattle off the site is
the best way to prevent damage
NATIVE PLANT COMMUNITIES
In general, the effects to other native plant communities are similar to the effects described for the
sensitive plants described in this chapter. The Noxious Weed Section of the DEIS addresses the general
concern and impacts of weed spread.
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED and SENSITIVE PLANT SPECIES BIOLOGICAL
ASSESSMENT/EVALUATION
Consultation Requirements for Threatened and Endangered Species
In accordance with the Endangered Species Act, it’s implementing regulations, and FSM 2671.4, the
KNF is not required to initiate formal consultation with the FWS regarding the determination of no effects
to the threatened water howellia and Spalding’s catchfly; and is not required to request written
concurrence from the FWS with respect to the determination of "no effect".
Table 3.77 summarizes the biological assessment/evaluation for the six plant species considered in this
analysis.
Table 3.77 - Summary of Effects to Known and Suspected Sensitive Species
COMMON NAME

Taper-tipped onion
Upswept moonwort
Wavy moonwort
Common clarkia
Western pearl flower
Northern beechfern
Clustered lady’s-slipper
Lichen

SCIENTIFIC NAME

Allium acuminatum
Botrychium ascendens
Botrychium crenulatum
Clarkia rhomboidea
Heterocodon rariflorum
Phegopteris connectilis
Cypripedium fasciculatum
Collema curtisporum

CONCLUSION

RATIONALE

May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**
May Impact**

Known
MI 1
MI 1
MI 2
Known
MI 1
MI 2
MI2

*No Impact expected N1 no activities proposed in potential habitat N2 low potential for occurrence in analysis area
**May impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend towards federal listing or cause loss of viability to the
population or species.
MI 1 High potential for occurrence: Proposed activities may impact potential habitat or individuals not detected in surveys.
MI 2 Moderate potential for occurrence: Proposed activities may impact potential habitat or individuals not detected in surveys.

CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN and other MANAGEMENT DIRECTION
This project is in compliance with FS policy on sensitive species (FSM 2670.32) and the Endangered
Species Act relative to PTES plant species. The FS is mandated to maintain viable populations of all
native and desirable non-native species under the National Forest Management Act. Clause R1-C6.251#,
Protection of Habitat of Endangered Species, will be used in the timber sale contract to modify the action
as necessary to protect PTES plant populations in the event that they are missed by field surveys and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 198 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
PROPOSED, THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE PLANTS

found after the timber sale contract is awarded.
Consultation Requirements for Threatened and Endangered Species
In accordance with the Endangered Species Act, it’s implementing regulations, and FSM 2671.4, the
KNF is not required to initiate formal consultation with the FWS regarding the determination of no effect
to the threatened water howellia and Spalding’s catchfly; and is not required to request written
concurrence from FWS with respect to the determination of “no effect”.
Need for Re-Assessment Based on Changed Conditions
The findings of this report are based on the best data and scientific information available at the time of
preparation. This project underwent several changes throughout the field season so it was impractical to
survey at that time. If new information reveals effects that may affect threatened, endangered, proposed or
sensitive species, or their habitats, in a manner or to an extent not considered in this assessment; if the
proposed actions are subsequently modified in a manner that causes an effect that was not considered in
this assessment; if sensitive species are found to occupy activity areas, or if a new species is listed or
habitat identified that may be affected by the actions, a revised biological assessment should be prepared.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 199 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WIDLIFE RESOURCE

WILDLIFE INTRODUCTION
The Kootenai National Forest (KNF) provides habitat for over 300 different species of wildlife (KIPZ
Analysis of the Management Situation USDA Forest Service 2003b 49 59-64), many of which occur on
the Libby Ranger District and within the Cripple Planning Subunit (PSU) (analysis area). The presence or
absence of these wildlife species depends on the amount, distribution and quality of each animal’s
preferred habitat. In addition to habitat changes, many of these animals are impacted by hunting or
trapping. Montana Fish, Wildlife & Parks (MFWP) regulates game animal populations. The Forest
Service (FS) and MFWP work together to ensure that an appropriate balance is maintained between
habitat capability and population numbers. The FS also works closely with the U.S. Fish & Wildlife
Service (FWS) to assist in the recovery of animals listed under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Proposed federal projects that have the potential to impact species protected by the ESA require
consultation with the FWS.
For the purpose of this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), a number of wildlife species were selected
for detailed analysis. The species chosen represent a combination of fine filter (species specific) and
coarse filter (management indicator species) analyses. The FWS requires that endangered, threatened and
proposed species be included in an effects analysis. The Regional Forester designates sensitive species.
Any effects to sensitive species present or potentially present in a project area must be disclosed.
Management Indicator species (MIS) are identified in the Kootenai Forest Plan (1987 Appendix 12) and
represent a particular habitat or habitat complex. Each MIS represents a group of species that share
common habitat components required for sustained growth and successful reproduction. Other species
that would not be affected by any of the alternatives are reviewed, but not discussed in detail. The wildlife
portion of this chapter is divided into seven sections: old growth, snags, down woody debris, MIS, other
species of interest, sensitive species, threatened and endangered species, and migratory birds.
The bounds of analysis for each species were determined using the viability analysis concepts described
by Ruggiero et al. (1994). Species viability is tiered to the forest-wide conservation plan (Johnson 2004).
The wildlife analyses include the baseline conditions (created by all past management practices and
natural events); direct, indirect and cumulative effects of the proposed actions; and cumulative effects of
reasonably foreseeable projects (Chapter 3, pg.1 to 7). The analyses are based on a review of Forest and
District records, a thorough review of the best relevant scientific information, a consideration of
responsible opposing views, an acknowledgment of incomplete or unavailable information and
recognition of relevant scientific uncertainty.

OLD GROWTH
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Management and characteristics of old growth (OG) and stand attributes necessary for a stand to be
considered old growth are discussed and summarized in the Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP
Appendix 17 FP II-1 7 22 FP III-54); Green et al. (1992); Pfister et al. (2000); Kootenai Supplement No.
85 to FSM 2432.22 (1991); Castaneda (2004). That information is incorporated by reference. Data
sources to identify old growth stands include District files and surveys, the KNF old growth GIS layer
developed from stand-level old growth inventory that is aggregated and summarized at the Forest scale,
and the Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) data that collects and reports data at the Forest scale.
Field verification of OG has occurred. Stands were inventoried using one of the procedures developed for
use on the Libby Ranger District (Old Fisher River Old Growth Process Paper, USDA 2003a). This
survey procedure, developed by Gary Altman (Altman 1990) and used from 1990 to 2000, rates the
structural features of OG forests as defined in the KNFP (Appendix 17 KNF Integrated Plan 1987). Some
more recent surveys use the KNF old growth protocol surveys. For the Cripple PSU, old growth acres
were updated in 2003. Final acreages may be different if additional suitable replacement stands are found
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 200 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

during field reconnaissance for the East Reservoir Project. Forestwide acres displayed in Table 3.57 are as
of April 2008.
The KNFP identified the pileated woodpecker as the MIS for old growth habitat (KNFP-Vol II Appendix
12-1). For effects to OG associated wildlife species, refer to the pileated woodpecker analysis in the MIS
section of this document.
Criteria used, when applicable, to compare the alternative impacts on old growth include:
1) Acres of vertical structure removed. These are the acres of direct harvest in designated old growth.
This includes both effective (OG) and replacement old growth (ROG).
2) Acres of harvest in undesignated effective old growth (OG).
3) Road length built adjacent or through designated old growth (in feet).
4) Number of proposed units adjacent to old growth.
5) Acres of edge effect in old growth.
6) Acres of interior habitat remaining in old growth.
7) Acres of additional old growth designated.
8) Acres treated to maintain old growth characteristics or trend toward old growth.
9) Percent of designated old growth (OG/ROG) in the PSU.
Current edge effects were determined by buffering existing regeneration harvest units (TSMRS activity
codes 4100-4134) that are < 30 years old and bordering OG stands by 300 feet (three tree heights- Russell
et al. 2000 134; Harris 1984 110-111; Morrison et al. 1992 84; Province of BC 1995 App 1; Ripple et al.
1991 79). On the KNF, the average old growth tree height across OG types is 100 feet (KNF TSMRS).
Effects of alternatives were determined by using the same buffer on proposed regeneration units that
border old growth stands.
Direction for maintaining 10% old growth below 5,500 feet in each third order drainage or compartment,
or combination thereof, or by planning subunit is contained in the KNFP (Appendix 17, FP II-1, 7, 22, FP
III-54), Kootenai Supplement No. 85 to FSM 2432.22 (1991), and Castaneda (2004). That information is
incorporated by reference. Old growth has been previously analyzed by timber compartment and OG
compartment and this process is also described in USDA 2003a and USDA 2003b. Table 3.57
summarizes the designated and undesignated status of the OG and ROG acres within compartments
located in the Cripple PSU and the KNF situation. The analysis boundary used for the displaying the East
Reservoir project impacts and cumulative effects to old growth is the Cripple PSU, based on Castaneda
(2004), while viability of the OG resource and its MIS species are analyzed at the Forest level. The
temporal boundary for cumulative effects on OG ranges from approximately 100 to 300 years depending
on vegetation response units (VRUs) and tree species (lodgepole pine versus spruce or larch etc.) present
within those VRUs.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Existing conditions are a result of historic timber harvest and wildfires. Timber harvest and fire history
are discussed in the Cripple NFMA assessment (USDA 2010), and the vegetation section of the EIS.
Existing old growth surveys within the Cripple PSU have identified approximately 9,262 acres of
designated and undesignated old growth less than 5,500 feet in elevation.
See the old growth map (Map 10) in the map section of this document for location of old growth stands
within the PSU. Of the 9,262 acres, designated/undesignated effective old growth totals 1,203 acres, and
designated/ undesignated ROG totals 8,059 acres. Replacement is the minimum acres required to be
designated to meet KNFP standards. Designated old growth stands in the analysis area generally support
the habitat conditions described in “Old Growth Forest Types of the Northern Region” (Green et al. 1992,
errata corrected 02/2005).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 201 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Table 3.78 - Old Growth Acres Under <5500 Feet Elevation
NFS Lands in Cripple PSU and Forestwide
EXPRESSED as ACRES and (PERCENT)

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

PLANNING
SUBUNIT
Cripple

7,083

13,073

8,064

9,492

14,083

4,596

7,643

8,879

5,409

78,607

1,869,222

7,025

12,064

7,916

8,844

13,964

4,596

7,454

8,622

5,351

76,083

186,922

702

1,206

791

884

1,396

459

745

862

535

7,608

138,902

187
629
816
(11.6)

285
1,094
1,379
(11.4)

37
988
1,025
(12.9)

106
791
897
(10.1)

108
1,658
1,766
(12.6)

221
435
656
(14.3)

197
696
893
(11.9)

47
668
715
(8.6)

0
364
364
(6.8)

1,192
7,341
8,533
(11.2)

138,902
62,605
221,065
(11.8%)

TIMBER COMPARTMENT

Total NFS lands
Total NFS lands
below 5,500 feet
elevation
Minimum acreage
designation
required by
KNFP

NATIONAL
FOREST
Kootenai

DESIGNATED OG

Effective OG
Replacement OG
Total OG and
ROG

UNDESIGNATED EFFECTIVE OG AND ROG

Effective OG
Replacement OG

61,192
(3.3%)
36,229
(1.9%)

0

0

0

0

0

0

11

0

0

11

259

257

202

0

0

0

0

0

0

718

187

285

37

106

108

221

208

47

0

1,203

201,577
(10.8%)

888

1,351

1,190

791

1,658

435

696

668

364

8,059

97,717
(5.2%)

1,075
(15.3)

1,636
13.6)

1,227
(15.5)

897
(10.0)

1,766
(12.6)

656
(14.3)

904
(12)

715
(8.3)

364
(6.9)

9,262
(12.1)

299,294
(16.0%)

TOTALS

Total Designated
and Undesignated
DEFF
Total Designated
and undesignated
ROG
All OG <5,500
feet

NFS – National Forest Service

All numbers in ( ) are percentages %

The 2011 Forest Plan Monitoring Report (FY2010, August 2011) indicates the KNF has 1,869,222 acres
below 5,500 feet elevation (minus lakes and highways). Using the stand-level data, there are currently
201,577 acres or 10.8% of KNF acres below 5,500 feet that are OG (designated or undesignated). An
additional 97,717 acres are replacement old growth (designated and undesignated). Forestwide, OG or
ROG on the KNF totals 299,294 acres or 16.0% of acres below 5,500 feet based on the stand-level data.
As described in the Monitoring Report, the FIA data is summarized forestwide and does not measure old
growth based on the criteria in the KNFP. The FIA data estimates effective OG forestwide at 9.0% of the
Forest, with a 90% confidence interval of 7.2% to 10.9%. The acres of OG from the stand-level inventory
are just within the confidence interval for the FIA data. FIA estimates for old growth cannot be used to
determine whether or not the Forest is meeting the Forest Plan standard for OG. The FIA estimate is for
all forest lands (not only lands <5,500 feet in elevation) and does not include lands managed as
replacement old growth.
The estimate from FIA is helpful, however, in comparing to the old growth GIS layer used by the Forest
for managing OG. Also, to account for changes from when the FIA data was collected (1993 to 1995),
any plots with disturbance (e.g. wildfire) were excluded from consideration as OG. This is a conservative
estimate, since some wildfires may not have affected OG characteristics and the FIA may underestimate
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 202 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

the amount of old growth, since not all disturbances would necessarily result in a reduction of old growth.
In addition Kootenai Supplement (Supplement 85, 1991) to Forest Service Manual 2400 describes the
validation process to be conducted on a compartment basis before the Forest conducts management
activities that could affect old growth habitat. Validation, as defined in the Manual, is “on-the-ground
verification.” Field verification has and is occurring on the Libby Ranger District and this is felt to be a
more accurate representation of the old growth available. The FY 2011Monitoring Report indicates the
Forest is meeting its Forest Plan requirements for managing 10% of the forest as old growth habitat well
distributed across KNF lands below 5,500 feet elevation.
The Cripple PSU totals 92,544 acres, with 90,226 acres below 5,500 feet (76,083 acres of NFS and
14,143 acres of other state or private lands). Old growth stands on Corporate timber land and State lands
have been harvested, and the 9,262 acres of OG remaining on NFS lands <5,500 feet is approximately
10.3% of all lands <5,500 feet within the PSU, regardless of ownership. As shown in Table 3.57, across
the KNF, the percent of NFS acres designated as an old-growth management area (MA13) is 11.8%. The
present allocations within the Cripple PSU of 12.1% are above Forest Plan direction as clarified in FSM
2432.22. Over 5,500 feet within the Cripple PSU, 34 acres have been designated as OG (designated
effective, replacement and unknown). Old growth stands in the analysis area are mainly composed of old
larch, ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir, and other conifers. There are several areas of large contiguous old
growth blocks in the PSU, as well as some isolated and fragmented old growth stands. Field verification
of all stands identified as MA 13 within the Cripple PSU was completed (fall 2011).
Stands with OG character and least fragmentation in the analysis area have been allocated to MA 13 or
other old growth MAs. Replacement old growth stands were designated to provide OG in the future
within the PSU. Replacement old growth above the KNFP standard was identified to provide connectivity
between effective OG stands, or to conserve areas with a component of OG micro-sites and evidence of
ecological continuity. Those inventoried stands best meeting old growth definitions were allocated to old
growth MAs. Old growth management area designations within the PSU have been delineated to conserve
the best old growth attributes available; and to provide the best distribution, size, habitat type and quality
of what is available. These old growth areas are composed of old growth stands that are physically
connected to other old growth stands where possible, or are interconnected to adjacent old growth stands
with connector stands composed of 100+ year old age classes where possible.
Block Size
There are a total of 8,533 acres designated (MA13) for OG management. These acres are in 98 blocks
ranging from 1 to 431 acres in size. Fifty-two designated OG blocks are greater than 50 acres in size.
When undesignated OG and ROG stands are considered in conjunction with designated stands, there are a
total of 9,296 acres (above and below 5500 feet) in block sizes ranging from 1 to 433 acres. Of these, 52
blocks (53%) are greater than 50 acres in size. The larger blocks provide interior habitat and connectivity
within the areas of National Forest System (NFS) lands.
Stands smaller than 50 acres in size were designated to protect additional attributes unique to old growth
where they exist in the PSU. They were designated based on recommendations in Morrison et al. (1992
85), where they state “it is vital to recognize that in heavily fragmented landscapes, the last remaining
patches of older or forested vegetation may play an important role. The patches may act as stepping
stones for dispersal of many species associated with the specific environmental conditions throughout the
landscape. Removal of such patches because they fail to meet criteria for size and provision of interior
conditions may result in a network of dispersal for wildlife being severed in the landscape". These stands
are largely surrounded by multi-aged stands that provide corridor links to larger blocks of old growth.
Current block size of old growth is largely the result of past timber harvests and 100 years of wildfire
suppression, leaving some areas with relatively small, isolated blocks of interior old growth and other
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 203 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

areas with an abundance of old growth due to lack of access. In many areas, functional old growth stands
are limited to drainage bottoms where logging activities were more restricted. Likewise, federal
regulations on regeneration opening size and proximity of openings resulted in un-natural square blocks
of harvest areas. This practice in turn resulted in a reduction of large interior blocks of old growth and a
checker-board effect of cover versus openings across the landscape.
Distribution
Table 3.79 shows the distribution of old growth (< 5500’ elevation) by VRU. Old growth is well
distributed across the vegetation types.
Table 3.79 - Old Growth (<5500’ elevation) Distribution by VRU
NFS Lands in the Cripple PSU
VRU

HRV %
OG \1

NFS LANDS
VRU
acres (%)

DESIGNATED
OG
acres (%)

UNDESIGNATED
OLD GROWTH
acres (%)

TOTAL OG \2
(UNDESIGNATED and DESIGNATED)
acres (%)

1
2
3
4
5
7
9

10-70
20-50
15-40
10-40
25-55
15-45
5-10

832 (1.1)
18,322 (23.3)
17,491 (22.3)
8141 (10.4)
947 (1.2)
22,452 (28.6)
10,271 (13.1)

58 (7.0)
2,780 (15.2)
1,826 (10.4)
566 (7.0)
16 (1.7)
2,815 (12.5)
447 (4.4)

0
384 (2.1)
146 (0.83)
80 (0.98)
13 (1.4)
94 (0.42)
12 (0.12)

58 (7.0)
3,164 (17.3)
1,972 (11.3)
646 (8.0)
29 (3.1)
2,909 (13.0)
459 (4.5)

\1 USDA Forest Service 1999: stands > 150 years old \2 remaining 25 acres is VRU XX5 (water)

These designated OG stands represent the best distribution of old growth habitat that remains in the PSU
(following KNFP direction), recognizing that these areas and their boundaries may change due to natural
events such as windstorms, epidemic insect infestations and stand replacement fires.
Stand Structure
Old growth stand structure is described by Green et al. (1992 errata corrected 2005). That information is
incorporated by reference. In summary, Green identifies three structural stages that are useful in
describing old growth. They are late seral single story (e.g. ponderosa pine, Douglas-Fir, lodgepole pine
sites); late seral multi-story (e.g. larch, western white pine) and near climax (e.g. cedar, grand fir, subalpine fir sites). Stands identified as OG contain one of these structure stages described by Green.
Disturbance
Within existing designated OG, there are approximately 30 miles of local roads. Of these, 1.4 miles are
restricted seasonally, 11.9 miles are restricted yearlong, 10.4 miles are open yearlong, 4.9 miles are
impassable; and there are approximately 37 miles of motorized trails. These roads/trails either bisect or
are adjacent to old growth stands. Roads allow for potential access by firewood cutters to remove
standing snags. There are 136 areas where existing regeneration units (stands < 30 years old) are adjacent
to old growth. These units create an edge influence on about 1,744 acres of old growth.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES/EFFECTS
Table 3.80 displays a comparison of effects to old growth habitat by alternative. These criteria are
discussed under each alternative.
Table 3.80 - Summary of Measurement Criteria to Evaluate Effects to Old Growth
Alt 1 = Existing Condition (by acres)
MEASUREMENT CRITERIA

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

Vertical structure removed in designated OG/ROG
Vertical structure removed in undesignated OG
Road length (feet) existing/built adjacent/through designated OG/ROG

25
N/A
158,400

137
43
+666

0
0
+666

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 204 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE
MEASUREMENT CRITERIA

Number of existing or proposed regeneration areas/units adjacent to
old growth
Acres of edge influence in old growth
Acres of interior habitat remaining in old growth remaining
Acres of additional old growth designated
Acres treated to maintain OG or trend stand toward OG (burning)
Percent of designated old growth in Sub-Unit (OG+ROG)

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

136

+28

+23

1,744
7,518
0
N/A
11.2

+250
7,268
0
1,326
11.2

+241
7,277
0
0
11.2

Management activities (including timber harvest, road construction, mining, etc.) have the potential to
impact the function of old growth habitat or specific components of old growth, such as interior habitat
and vertical structure. Activities may also allow noxious weed invasion.
Timber harvesting can affect adjacent OG stands by altering six microclimatic factors (solar radiation,
soil temperature, soil moisture, air temperature, relative humidity and wind speed (Chen et al. 1995).
Microclimatic changes lead to vegetative changes (e.g. species richness, diversity, structure, composition)
(Russell and Jones 2001). Changes in vegetative conditions may lead to effects such as changes in
wildlife species using the area, species abundance and higher predation (Askins 2000 pg.120) (see
pileated woodpecker analysis). All these effects extend varying distances into the uncut stands depending
on a number of variables (e.g. aspect, slope, elevation, wind speed and direction, etc.). While there is no
single answer to how wide the area influenced by edge is (Chen et al. 1995), research (Harris1984;
Russell et al. 2000; Morrison et al. 1992; Ripple et al. 1991; Province of BC 1995) has identified a threetree height rule of thumb as the distance effects occur. Table 3.59 displays the acres of OG influenced by
edge effects. The depth of influence is also related to time since harvest, with effects dissipating within 20
to 50 years, depending on the factor (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991; Russell et al. 2000). In
the Cripple PSU, average tree growth in regeneration units result in tree heights (20-50 feet) and densities
(fully stocked stands) that reduce the depth of influence from edge effects after 30 years.
While changes in vegetation and wildlife use may occur on the acres influenced by edge, those acres
remain functional old growth for some species. The old growth acres not impacted by edge effects
provide interior habitat.

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
This alternative would have no direct effect on designated OG or associated plant and wildlife species
(see pileated woodpecker discussion). The conditions for all nine measurement criteria (Table 3.59)
would remain unchanged. No OG would be treated through timber harvest or prescribed burning. There
would be no risks from these activities, such as soil compaction, weed introduction or modification of
stand structure. All old growth areas would maintain their existing conditions, and continue to provide
habitat for those species that utilize the area over the long-term. This analysis accounted for the
possibility for snag removal in old growth, as well as other mature forest stands on all NFS roads, both
open and restricted. Restricted roads are opened occasionally for personal firewood gathering (Table 3.61
in the Snag/Down Woody Debris Section – also applicable to Alternatives 2 and 3).
Opportunities to return fire into the drier types of old growth would still be taken under this alternative
under other projects. These would assist in reducing the fuel loadings in these old growth types, increase
forage on ungulate winter range, assist in the growth of retained trees, and create some large snags. Old
growth stands left untreated under this alternative or by similar projects would be at greater risk of stand
replacement in the event of wildfires and insect infestations.

ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 3 is similar to Alternative 1 in that no treatments of any kind are proposed in any category of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 205 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

old growth. Any changes to the composition and structure of old growth under Alternative 3 would be the
result of natural processes such as insects, disease, or windstorms and wildfire.
While Alternative 2 would not result in a reduction of OG in any category, treatments are proposed in
designated effective old growth (MA 13). All treatments are designed to maintain the large tree
component of old growth but would temporarily remove varying amounts of the vertical structure.
Management activities (removal of ladder fuels, prescribed fire) are proposed in 180 acres of effective
dry-site old growth under Alternative 2. The purpose of these activities is to lessen the threat of stand
removal by a wildfire and to maintain the integrity of the stand by lessening competition favoring large
diameter trees. The outcome would be the maintenance of all old growth structure, function and health in
the treated areas. This action alternative would better meet the purpose and need of this project than the
No Action (Alternative 1) by treating more acres of habitat outside of existing projects.
Treatments are also proposed in designated replacement old growth (MA 13) under Alternative 2.
Activities are designed to improve or preserve attributes that could develop additional old growth
characteristics in the near future, as well as maintain the existing OG attributes in the treatment areas.
Alternative 2 proposes 1,306 acres of ladder fuel reduction and prescribed fire in designated ROG.
Presently, these stands lack enough large trees to be designated as effective old growth. Treatments would
increase growth and vigor in the younger age-classes, which would enhance growth into the larger tree
diameters.
Undesignated ROG would be managed by proposed activities under Alternative 2. Approximately 43
acres of undesignated old growth would be treated to physically remove (slashing) ladder fuels followed
by prescribed burning in order to reduce fuel loadings and lessen the possibility of stand replacement fires
on the boundary of private and state lands. This strategy would also assist in prolonging the overall health
of these stands and retaining the large-diameter tree component for a longer period of time and
contributing to long-term nesting, cavity building and thermal cover habitats for wildlife as described in
the purpose and need for this project.
Both action alternatives propose treatments adjacent to designated and/or undesignated OG (a portion of
the proposed unit is adjacent to one or more edges of the old growth stand). The effect on existing OG
and the resulting interior acres of old growth from the nine proposed treatment areas can be found in
Table 3.59. In general, seedtree harvest adjacent to just one edge of the old growth stands would subject
the edge to drying and invasion by early successional plant species (Morrison et al. 1992).
New permanent and or temporary road construction/reconstruction is proposed under Alternative 2. Of
the miles of road proposed, approximately 666 feet would intersect existing OG in the PSU. These roads
can have similar effects to old growth and associated species, but to a smaller degree, as the edge effect
from treatment units being placed next to old growth (see above). Additional effects to old growth are
disclosed within the discussion of Snag Resources.
Alternative 2 proposes motorized trail access changes in that it converts approximately 37 miles of
motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted
roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would benefit any adjacent OG stands by
making them less susceptible to firewood cutting. Contrarily, Alternatives 3 proposes to convert
approximately 1.7 miles of seasonally restricted roads to intermittent stored service and approximately
13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access
change, any impact to adjacent OG stands has likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due
to the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to any old growth
in these areas are not anticipated.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 206 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Prescribed fire is proposed in designated or undesignated OG stands under Alternative 2. The effect on
old growth (acres) was accounted for under the discussion of vertical structure. Expected effects include a
temporary reduction in vertical structure including shrubs, reduction in down woody debris, snag loss and
snag creation, and slight alteration of microclimate (e.g. soil moisture, penetration of sunlight, change in
herbaceous layer, etc.)
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to old growth may result in noxious weed invasion. The project design should
include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g. washing equipment, weed spraying). These activities
would not remove old growth attributes, such as snags, unless deemed unsafe to recreation users/campers.
The Army Corps of Engineer (COE) is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on
COE lands included in the PSU boundary. There are no NFS old growth stands adjacent to any COE
activities so no impacts to this resource, such as edge effect, are anticipated.
Summary of Direct/Indirect Effects of Action Alternatives on Existing Condition
Alternative 2 proposes treatments in various OG designations. Briefly, these include slashing to remove
ladder fuels and prescribed burning to reduce fuel loadings. Some road building adjacent or through
designated old growth is also proposed.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Existing old growth conditions have been cumulatively created by past management actions including fire
suppression, forest user activities, as well as natural events, such as fire, windstorms and insect
infestations. Increased edge from adjacent regeneration units and wildfires is one quantifiable example
(Table 3.59). Other cumulative impacts to OG resources include a decrease in interior (secure) habitat,
loss of vertical and horizontal structure in some stands while other stands have over-accumulated
structure due to years of wildfire suppression. All of these effects alter the way wildlife utilize forests
classified as old growth. Snags, another important element of old growth, have also been altered in their
presence across the landscape. Roads opened for firewood cutting result in some continuing level of snag
removal from the old growth stands, while wildfires in old growth create an abundance of snags in
localized areas, thus resulting in somewhat of an imbalance of snag distribution.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this resource are
discussed.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There is 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
the treatment of FWF (Forestwide Fuels) Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and
would alter the understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated old growth would not reduce the amount and distribution of OG below
KNFP requirements. However, due to cumulative edge effects (Table 3.59) there may be reduced old
growth quality for some plant and animal species, such as resulting in less interior habitat and more edge
where predation is more likely to occur or where noxious weed invasions are more likely to become
established. However, given the level of impact and the quantity of OG in the PSU, this effect should be
minimal and would diminish in approximately 50 years (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991;
Russell et al. 2000). Private lands in the Cripple PSU were assumed to not provide any OG, based on past
harvest practices.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 207 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning (760 ac), Christmas tree cutting, bough collection and pine cone
collecting would maintain the designated management level of OG by avoidance. In the instance where
existing OG is burned or blown down, ROG would be designated to account for this loss.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of OG habitat, snags or
down woody debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive. Grazing cattle
predominantly move along road systems and within past harvest units where an abundance of forage can
be found.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in snags and down woody debris because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
impacts to OG habitat. Conversely, wildfire suppression also serves to preserve existing OG habitat.
Suppression activities are typically subject to input from District Resource Advisors, and protection of
special habitats, including OG, is considered. However, if cumulative effects to old growth habitat result
in the habitat no longer functioning as old growth, additional old growth habitat would be designated.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect OG and other
specialized habitats (e.g. snags, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation
removal. These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the
summer or fall of 2013. The standing tree and snag component would only be affected if considered a
hazard to road users. These activities would not result in any change to the quantity of old growth, thus no
adverse cumulative effects would be expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the
cumulative impact on OG because maintenance of these facilities do not typically involve removal of old
growth elements such as large trees or snags unless deemed to be a safety hazard to forest users. In this
situation, the removal of a tree or snag is considered negligible.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, outfitter/guide
trails/camps and COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground
disturbance on resources such as old growth have been included under the existing condition and would
have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts
on old growth at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from OG along open road corridors and these
acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other forest use activities such as
mushroom and berry picking, camping, hunting, Christmas tree cutting, bough collection, etc. have little
to no measurable impact on old growth because they are largely non-consumptive or rapidly reAFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 208 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

established and would not contribute to the cumulative effect on this resource.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. However, these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old growth
type on NFS lands and therefore would have no edge effect on old growth stands.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
As previously stated, fire suppression over the last century has altered stands historically maintained by
fire disturbance. The affected stands have developed fuel loading and ladder fuels that are uncharacteristic
for some sites. These conditions would continue to develop until a natural disturbance occurs. Potential
natural disturbances (wildfire, insect or disease epidemics, wind) could reduce OG characteristics or
completely remove an area of old growth under extreme conditions. Likewise, there is the potential for
human-caused fires initiating on private lands to move on to adjacent NFS lands and remove OG that has
not been, at least partially, managed either by prescribed burning and/or removal of ladder fuels. In either
case, if the large tree component of old growth is removed then replacement old growth would need to be
designated.
The most recent Forestwide old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet
elevation is designated for old growth management. The proposed activities would not affect the 10%
standard for old growth at either the PSU or Forest scale.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan
All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain a minimum of 10% OG below 5,500 feet
in elevation in each third order drainage or compartment, or a combination of compartments (Kootenai
Supplement No 85; supplement to FSM 2432.22). Based on April 26th, 2004 direction (Castaneda 2004),
old growth will be analyzed at the PSU scale. After implementation of the action alternatives, the Cripple
PSU would have 11.2% designated old growth below 5,500 feet elevation. In addition, 729 acres of
undesignated old growth would remain. The most recent Forestwide assessment as documented in the
Forest Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Report (USDA Forest Service 2011) shows that the KNF has
11.8% old growth designated (includes both effective and replacement). The KNFP established that
maintaining 10% of old growth habitat is sufficient to support viable populations of old-growth dependent
species (Vol 1 II-1 7; III-54; Vol 2 A17).
MA 13 Recreation Standards: All alternatives comply with these standards. A forest closure order
exists to off-highway vehicles that restricts them to established roads and trails therefore limiting
their effect on old growth.
MA 13 Wildlife and Fish Standards: All alternatives comply with these standards, which are
largely passive and favor natural processes. Also refer to grizzly bear analysis.
MA 13 Range Standards: All alternatives comply. Due to the lack of available forage in old growth
stands, use by grazing cattle is negligible.
MA 13 Timber Standards: All alternatives comply with Standards 1 and 3. Unauthorized firewood
cutting could impact snags located in OG habitat, and this effect is taken into consideration in the
cavity habitat analysis and accounted for under the existing condition.
MA 13 Facilities Standards: All alternatives comply with Standards 2 and 3. All alternatives would
continue to restrict motorized access on local roads where closures exist.
MA 13 Fire Standards: Planned ignitions. The proposed slashing and burning is consistent for all
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 209 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

alternatives. The KNFP (Vol 1 III-56) states that planned ignitions are acceptable to maintain old
growth characteristics (e.g. old growth ponderosa pine).
National Forest Management Act
The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for old growth.

SNAGS
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Thomas (1979 pg.72-75) was used to determine the percent of the potential population level (PPL) to
maintain primary cavity excavator populations (snag level % times % of area with that snag level). The
general analysis process was based on the field data and applied as a worst case scenario. Old growth
stands provide 100% snag level (SL) as do untreated forest stands (Tincher 1998). Partial cut stands
provide at least 60% SL (Johnson and Lamb 1999). Regeneration units provide 0-80% SL. The percent
varies mostly by period of harvest (pre- vs. post-KNFP 1987). Units harvested prior to the KNFP and
those planned pre-1987 but harvested through 1992 basically provide no cavity habitat structures
(Johnson and Lamb 1999). Post-1987 KNFP, (1993-2002) harvest units provide at least 40% SL (USDA
Forest Service 2003b). Roads provide 0% SL. Roads account for 4 acres/mile (average 33 feet wide times
5,280 feet per mile divided by 43,560 square feet per acre). There is no difference in snag density
adjacent to open versus closed roads (Bate and Wisdom 2004).
For this project, OG stands and stands with multi-story, low or high risk pole timber (MLRD, MHRP),
multi-story low and high risk saw timber (MLRS, MHRS), and saw timber (SAWT) were categorized as
forested stands that provide 100% snag level. All other stands, whether partially treated or regenerated
were given a conservative average snag capability level of 20% whether or not the stands were treated
prior to or after the 1987 KNFP. Additionally, the forest acres within 100 feet of any road were given a
0% snag level in order to adjust for the loss of snags along roads over time. A one hundred foot zone
along roads was chosen based on field observations and conversations with firewood cutters, which is
adequate given that many firewood cutters do not pull snags uphill nor do they winch trees much farther
than 100 feet from a solid road surface.
The KNFP recommends applying minimum cavity excavator PPL on a drainage or compartment basis at
the following levels: maintain at least 40% of the PPL throughout commercial forest lands, and maintain
at least 60% of the PPL in riparian areas (KNFP 1987). These recommended percentages equate to snag
levels of approximately 0.9 snags per acre for the 40% PPL, and 1.35 snags per acre for the 60% PPL.
Due to the need to provide a continuous supply of snags over time, there is also a need to designate green
trees as snag replacements. Usually two replacements are needed for every snag needed (USDA Forest
Service 1987 A 16-11). This results in the general recommendation of 1-2 snags and 2-4 snag
replacements per acre or a total of 3-6 per acre. The KNFP riparian standards, as amended by the Inland
Native Fish Strategy (INFS) (USDA Forest Service 1995b), provide adequate snags and replacement trees
to meet the riparian 60% SL standard. Therefore, the following analysis focuses on the general forest
standard of 40% PPL.
Newer science (e.g. Bull et al. 1997), since the 1987 KNFP, has been incorporated into the Northern
Region Snag Protocol (USDA Forest Service 2000). This protocol used the FIA data for 1988 to 1995 to
estimate snag numbers by VRU cluster. The protocol further recommends Forests use local data to fine
tune the protocol and recommended snag management levels. The Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem
Management Plan (ICBEMP DEIS Appendix 12) (USDA et al. 2000b) also provides new data on snags.
Like the R1 Snag protocol, the ICBEMP document recognizes the need to use local data to fine tune
recommended snag management levels. The KNF has established optional snag management levels based
on local data (Johnson 2005). These snag levels are greater than the KNFP snag standards. These
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 210 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

recommendations were considered in this analysis as part of the design criteria for snag retention in
proposed treatment units.
The pileated woodpecker is the MIS for snags (KNFP App 12) (MIS section). The KNFP assumption is
that effects of a proposed action on MIS can be correlated to effects on other species with similar habitat
requirements. As habitat for MIS species is being maintained, it is assumed that sufficient habitat, such as
snags and other snag associated species are also being maintained.
The effect indicators for snag and down wood habitat are: 1) percent of the maximum population potential
by PSU; 2) acres treated that reduce snag and down wood levels.
The analysis boundary for project impacts (direct, indirect, cumulative) on snags is the Cripple PSU. This
size is sufficient to cover home range sizes of species associated with snag and down wood habitat
structure. Effects on the viability of MIS pileated woodpecker are evaluated at the Forest scale.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Historically, within VRUs 1 and 2, Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine snags and live culls provided a
majority of the cavity habitat, with fire resistant ponderosa pine providing most of the large (>19" dbh)
snags and live culls. VRU 3 has a higher component of larch snags and culls, which provide an important
feature for primary excavators and secondary cavity nesters. The more moist VRUs (5 and 7) also have a
component of larch snags in the early and late seral forest condition, with cedar and grand-fir also
providing cavity habitat. The number of snags per acre (>10"dbh) likely approached 5-10 snags per acre
within all VRUs.
Table 3.81 - Snag Capability/Recommendations by VRU
VRU-CLIMATIC
MODIFIER

ACRES/PERCENT OF
PSU
in each VRU

TOTAL SNAGS/ACRE at 100%
CAPABILITY and
RECOMMENDED NUMBERS

RECOMMENDED # SNAGS
>20” DBH at 100%
CAPABILITY to RETAIN

1 - warm &dry
2 - mod. warm& dry
3 - mod. warm & mod. dry
4 - mod. warm & moist
5 - mod. cool & moist
6 - mod. cool & wet
7 - cool & moist
8 - cool & wet
9 - cool & mod. dry

832 ac/<1.1%
18,322 ac/23.3%
17,491 ac/22.3%
8,141 ac/10.4%
947 ac/1.2%
0 ac/0%
22,452 ac/28.6%
0 ac/0%
10,271 ac/13.1%

4
6
8
7
9
8
12
12
12

1
2
2
2
3
4
2
1
All available

Snags, broken-top live trees, live cull trees and down logs are used by a great variety of wildlife species
for nesting, denning, perching, roosting, feeding and shelter. On the KNF, 42 species of birds, 14 species
of mammals, and several species of amphibians are recognized as largely dependent on cavity habitat
(snags and down wood). Table 3.82 summarizes the existing cavity habitat potential on NFS lands in the
Cripple PSU based on the criteria given previously.
The current SL within the Cripple PSU is 67.9% (Table 3.82). In other words, 67.9% of the area should
be able to naturally produce 100% of the snags necessary for associated species, and these snags would be
distributed across the landscape based on VRUs (as demonstrated by percentage of the PSU in Table 3.81.
This level exceeds (better than) the KNFP standard of 40% in general forest habitat and 60% in riparian
habitat (USDA Forest Service, 1987a, II-22; USDA Forest Service, 1987b, A16-3), indicating that
existing snag habitat is maintaining viable populations of cavity-dependent species. The current capability
rating takes into consideration the number of acres altered by man via timber harvest and firewood cutting
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 211 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

as described under the written assumptions (Table 3.82). The actual procedure and capability matrix, as
calculated in Arc Map GIS, is located in the Wildlife Section of the Project File.

Table 3.82 - Existing Population Potential on All Lands in the Cripple PSU
HABITAT
COMPONENT

OG & MLRP, MHRP, MLRS, MHRS, SAWT
Treated Forest Areas Ranging from Clearcuts
to Thinned Stands (average 20% capability)
Roads & Buffer (24.5 acres/mile at 100 foot
buffer for 471 miles)
Total PSU

ACRES

% OF
SUBUNIT

TOTAL
SNAGS/ACRE1

SNAG
LEVEL (%)

POPULATION
POTENTIAL2

58,262

63.0

2.25

100\3,\4

63.0

22,605

24.5

<1.0

20\3

4.9

11,540

12.5

0\4

0\3

0

92,407

100

--

--

67.9

1

Value in parenthesis is based on Thomas 1979 Table 18 (pg 72) and include all snags > 10” dbh. This number is needed to achieve the Snag Level
value in parenthesis in the next column.
2
Percent of sub-unit (expressed as decimal) times snag level percent = proportionate population potential for each component. Sum of proportionate
population potentials from all components equals the PSU potential. (Thomas 1979 72-73)
\3
Managed snag level percent based on averaging areas treated prior to and following 1987 FP.
\4
Based on field observations; conversations with firewood cutters
MLRP = multi-story low risk pole timber MHRP = multi-story high risk pole MLRS = multi-story low risk sawtimber;
MHRS = multi-story high risk sawtimber SAWT = sawtimber POLE = pole timber IMST = immature sawtimber

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
In the PSU, all action alternatives would provide at least 40% snag levels following management
activities. PPLs would be cumulatively reduced by 0.1 to 7.9% in the PSU depending on alternative
(Table 3.83).
Table 3.83 - Cavity Excavator Potential Population Level (%) by Alternative
Based on KNFP Standards

PPL in PSU (%)
Change in PPL (%)
Cumulative Acres Treated that Reduce Snag Level

EXISTING
CONDITION

ALT 1
(NO-ACTION)

ALT 2

ALT 3

67.9%

67.8%
(-0.1%)
34,347

60.0%
(-7.9%)
43,301**

61.0%
(-6.9%)
42,001**

34,145

(*) Value in parenthesis is percent change (+/-) due to alternative. Change in No Action reflects cumulative effects of other known or
reasonably foreseeable actions, though not enough to change PPL.
(**) Some treatment acres fall within previously treated stands were not duplicated and already assigned a snag capability level of 0.2 or 20%.

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1, no activities would be proposed, so no direct effect to snags is expected. However,
there could be some additional snag loss or creation due to cumulative activities from foreseeable
projects. These acres are disclosed in Table 3.83 and listed under the section discussing foreseeable
activities under cumulative effects. Wildlife use of cavity habitat would continue at current levels. The
addition or loss of snags would be dependent on other factors, such as firewood cutting, which has
already been accounted for (100 ft. from all system roads), and wind events, natural attrition or wildfire.
The level of impact from these factors cannot be calculated due to the high uncertainty in predicting
occurrence and intensity levels.
Effects Common to Alternatives 2 and 3
Management activities that could reduce snags in riparian areas are restricted by Riparian Habitat
Conservation Area (RHCA) standards and guidelines (USDA Forest Service 1995b). For the proposed
activities, this would result meeting the riparian standard for snag levels (60%).
Regeneration harvest would result in a long-term (50-100 years), site-specific reduction in suitable cavity
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 212 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

habitat for species (e.g. pileated woodpeckers) that do not utilize open areas for nesting. In the long-term,
the green trees retained in regeneration units would provide nesting habitat as the new forest develops into
a mature stand comprised of snag producing agents.
Underburning and excavator piling are treatments proposed to reduce existing fuels and/or harvestgenerated slash. Underburning has the potential to reduce cavity habitat because standing snags can burn
up or the bases can burn through, causing them to fall over. Down logs are sometimes partially or wholly
consumed by fire. At the same time, underburning also has the potential to create new snags if a green
residual tree is killed by fire. The loss or gain of cavity habitat varies widely, and depends on conditions
(e.g. weather, fuel loads, fuel moisture) present when units are underburned. Excavator piling and burning
would have less potential for loss or gain of cavity habitat because the burn treatment would be
concentrated in pile areas, and piles would generally be located away from snags and leave trees. Similar
results and effects on snags can be expected on proposed COE lands contained within the analysis area.

ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Implementation of the action alternatives would have direct effects on snag habitat. Table 3.84
summarizes those project activities that would change snag levels. Also see Table 3.82 for the changes in
PPL by alternative.
Table 3.84 - Acres of Project Activities that Cumulatively Impact Snag Level
ACTIVITY

ALT 11

ALT 2

ALT 3

Regeneration Harvest
Partial Cutting
New Road Construction (miles)
Prescribed Fire2

198
0
0.84
935

3456
5649
9.3
11,848

2802
4945
8.1
11,358

1

the acres in Alternative 1 are the cumulative effects from other reasonably foreseeable projects. They can be added
to the acres in the action alternatives to see cumulative effect acres
2
Acres treated with prescribed fire may increase and/or decrease snag levels and were not accounted for in capability
calculations.
3
Includes lands managed by Army COE.

Regeneration harvest in Alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce snag availability specific to the unit areas, and
use would change from those species requiring snags with nearby live tree cover (e.g. pileated
woodpeckers) to those that would use snags in open sites (e.g. bluebirds, northern flickers, flycatchers).
Regeneration harvest can potentially impact long-term cavity habitat, since fewer trees are left on site to
be recruited as snags or snag replacements.
Commercial thinning in Alternatives 2 and 3 would retain higher levels of existing snags than
regeneration units, and green replacement trees would be more readily available for future habitat.
Limited timber harvest is proposed in MA 10 however, the resulting snag capability level within this MA
designation would remain high at least 93% and still well above KNFP standards (40% general; 60%
riparian).
In the long-term, the proposed improvement harvests identified in the action alternatives are expected to
provide for the continuity of large-diameter ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir. This in turn provides a longterm benefit to cavity-dependent species, as over time they would become snags. Commercial thinning
would follow a basal area reduction prescription. A majority of the ponderosa pine-Douglas-fir stands
would retain larger and older trees in the overstory to maintain vertical structure and provide future
replacement snags. The prescription would result in the removal of small diameter (less than 7" dbh)
snags and whips in the understory, which would likely be removed or toppled during logging operations.
On units planned for skyline yarding, snags are expected to be lost due to OSHA safety standards. This
may also occur on tractor yarding units, depending on snag condition, location and size in relation to skid
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 213 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

trails and falling personnel. These losses have been accounted for in the conservative estimate (20%
average amongst units harvested prior to and after 1987 KNFP) of the snag capability of treated stand
(Tables 3.82 and 3.83). Adequate live trees of larger sizes would be available to provide habitat features
needed by snag dependent wildlife in the future.
The subsequent proposed prescribed underburning would reduce the small-diameter Douglas-fir
encroachment, and any trees that may be killed during the burning would result in the creation of snags.
Additionally, fire may facilitate decay in surviving trees by providing an entry point for fungi, which
increases the likelihood that the trees would be used by cavity excavators (Smith et al. 2000).
Site preparation burning and prescribed fire on non-harvest units may result in some fire-killed trees and
subsequent new snag feeding/nesting sites. Within proposed harvest units, retention of snags greater than
10" dbh would contribute to meeting KNFP standards for this resource.
There are typically no snags available within precommercial thin units, especially those stands initiated
prior to 1992 so reduction of snags is not a concern within these units.
Alternative 2 proposes motorized trail access changes in that it converts approximately 37 miles of
motorized trails to non-motorized, covert approximately 16 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted
roads into an intermittent stored status and decommission 5.93 miles of road. These actions would benefit
any adjacent snags by making them less susceptible to firewood cutting. Contrarily, Alternative 3
proposes to keep approximately 9.7 miles of trails as motorized for ATV use. Both action alternatives
convert approximately 1.7 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of
undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, any
impact to snags has likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due to the easy topography of
these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to any old growth in these areas are not
anticipated.
The proposed dispersed camping areas would have negligible direct effects on the snag resource because
these areas are maintained as natural as possible. Only those snags determined to be a threat to users and
campers would be removed. Indirectly, forest users would likely fell and burn some snags as campfire
wood but would likely only impact a one to two hundred foot perimeter around the sites based on typical
firewood gathering. The potential for tree or snag due to the creation of permanent or temporary roads has
already been accounted for in the effects of road systems (Table 3.82) on snag capability in that any areas
100 feet from any road are considered to have a zero capability to produce snags.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on Corp lands included
in the PSU boundary. The impacts on snags from these activities would be similar to those described
previously and were included in the snag capability results found in Table 3.82.
Summary of Direct/Indirect Effects of Action Alternatives on Existing Condition
Direct effects of the action alternatives would reduce (ranging from 0.1 to 7.9%) the number of snags
available to wildlife within stands treated by timber harvest. Conversely, the associated fuel treatments
and periodical prescribed burns would indirectly create snags for years following timber harvests.
Although small, isolated pockets lacking in snags may occur as a result of the action alternatives, overall,
management actions would not have a major impact on snags across the landscape and would maintain a
viable snag level of 40% or greater as directed by the KNFP.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
In conjunction with naturally occurring events such as insect infestations, windstorms and wildfires, fire
suppression and certain logging practices have changed the amount and distribution of snags across the
landscape (USDA Forest Service 2000). Likewise, firewood cutting, a commonplace impact and one that
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 214 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

is difficult to measure, has contributed cumulatively to the existing condition of the current snag resource.
All of these influences on the snag resource can be expected to continue to varying degrees in years to
come and would contribute both positively and negatively to the resource in that snags are both created
and removed. Table 3.82 displays estimated snag levels for the existing condition based on what is known
about past occurrences.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this resource
within the next 10 to 20 years are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 for 265 ac, FWF 536 for 195ac, FWF 52403 for 450ac,
FWF 589 for 25ac) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for
these units would occur between 2013 and 2014, will likely remove and create snags therefore their
impact is considered negligible. All of these acres are reflected in Table 3.84.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging would maintain the existing level of
snags by avoidance with the exception of small snags possibly lost to character wood (furniture)
gatherers. Most snags removed for furniture however are small diameter trees (<10” DBH) unsuitable for
most cavity nesters and this impact is considered negligible.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of, snags or down woody
debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in snags and down woody debris because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities including the construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could
potentially result in impacts to specialized habitats (e.g. old growth, snags, down woody debris). The
amount and timing of such a loss cannot be predicted; however, the number of snags created by a wildfire
would far exceed those lost during fire suppression efforts. Suppression activities are typically subject to
input from District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats, including snags, is
considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats
(e.g. snags, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. These
activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of
2013. The snag component would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. These activities
would not result in any change to the snag component, thus no adverse cumulative effects would be
expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites could involve the harvest of
snags or green replacement trees that pose a hazard to users. However, the scale of the impact would be
small and not measurable as a cumulative effect to snag levels or associated species.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 215 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, outfitter/guide
trails/camps and COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground
disturbance on resources such as snags have been included under the existing condition and would have
no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on
snags at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but could result in the loss of individual snags due to public safety concerns.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from the open road corridors and these acres
were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other public uses such as wildlife
viewing, berry picking, camping, snowmobiling, etc. have negligible impacts on the snag resource. Most
campers utilize down wood for campfires in lieu of felling additional dead wood so this impact would
also be negligible.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there would likely be a decrease in dry-site snags within the
PSU, but outside of NFS lands.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities will likely result in snag loss and were considered under the
No-Action Alternative 1 (Table 3.84).
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Cumulatively, with all lands considered, and all other reasonably foreseeable actions on private and state
lands considered, sufficient cavity habitat would remain in the Cripple PSU (Table 3.83).
When other activities including the harvest on private, state and federal lands discussed under Alternative
1, and all past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities are considered, habitat on federal lands is
considered sufficient to provide cavity habitat to cavity-dependent species. After implementation of
Alternative 1 and the reasonably foreseeable FS projects, the primary cavity excavator PPL on NFS lands
is estimated to remain at approximately 67.8%. After implementation of Alternatives 2 or 3 and the
reasonably foreseeable projects, the primary cavity excavator PPL on NFS lands would decrease from
67.9% to 60.0 or 61.0% respectively. This level of snag habitat is still expected to provide for an
associated species population level above 40%, which is thought to be the minimum needed to maintain
self-sustaining populations of snag-dependent wildlife (Thomas 1979 pg.72).
The 2007 KNFP Monitoring Report (USDA Forest Service 2008) documents results for the past 19 years,
and indicates the KNF is providing sufficient cavity habitat at the drainage or compartment, as well as the
Forest scale.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
All proposed units in Alternatives 1, 2 and 3 maintain at least 40% snag level. No alternative causes the
Cripple PSU overall PPL to drop below the general forest 40% or riparian 60% primary cavity excavator
potential population level. This is consistent with Forest Plan standards.
KNFP cavity habitat standard (40% PPL) in MAs 15 and 16 is met by maintaining at snag capability of at
least 64.5% under all alternatives.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 216 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

KNFP cavity habitat standard in MA 10 is met by maintaining a snag capability of at least 93% under all
alternatives. Alternatives 2and 3 would not require a project-specific amendment to suspend the
requirement to retain all existing cavity habitat in MA 10. All treatment units would be managed to meet
the 40% minimum snag level.

DOWN WOOD HABITAT
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Down wood habitat is woody material derived from tree limbs, boles and roots in various stages of decay
(Graham et al. 1994), and performs many physical, chemical and biological functions in forest
ecosystems. Coarse down wood habitat is generally defined as any down wood material larger than 3
inches in diameter. The minimum piece size to qualify as a down “log” is 8 feet long with a large-end
diameter of six inches or more (Bull et al. 1997). The ecological processes and functions of down wood
material are discussed in many research papers (e.g. Bull et al.1997; Graham et al. 1994; Maser et al.
1984). These are incorporated by reference.
The analysis boundary for project direct effects is the treatment units. Cumulative effects are analyzed at
the PSU scale because the home range of several resident wildlife species with associations to down wood
habitat extend further than the typical treatment unit.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The KNFP suggests that sufficient amounts of large down wood material be retained on site for wildlife
habitat needs, nutrient release back into the soil and site protection for timber stand regeneration. The
current KNFP direction (USDA Forest Service 1987 A16-6) is to meet timber/silviculture Guideline #9,
which is to leave logs greater than 12” diameter scattered throughout harvest units (a few pieces per acre).
Five to 15 tons per acre is recommended depending on the associated VRU.
The project is designed to meet Guideline #9. Reserve trees are provided to assure future down wood
habitat.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
In the short-term, this alternative would not change the current condition or availability of coarse woody
debris within the PSU. With the lack of wildfires in concert with continued fire suppression, these forest
stands could accumulate down woody debris beyond what would be expected under natural conditions in
a given VRU.
Effects Common to Alternatives 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
The proposed Forest Fuel and Wildlife habitat enhancement units (10,049 ac) would retain adequate
down wood. Spring burning prescriptions and conditions should allow for the maintenance of larger
pieces of organic matter on the forest floor. Fall burning may increase the risk of large woody
consumption by fire, but fire-killed snags would be recruited over time.
In proposed timber harvest units under the action alternatives, implementing recommended down wood
material guidelines under all alternatives is expected to ensure the maintenance of adequate habitat.
Implementation of KNFP snag guidelines would maintain some cavity habitat and subsequent down wood
habitat recruitment to the forest floor over the next several decades. Application of these guidelines in all
harvest units would ensure distribution of down wood material across the landscape. Any snag felled due
to OSHA standards would be required to remain on site. The forest guideline to leave 5-15 tons/acre of
12”+ diameter down wood is met.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 217 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Generally, all action alternatives have the potential to reduce down woody resources over several
thousand acres under a variety of management actions (Tables 2.14 and 2.23). Any acres treated with
timber harvest should meet KNFP guidelines/recommendations for retention of down woody debris. The
many acres treated with prescribed fire should maintain a minimum of 5 to 10 tons of down woody debris
per acre, depending on the VRU, for soils nutrient recycling. Site preparation methods are similar
between the action alternatives (see Chapter 2 for the differences in acres between alternatives). Grapple
piling of logging slash can more easily separate fine fuels from coarse wood material thereby assisting in
maintaining the large wood component in treatment units. Charred coarse wood material with checks and
cracks does not substantially interfere with the decomposition or function of this material.
There are typically few snags and subsequent down wood available within precommercial thin units,
especially those stands initiated prior to 1992, so reduction of down wood is not a concern within these
units.
Alternative 2 proposes motorized trail access changes in that it converts approximately 37 miles of
motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted
roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would benefit any adjacent snags by making
them less susceptible to firewood cutting. Contrarily, Alternative 3 proposes to keep approximately 9.7
miles of trails as motorized for ATV use. Both action alternatives convert approximately 1.7 miles of
seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which
allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, any impact to snags has likely already occurred
from illegal firewood gathering due to the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir.
Additional impacts to any old growth in these areas are not anticipated.
The proposed dispersed camping areas improvements would have negligible effects on the snag resource
because these areas are maintained as natural as possible. Only those snags determined to be a threat to
users and campers would be removed.
Any potential for tree or snag loss and subsequent down wood due to the creation of permanent or
temporary roads has already been accounted for in the effects of road systems (Table 3.82) on snag
capability in that any areas 100 feet from any road are considered to have a zero capability to produce
snags.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on Corp lands included
in the PSU boundary. The impacts on snags and subsequent down wood from these activities would be
similar to those described above and were included in the snag capability results found in Table 3.82.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
In conjunction with naturally occurring events such as insect infestations, windstorms and wildfires, fire
suppression and certain logging practices have changed the amount and distribution of the down wood
component across the landscape (USDA Forest Service 2000). Likewise, firewood cutting, a
commonplace impact and one that is difficult to measure, contributes cumulatively to the existing
condition of the current down woody debris resource. All of these influences on the down woody resource
can be expected to continue to varying degrees in years to come and would contribute both positively and
negatively to the resource in that down woody debris would be both created and removed.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this resource
within the next 10 to 20 years are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 for 265 ac, FWF 536 for 195ac, FWF 52403 for 450ac,
FWF 589 for 25ac) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 218 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

these units would occur between 2012 and 2014, will likely remove and create down wood (new snag
creation) therefore their impact is considered negligible.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging would maintain the existing level of
snags, and subsequent down wood, by avoidance with the exception of small quantities possibly lost to
character wood (furniture) gatherers. Most wood removed for furniture however are small diameter trees
(<10” DBH) unsuitable for most cavity nesting or hollow log rest areas. This impact is considered
negligible.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of old growth habitat,
snags or down woody debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in snags and down woody debris because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities including the construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could
potentially result in impacts to specialized habitats (e.g. old growth, snags, down woody debris). The
amount and timing of such a loss cannot be predicted; however, the number of snags and down wood
created by a wildfire would far exceed those lost during fire suppression efforts. Suppression activities are
typically subject to input from District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats,
including dead standing and down wood, is considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats
(e.g. snags, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. These
activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of
2013. The snag component would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. It is likely
however, that any or most down wood within the permitted area of the Marina would be lost to campers
for campfires. Given the number of acres (70 ac) under permit versus the size of the PSU (>90,000), this
impact is considered negligible.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites could involve the harvest of
snags or down wood that pose a hazard to users. However, the scale of the impact would be small and not
measurable as a cumulative effect to snag/down wood levels or associated species.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, outfitter/guide
trails/camps and COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground
disturbance on resources such as snags have been included under the existing condition and would have
no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on
snags at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but could result in the loss of individual snags, and subsequent down wood, due to public safety
concerns. It is likely however, that any or most down wood within the permitted area of the Marina would
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 219 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

be lost to campers for campfires. Given the number of acres (70 ac) under permit versus the size of the
PSU (>90,000), this impact is considered negligible.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags/down wood from the open road corridors and
these acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other public uses such as
wildlife viewing, berry picking, camping, snowmobiling, etc. have negligible impacts on this resource due
to scope.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there would likely be a decrease in dry-site snags and
associated down wood within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in snag and subsequent down wood loss
and were considered under the no-action Alternative 1 under the snag analysis (Table 3.84).
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Cumulatively, with all lands considered, and all other reasonably foreseeable actions on private and state
lands considered as described previously, sufficient down woody debris would remain in the Cripple
PSU.
The 2007 KNFP Monitoring Report (USDA Forest Service 2008) documents results for the past 19 years
may be the best indicator that standing dead and down habitat is being retained via management
guidelines and recommendations.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
There are no goals or standards for downed woody debris in the KNFP. It does contain the goal to:
“Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable populations of all existing native, vertebrate,
wildlife species.... (FP Vol 1 II-1 Goal #7)”. The KNFP provides guidelines in Appendix 16, Cavity
Habitat Management (FP Vol 2 App 16 6 - Guideline #9). All alternatives are consistent with the KNFP,
as a wide range of successional habitats, and associated amounts of downed wood would be available.

MANAGEMENT INDICATOR SPECIES
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Federal laws and direction applicable to Management Indicator Species (MIS) include the National Forest
Management Act (NFMA 1976) and Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2620. The NFMA specifies that the
NFS be managed to provide for diversity of plant and animal communities to meet multiple-use
objectives. The “specific land area” (scale) for providing diversity is established in the framework as the
area covered by a Forest Plan (36 CFR 219.3). The regulations also say that Forests “must ensure well
distributed habitat” to provide for viable populations of native and desired non-native plants and
vertebrate species (36 CFR 219.19). The NFMA defines a viable population as "... one which has the
estimated numbers and distribution of reproductive individuals to insure its continued existence and is
well distributed in the planning area." Under the implementation regulations, the Forest is considered the
planning area.
Other Federal resource laws that provide impetus for managing for viable wildlife populations on public
land includes the National Wilderness Preservation Act (1964), the National Environmental Policy Act
(1969) and the Endangered Species Act (1973). Information from the landscape assessments conducted in
the Columbia River Basin was also reviewed.
The Kootenai Forest Plan (KNFP) (1987 Appendix 12) identifies MIS (Table 3.85). The FP states “the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 220 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

maintenance of viable populations of existing native and desirable non-native vertebrate species, as
monitored through indicator species, will be attained through the maintenance of a diversity of plant
communities and habitats.” (FP II-22)
The analysis considers how the action provides for diversity of plant and animal communities based on
the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet overall multiple use objectives, and
within the multiple use objectives of a land management plan adopted 16 USC 1604 (g)(3)(B).
Wildlife habitat guidelines and objectives to help maintain species viability on the KNF are outlined in
the FP on pages II-22-23. The current list of MIS species for the KNF is displayed in Table 3.85.

Table 3.85 - Management Indicator Species
SPECIES

HABITAT REPRESENTED

Grizzly Bear (Ursus arctos)
Gray Wolf (Canis lupus)
Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus)

General Forest
General Forest
Rivers and Lakes

Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus)

Cliffs

Elk (Cervus elaphus)
Whitetail Deer (Odocoileus virginianus)

General Forest
General Forest

Mountain Goat (Oreamnos americanus)

Alpine

Pileated Woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus)

Snags, Old Growth

COMMENTS

See T&E Section
See Sensitive Species Section
See Sensitive Species Section
Suitable habitat questionable, no known
aerie present, No further analysis
required
Serves as MIS for Cripple Subunit
Represented by Elk
No alpine habitat in project area.
Mtn. goats not found in project area.
Project will have no impact on mtn.
goats. No further analysis required.
Also see old growth and snag sections

The KNFP identified a number of wildlife species that find optimum breeding and feeding habitat in old
growth. The pileated woodpecker is an inhabitant of old growth habitat and a management indicator
species (MIS) for old growth habitat on the KNF.
Elk and whitetail deer are two MIS species that represent similar habitat. Summerfield (1991)
recommends determining which big game species will be featured in a particular area, since species winter
requirements differ. Based on FP direction, the biological potential of the area, state wildlife management
objectives, public comments during scoping and the information contained within the Kootenai
Conservation Plan (Johnson 2004 Appendix H); an emphasis species was identified for this report.
As a general rule the following process was used to determine the featured species. In the Conservation
Plan, the KNF and MFWP Elk Task Force established management emphasis designations for elk by PSU
(Ibid: Appendix H Attachment B page H-12 and 2600 letter of 5-16-1997). In PSUs with high emphasis
for elk, elk will be the emphasis MIS in the report. For PSUs where elk are a low emphasis, whitetail deer
will be the indicator for general forest habitat in the report. For PSUs where elk are moderate emphasis,
the project biologist will designate the general forest indicator, based on site-specific information about
elk and deer use in the PSU. The Cripple PSU is moderate emphasis for elk and the elk has been chosen to
be the general forest indicator in the analysis because of its higher interest to the public as a game
mammal.

ELK
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Elk are one of the indicator species for general forest habitat condition. The East Reservoir project area is
located in the Cripple PSU, which is identified as an area where elk are managed equally with the whitetailed deer, another general forest indicator species (KNF MFWP Elk Task Force 1997).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 221 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Elk population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are described
in Murie (1979) and Toweill and Thomas (2002). That information is incorporated by reference. Elk
population and harvest data come primarily from MFWP data. Additional information used is from recent
District wildlife observation records and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife). The analysis area
boundary for project impacts to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple PSU. The boundaries for
determining population trend and viability are the MFWP elk hunting districts #101, 102, 103, 120, 122
(Salish EMU) and the Kootenai National Forest, respectively.
The effects analysis is based on direction provided in the KNFP (1987) as amended and Coordinating Elk
and Timber Management (MFWP 1985). Additional guidance is provided by Defining Elk Security: The
Hillis Paradigm (1991). Potential effects to elk habitat are identified by analyzing four effects indicators:
cover/forage ratio, habitat effectiveness, security and key habitat components.
Cover/Forage Ratio: Cover/forage ratio portrays the percentage of area that meets elk requirements for
cover and forage. Cover provides protection from weather, predators and humans. Two different types of
cover have been recognized. Hiding cover is defined as vegetation capable of hiding 90% of an elk from
the view of a human at 200 feet. Thermal cover is a stand of conifers that are 40 feet tall with 70% crown
closure. Forage areas are those natural or man-made areas that do not qualify as cover (hiding or thermal)
(Thomas 1979, pp. 109, 114, 116). Recently, elk use of thermal cover and foraging areas has been
reexamined and this research indicates that providing thermal cover is not a suitable solution for
inadequate forage conditions (Cook et al. 1998).
The KNFP (1987) recommends a cover/forage ratio of 30/70% for elk winter range (measured on the
combined acres in MA 10 and 11 lands). Summerfield (1991) recommends cover to be 60% on winter and
summer range (measured on all MAs, not winter range, e.g. MAs 12, 15, 16, etc.). On elk winter range,
the cover should be at least 40% thermal cover (Ibid). Summer range cover may be in any combination of
hiding and thermal cover (Ibid). The KNFP (1987) also identifies the general maximum size for an
opening as 40 acres. Summerfield (1991) recommends that the opening size standard be the same as the
standard for grizzly bear (a maximum of 600 feet to cover from any point inside an opening).
Current landscape conditions as related to opening size and fuel loads are noticeably out of their historical
ranges where wildfires have not occurred in recent years. These conditions can be largely attributed to
successful wildfire suppression and man-made opening size limitations of federal regulations and KNFP
direction. This disturbance conditions, or lack thereof, are present across most VRUs, but most noticeable
in the drier type VRUs, like VRU 2.
Cover/Forage ratio (C/F) for summer range (combined MAs 15, 16, 17 acres) in the PSU, C/F ratio for
winter range in the PSU, the percent thermal cover on winter range, and the number of regeneration
harvest units greater than 40 acres in size at the PSU scale are the measures for effects.
Habitat Effectiveness: The habitat effectiveness (HE) of an area refers to the percentage of habitat that is
usable by elk outside of the hunting season that does not contain open roads. Numerous studies have
shown that there is a strong negative correlation between elk use of an area and the density of open roads,
even if those roads are only lightly traveled (Frederick 1991).
The KNFP calls for an open road density (ORD) in MA 12 (Big Game Summer Range and Timber) of
0.75 mi/mi2. This translates into a habitat effectiveness value of 68% (Lyon 1984). In MAs 15, 16, 17 and
18, the KNFP ORD standard is < 3.0 mi/mi2, which equates to 38% habitat effectiveness.
The percent HE for the PSU, ORD for MA12, and ORD for the combined MA 15, 16, 17 and 18 lands in
the PSU are the measures for effects.
Security: Security areas are defined as areas that are larger than 250 contiguous acres in size and more
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 222 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

than one half mile from an open road (Hillis et al. 1991). These areas offer elk refuge through reduced
vulnerability during the hunting season and can greatly influence the age structure and composition of a
herd.
The KNFP has no standard for security. A panel of state and federal wildlife biologists convened in 1996
and produced, “Integrating Kootenai National Forest Plan and Fish, Wildlife & Parks Elk Management
Plan Final Task Force Report (Johnson 2004 Appendix H-B). This document identified security as an
important component in elk habitat and that the Hillis et al. (1991) method would be used to calculate it.
This method recommends a minimum of 30% of an elk’s fall use area be maintained as security habitat.
Since elk use in the fall could be any place within a PSU, the 30% minimum is measured against the PSU
NFS acres. Appendix H-B (Johnson 2004 p H-12) also provides the elk management emphasis level by
PSU, as well as definitions for security levels (H-B-13).
The percent security in the PSU will be the measure for effects.
Key Habitat Components: Wallows, wet meadows and bogs will be avoided when constructing roads
(KNFP 1987; III-44 49). When these areas are located they will be mapped and managed as riparian
areas.
The number of features potentially impacted by the project will be the measure for effects.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The Cripple PSU is located in elk hunting districts #101, 102, 103, 120, 122 (Salish Elk Management
Unit or EMU). The population in the Salish EMU is stable (MFWP 2004 p 66) based on numbers of elk
taken during hunting seasons and counted at local hunter check stations. Currently, the summer
cover/forage ratio is approximately 75/25%, winter range cover is 90/10%, habitat effectiveness is
approximately 70% within MA 12 and 49% within MAs 15 and 16, and approximately 28.1% of the PSU
is secure habitat (Table 3.86). The PSU is managed with a moderate emphasis for elk (Johnson 2004 App
H-B p H-12) with sign (tracks, droppings) found throughout the PSU. The number of known or suspected
wallows in the PSU is one, however, this habitat will continue to be documented if found during field
visits to the PSU.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Cover/Forage Ratio
Under Alternative 1 (no-action) the C/F ratio would remain unchanged, in the short-term. However, as
trees and shrubs continue to grow and mature, the number of acres of productive foraging habitat would
decline. As trees continue to encroach upon forage openings and tree canopies close, the quality of forage
and number of acres producing forage would also decline therefore not supporting the purpose and need
described in Chapter 1 to maintain and improve wildlife habitat. The increased tree density and
continuous fuel profile from the ground up to the main canopy puts the area at risk of severe wildfire (See
Fuels Section for additional information). If severe wildfires occur, it is likely that forage habitat would
be greater than 600 feet from cover, making it less likely to be used by elk.
ALTERNATIVES 2 AND 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Cover/Forage Ratio
Each action alternative includes prescribed burning (see Alternative Descriptions, Ch. 2), which would
occur primarily on south and west slopes that make up big game winter range. Burning would improve
the palatability and enhance the quality of the forage produced on these acres which helps meet the
purpose and need for managing wildlife habitat.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 223 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Cover/Forage ratios on winter range would shift toward the KNFP standard because of timber harvest in
MAs 10 and 11 (Table 3.86). Alternatives 2 and 3 result in similar changes to the cover/forage on winter
range, harvesting 3,276 acres and 3,060 acres, respectively. Summer range C/F ratio would become 66/34
(Table 3.86) under Alternative 2, which is the largest change in this ratio. Alternative 3 would change the
C/F ratio to 68/32.
For timber regeneration harvest in Montana, the maximum cut is defined as 40 acres (36 CFR Part 219.27
(d)(2)). Action Alternative 2 includes units that would result in openings greater than 40 acres (Units 147150; 73T; 188; 75; 80; and 40). This strategy may result in openings that may not be fully utilized by elk
as foraging areas, however, creating these openings reduces over edge effect and fragmentation that
would occur with greater number of openings of lesser acreage. Additionally, stringers and groups of
trees would be left within the units to provide screening and minimize the effect of the openings when
possible. There may be short-term disturbances within identified big game travel corridors due to project
related activities. Timber management in RHCAs would follow INFS guidelines and the state of Montana
Streamside Management Zone (SMZ) law, ensuring the maintenance of travel corridors within riparian
zones. Vegetated corridors facilitating movements in elevation would be maintained (see Cover/Forage
maps in the Project File).
Unit 62 (seedtree prescription) was designed for various wildlife species like elk and other large bodied
mammals, to maximize forage potential within summer habitat while maintaining a 600 feet to cover
standard of the 1987 KNFP. This strategy allows elk to utilize both forage opportunities along the unit’s
edge and interior without the need to venture to far from forest cover. The shape of the unit mimics
naturally created openings and contributes to the juxtaposition of forage and cover for the species.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on Corp lands included
in the PSU boundary. These acres are included with the cover effects from harvest activities on NFS
lands.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Open Road Density and Habitat Effectiveness
Open Road Densities (ORDs) (3.86) and Habitat Effectiveness for MA 12 and MAs 15-18 would remain
unchanged at 70% and 49% respectively, under Alternative 1.
ALTERNATIVES 2 AND 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Open Road Density and Habitat Effectiveness
Alternative 2 would decrease the ORD within MA 12 (Table 3.86). Therefore, habitat effectiveness would
be better than the existing condition (Table 3.86) due to the closing of 37 miles of motorized trails. The
trail closings result in an increase in big game security discussed later in this document. All roads utilized
to facilitate management activities would remain closed to the general public, therefore, not affecting the
ORD. This alternative also converts approximately 16 miles of yearlong or seasonally restricted roads to
stored status. Although these additional miles do not contribute to Hillis secure habitat, they do add
quality to the value of existing secure habitat by making areas less accessible to humans during the
hunting season.
Alternative 3 slightly increase the ORD within MA 12 (Table 3.86) due to the creation of a motorized
trail loop in the Boundary Mountain area and an access change for the #4904 trailhead. These access
proposals would result in a MA 12 habitat effectiveness of xx% as compared to the existing level of 70%.
Table 3.86 shows the PSU ORD in MAs 12 and 15-18. All alternatives are well below the Forest Plan
standard of <3.0 mi/mi2.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 224 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Security
Secure habitat for elk would remain unchanged (28.1% of the PSU) under Alternative 1.
ALTERNATIVES 2 AND 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Security
Although no roads needed to implement management activities would be open to the general public and
therefore not affecting elk security during the hunting season, temporary displacement of elk or species
avoidance during harvest activities may occur. Avoidance by elk or displacement from local areas would
be temporary and extend only through the life of the project. Secure displacement habitat exists to the
north and east of the PSU. Access to secure habitat would be maintained throughout the life of the project.
Upon completion of all activities related to this analysis, big game security in the PSU would increase by
6.9% to 35% under Alternative 2 due to the reduction of 37 miles of motorized trails. This calculation
includes the access change/creation of 1.6 (Alt 3) to 1.8 (Alt 2) miles of new open road which are largely
located within the influence zone (½ mile) of existing open roads. The overall decrease in motorized
roads or trails results in a security value, according to Hillis et al, better than KNFP standards. Also refer
to discussion of ungulate cover, previously.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Special Habitat Features
Under Alternative 1, no wetland acres would be impacted since no timber harvest would occur within the
Streamside Management Zone of any wetlands.
ALTERNATIVES 2 AND 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Special Habitat Features
Impacts to special habitat features, by alternative, are summarized in Table 3.86. Due to implementation
of specific design criteria to buffer these features, and/or the timing restrictions on management activities,
potential displacement of elk using these features is not likely to occur.
Table 3.86 displays the direct, indirect and cumulative effects to elk habitat in the Cripple PSU by
alternative.
Table 3.86 - Elk Habitat Components by Alternative
HABITAT COMPONENT

PSU Cover/Forage Ratio Summer Range (guide
60/40) (non-winter range MAs 12, 15, 16, etc.)
PSU Cover/Forage Ratio
Winter Range (MA 10 &11) (guide 60/40)
Thermal Cover %
Winter range (MA 10 & 11) (guide > 40%)
PSU Security Cover %
(guide >30%)
MA 12 Effectiveness (%)
(guide >68%) – during/after
MA 15/16 Effectiveness (%)
(guide >38%)
MA 12 ORD (mi/mi2) during implementation/
following implementation (std. < 0.75)

ALT 1

D,I = 0/0
CE = 75/25
D,I = 0/0
CE = 90/10
D,I = 0/0
CE = 58.5%
D,I = 0.0%
CE = 28.1%
D,I = 0
CE =70%
D,I = 0
CE = 49%
D,I = 0
CE = 0.73

ALT 2

D,I = -9/+9
CE = 66/34
D,I = -25%
CE = 65/35
D,I = -15.0%
CE = 43.5%
D,I = +6.9%
CE = 35%
D,I = +8
CE =78%
D,I = +5%
CE = 54%
D,I = -.17
CE = 0.56

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 225 of 410

ALT 3

D,I = -7/+7
CE = 68/32
D,I = -23.5%
CE = 66/34
D,I = -14.8%
CE = 43.7%
D,I = +5.3%
CE = 33.4%
D,I = +4
CE =74%
D,I = +2%
CE = 51%
D,I = -.09
CE = 0.64

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE
HABITAT COMPONENT

PSU Open Road Density (mi/mi2)
(MA 15,16) (std. <3.0)
# Openings > 40 acres - all summer range including
MA 12* (not NFMA regeneration harvest standard)
# Special Habitat Features impacted (if known) \1
# Movement Areas Affected in MA 12
and other summer MAs

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

D,I = 0
CE = 1.8
D,I = 0
CE = 73
D,I = 1
CE = 1
D,I = 0
CE = 14

D,I = -.23
CE = 1.57
D,I = 10
CE = 83
D,I = 1
CE = 1
D,I = +14
CE = 28

D,I = +.06
CE = 1.86
D,I = 0
CE = 73
D,I = 1
CE = 1
D,I = +19
CE = 33

D = Direct Effect
I = Indirect Effect
CE = Cumulative Effect
Project design includes requirement to buffer special habitat features if found during project layout.
*Created since 1986, considers 600 feet to cover thus combining units closer than 600 feet in adjacency that will result in openings greater
than 40 acres and calculated in ArcGIS.
**Unit 62 (regeneration cut) acres exceed 40; however, no point in this unit within MA 12 exceeds 600 feet from cover.
\1

Summary of Direct/Indirect Effects of Action Alternatives on Existing Condition
In summary, each of the action alternatives proposes activity in big game habitat. Alternatives 2 and 3
begin the process of shifting the cover/forage ratio toward one more suitable for elk with no reduction in
security. Some short-term displacement of big game may occur when harvest occurs in movement
corridors or as localized disturbance occurs during the life of the project.
The management activities and resulting changes in habitat conditions disclosed previously are likely to
result in short-term displacement effects on elk. For example, an estimated 25 miles of road may be
utilized for timber hauling at any given time, although localized within the PSU. These hauling routes
would result in approximately 8,000 acres being potentially unavailable to species like elk due to
disturbance. Elk numbers are not expected to change dramatically, however, with increased forage
availability and maintained security levels the population could show a slight increase.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Briefly, forest management practices and other human activities (e.g. hunting, wood consumption,
motorized recreation) have had influential cumulative impacts on elk and other big-game security, as well
as measurable fluctuations in cover to forage ratios. While natural events, such as wildfires, can result in
dramatic and immediate changes to big-game cover, and would continue to do so, it is the indirect effects
of forest management that has likely had the greatest impact to big-game habitat in the form of road
construction and associated uses. Use of these roads, whether for logging, recreation or hunting, decrease
elk and other big-game security (increasing vulnerability or risk of mortality), decrease habitat availability
via temporary displacement, and can increase stress levels of resident species. The formulation and
adherence to KNFP standards for open and total road densities has been and will continue to be an
important tool to mitigate the associated cumulative impacts to elk and other big-game. The current
conditions of various elk habitat components are displayed in Table 3.86.
Contrarily, forest management has also contributed positively to elk and big-game habitat. Logging and
prescribed burning have worked successfully to cycle forest cover through the many periods of
succession. These vegetation treatments have been especially important given the many years of wildfire
suppression activities, thus controlling wildfires that would have naturally kept a percentage of the forest
in early successional stages that provided the primary foraging element of big-game habitat. Continued
implementation of the wildfire use strategy utilized to help determine the agency’s reaction to wildfires is
expected to play an increasing role in future management of elk and big-game habitat in concert with
vegetation management.
EFFECTS of CURRENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 for 265 ac, FWF 536 for 195ac, FWF 52403 for 450ac,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 226 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

FWF 589 for 25ac) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for
these units would occur between 2012 and 2014 and may kill individual green trees within these units on
the drier end of the burning prescription. This loss however, should be minimal and not result in
measurable impacts to large ungulate cover.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3,360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like elk, bears, lynx, etc. are more
likely to be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home ranges. Area
elk may temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are occurring. Although these areas
may cumulatively add to disturbance on elk, there are approximately 26,000 acres within the analysis area
that are available for the species as secure habitat.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture) and blowdown salvaging (Pg. 3-5) would have minimal impacts
on elk cover due to their limited spatial scope and minimal removal of vegetation. They may cause elk to
temporarily (hours) avoid an area until the human activity has ceased however approximately 28% or
approximately 26,000 acres of the analysis area is in secure habitat.
Livestock Grazing
Although grazing allotment(s) cover several thousand acres of the PSU, competition between cattle and
resident ungulates for forage is not expected to be an issue. Domestic cattle typically utilize forage areas
readily available along roadsides and recently harvested areas that have more gentle slopes whereas
resident ungulates are more widespread across the landscape. There are four grazing allotments in the
Cripple PSU including Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek. The latter two allotments
(Cripple Horse, Canyon Creek) are slated for closure through the Forest Planning process. Warland has
been inactive for five years, however now has renewed interest from a local rancher to run 22 cow/calf
pair. Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek have been inactive for over 10 years allowing for full recuperation.
Fivemile is an active allotment that supports 17 cow/calf pair with a grazing season of June 1 thru
October 15. Much of the grazing is on private land owned by the permit holder along Fivemile Creek and
upland areas adjacent to Blue Sky Road #6271
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on elk or their habitat because treatment
of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to elk and other big game species (USDA Forest
Service 1997, 30). Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
displacing elk and other big game from site specific areas until the event is contained. Upon completion
of wildfire suppression activities, rehabilitation of these same areas can create micro-foraging areas since
these sites are seeded for soil stabilization. Suppression activities are typically subject to input from
District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats, including wallows, is considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats
(e.g. wallows) because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. Elk and other large ungulates
will typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human activities terminate, which usually comprises
of a few hours. These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in
the summer or fall of 2013. This action would not result in a loss of cover because the road already exists.
Although water restoration projects may temporarily displace elk and other wildlife from a localized area,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 227 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

they typically benefit wildlife in the long-term by increasing security, providing pulses of foraging when
seeded, or by simply stabilizing soils where certain habitat components can remain available (see Water
and Transportation Sections).
Recreation Maintenance
Actions such as road, trail, campground maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably affect elk and
other big game species. These species will typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human
activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that will continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as elk winter range, habitat effectiveness and cover, etc. have been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits
would be analyzed for potential impacts on elk at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but would add to the cumulative impact from human activities and their effects on elk.
Public Use
Other public uses such as wildlife viewing, berry picking, firewood gathering, camping, snowmobiling,
etc. have negligible impacts on elk given their limited scope (time and space). Infra-structure, such as
roads and campgrounds, that facilitate these activities have already been accounted for under the existing
condition.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a slight impact on elk cover and
security, especially on winter range where most privately owned acres occur. For road construction on
private lands, an estimated four acres per mile of cover can be expected to be lost. For home construction,
garage, parking, lawn, an estimated 1-2 acres of cover can be estimated to be lost per resident. Because
the acres are estimates and unknown, they are not reflected in Table 3.86.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in cover loss and would
cumulatively add to those disclosed impacts on NFS and COE lands under the action alternatives.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Timber sales and other management projects, such as salvaging, road work, precommercial thins and fuels
reductions, listed previously may have temporary effects on elk and other big game. These effects may
include avoidance of activity areas, increase in vulnerability during the hunting season, raised stress levels
and short-term displacement from key habitats, like foraging areas or wallows. Although these effects
may occur, they are not expected to result in lower elk populations due to the utilization of seasonal
design criteria, such as avoidance of the calving season. Contrarily, vegetation management activities can
have beneficial effects, once management activities cease, by providing additional and/or reconditioned
areas of big game foraging. Other forest activities such as hiking and berry picking are thought to have
minimal impacts to elk, typically resulting in temporary (hours) avoidance of an area.
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (spring calving and nesting) when wildlife may be more
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 228 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

sensitive to human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts to elk and
other species. There may be some situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur,
due to an overlap of forest activities, but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist
through the lifecycle of any one species, either temporally or spatially.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan
All alternatives meet KNFP direction for big game species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #12) by maintaining appropriate
amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
All alternatives, with their associated Regional Forester approval for the over 40 acre unit request, are
consistent with the KNFP (1987) by meeting KNFP or best science habitat parameters which in turn
maintain available and suitable habitat.
National Forest Management Act
The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for big game habitats.
State Elk Plan
The PSU is located in Elk Hunting Districts #101, 102, 103, 120, 122 (Salish EMU), identified in the
MFWP Statewide Elk Management Plan. The proposed project is consistent with that document by
maintaining viable populations of resident elk for hunting based on Forest Plan monitoring (USDA 2008).
Summary MIS Statement for Elk (General Forest)
Based on the analysis for elk and the other general forest habitat indicators and the KNF Conservation
Plan (Johnson 2004), habitat for general forest species should provide sufficient quality and quantity of
the diverse age classes of vegetation needed for viable populations. Since sufficient general forest habitat
is available, the populations of species using that habitat should remain viable. According to Item C-2 of
the 2008 KNFP Monitoring and Evaluation Report (FY 2007), “the aerial survey data on elk numbers
show an increase since the last five year report (FY 2002). The numbers of elk observed during surveys
increased from 1,778 in 2002 to 1,951 in 2007, with incremental increases each of the last five years. The
average number of calves per 100 cows remained about the same, going from 31 (2002) to 28 (2007). Elk
populations increased through 1990 or 1991 and then had a gradual decrease until 1997. The downward
trend appears to have reversed from the previous five year reporting period (1998-2002).” This upward
trend is indicative of a viable population although still below the fifth decade goal of 7,700 elk of the
1987 FP. This estimate is considered very conservative given many elk would not be seen via aerial
flights only.

PILEATED WOODPECKER
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Pileated woodpecker (PWP) population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified
by research for the northern Rocky Mountains are described in McClelland & McClelland (1999),
McClelland (1979 1977), McClelland et al. (1979), and Warren (1990). Research conducted in the Pacific
and Inland Northwest is described in Bull and Holthausen (1993), Bull et al. (1992), Bull (1987 1980
1975), Bull and Meslow (1977), Mellen et al. (1992), Mellen (1987), Thomas (1979), Mannan (1977),
and Jackman (1974). This information is incorporated by reference.
Pileated woodpecker occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records, the Region
One Landbird Monitoring Program (Avian Science Center, Univ. of Montana), and Forest historical data
(NRIS Wildlife). The PWP is the indicator species for old growth and snag habitat on the KNF. Habitat
for this species was modeled using all designated and undesignated old growth habitat and old growth
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 229 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

replacement habitat, which has currently been mapped for the Kootenai National Forest.
Effects Indicators
The potential population index (PPI) for PWPs on the KNF has been calculated and. based on the
assumption that all currently mapped effective and replacement old growth habitat (both designated and
undesignated) is providing suitable habitat to support nesting territories. This assumption also includes
the premise that all suitable habitat is spatially distributed across the landscape in a pattern that can be
incorporated into individual nesting territories. The procedure was based on territory sizes of PWPs as
described in research by McClelland (1977) for northwest Montana, and Thomas (1979) and Bull and
Holthausen (1993) for northeast Oregon. For the PPI analysis on the KNF replacement old growth habitat
was defined as habitat that had some old growth characteristics, but did not meet the KNFP definition of
old growth or the definition found in Green et al. (1992).
Effective old growth habitat was modeled as supporting one nesting pair per 600 acres, with replacement
old growth habitat supporting one nesting pair per 1,000 acres. The difference in territory size is based on
research that suggests that higher quality habitat can support a breeding pair with fewer acres
(McClelland 1977; Bull and Holthausen 1993). Also, allowing for larger territory sizes when habitat
becomes fragmented appears reasonable, as territory sizes up to 2,600 acres have been reported for
western Oregon (Mellen et al. 1992). Of course, there are numerous and complex interrelated factors that
influence the actual size of the home range territory (McClelland 1977).
Project impacts are evaluated based on impacts to important attributes of pileated woodpecker habitat,
primarily impacts to designated and undesignated old growth habitat. Specific features of old growth
stands evaluated for project impacts include preferred nest tree species and size, down logs (both size and
quantity), basal area (BA), and canopy closure (CC).
The overall assessment of habitat quality also accounts for potential negative factors discussed in the OG
habitat analysis that relate to patch size and connectivity, and include fragmentation, edge effect and lack
of interior habitat. Risk to firewood cutting is also evaluated. Other stands (not designated as OG) may
have one or more important attributes of old growth forests, or perhaps provide for connectivity and
interior habitat. These stands were also reviewed as part of this analysis.
The analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative effects to individuals and their habitat is the
Cripple PSU based on the known territory size for this species. The boundary for determining trend or
viability is the Kootenai National Forest.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The modeled minimum PPI for the pileated woodpecker on the KNF is 425 nesting or breeding pairs.
This is within the calculated historic range of variation for the minimum potential population index of 335
to 554 breeding pairs (Johnson 1999).
A detailed summary of OG habitat for the Cripple PSU is displayed in the Old Growth Section of this
document. This summary indicates that approximately 1,203 acres of effective OG habitat (both
designated and undesignated), and about 8,059 acres of replacement habitat (both designated and
undesignated) exist within the PSU. Existing PWP nesting territories would likely encompass a
significant portion of this old growth habitat. Based solely on the quantity of old growth habitat available,
the Cripple PSU could support about nine nesting territories (PPI) based on using 1,000 acres per territory
given the condition of the old growth available.
Breeding bird point count surveys have been conducted on the KNF since 1994. In this program, transects
consisting of multiple bird monitoring points are set up within a wide range of habitats distributed
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 230 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

geographically across the KNF. This survey technique is not specifically designed to census woodpecker
species, although all migratory and resident bird species detected by specialists trained in bird
identification are recorded at each point on each transect. The rate of detection can vary greatly from year
to year, especially for a wide-ranging species like the pileated woodpecker, that may or may not be
anywhere near a given point on a given day. During the 1994-2002 period, the PWP was tallied 184 times
at the 2,638 individual points surveyed (USFS 2003).
There are numerous snags in the Cripple PSU with sign of pileated woodpecker activity and individuals
are often seen or heard by forest personnel during field visits to the area. The presence and signs of
pileated woodpeckers remain largely undocumented because of their common occurrence.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1, natural successional processes would continue to occur throughout existing old
growth stands, and stands containing OG attributes used by pileated woodpeckers. Habitat would be
provided for PWP nesting pairs that find suitable feeding and breeding conditions provided by the
structural features and overall environment within these stands. There would be no change in PPI (Table
3.87).
Replacement old growth (ROG) habitat currently provides less suitable stand conditions for territory
occupation. Over the next several decades, in the absence of catastrophic fires or windstorms, these stands
would develop better habitat features for PWPs such as larger trees, larger snags and more down logs.
Also, higher levels of decadence would develop producing better substrate for food resources such as
carpenter ants and their larvae, one of the primary prey items for pileated woodpeckers in the Northern
Rockies (McClelland & McClelland 1999 1977) and in the Pacific and Inland Northwest (Bull et al. 1992;
Bull 1987 1975; and Bull et al. 1980).
Under Alternative 1, no active management is expected within effective or replacement old growth
habitat, with the exception of fire suppression activities. Continued disruption of the historic pattern of
frequent fires in the drier ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir cover type would continue to result in ecological
changes, such as the encroachment of Douglas-fir saplings in the understory. Eventually, these sites
would develop a higher percentage of Douglas-fir trees, snags, and down logs more suitable as foraging
habitat for pileated woodpeckers.
Over the next several decades, this successional trend may result in a reduction in quality PWP nest trees
(ponderosa pine), since Douglas-fir was not found to be important for pileated woodpecker nest cavity
excavation in the northern Rocky Mountains (McClelland & McClelland 1999 1977), in northeast Oregon
(Bull 1987 1975; Thomas 1979), or in British Columbia (Harestad & Keisker 1989).
Under this alternative, the impact of the existing road system on snags, an important attribute of the
pileated woodpecker territory, would remain as described under the analysis for snags and old growth
habitat. The effects of edge on PWP habitat from adjacent regeneration units would also remain as
described under the old growth analysis.
ALTERNATIVE 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Impacts to OG habitat are disclosed in the Old Growth Section. These effects can translate to potential
impacts to the PWP as loss of nesting and foraging habitat or reduced habitat quality.
Habitat impacts from the action alternatives would not result in the loss of old growth in any established
category. However, they would result in an increased edge effect of 250 acres (all categories) in
Alternative 2, and 241 acres in Alternative 3 due to proposed adjacent harvest acres (Table 3.80).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 231 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Both Alternatives 2 and 3 also propose approximately 666 feet of road (system or temporary) thru or
adjacent to old growth. Although these roads would remain closed to the public or decommissioned after
management activities, they would result in the loss of snags within the PSU. This loss has been
accounted for in the analysis for the snag resource, previously discussed.
Under Alternative 2, treatments to reduce the vertical structure within both designated and undesignated
OG are proposed in approximately 137 acres in conjunction with vegetation management and prescribed
fire to assist in reducing fuel loadings. An additional 1,326 acres of prescribed burning, without pretreating the vertical structure, is proposed in old growth. These activities have the potential to both reduce
and create PWP feeding and nesting habitats. The vertical structure treatments and fuel treatments
however, are not expected to affect the canopy closure, tree species present, basal area of the large
diameter trees, nor the overall snag capacity of these stands. Likewise, these proposed management
activities would not affect the continuity of PWP habitat or old growth stands given that no mature timber
would be removed from old growth stands.
Alternative 3 was designed to meet the intent of Forest Supervisor Paul Bradford’s letter of April 13,
2007, in that project analyses must include an alternative in addition to the no-action alternative, which
does not propose any treatments (including prescribed fire) in any type of old growth.
Conversely, in Alternative 2, fuel treatments should assist in promoting tree growth by decreasing
competition and contribute to the large tree component of treated dry-site old growth stands.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 37 miles
of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 miles of seasonally or yearlong
restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would benefit any adjacent old
growth stands by making them less susceptible to firewood cutting. Contrarily, Alternative 3 proposes to
convert approximately 1.7 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of
undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, any
impact to adjacent old growth stands has likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due to
the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to any old growth in
these areas are not anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to old growth may result in noxious weed invasion. The project design should
include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g. washing equipment, weed spraying). These activities
would not remove old growth attributes, such as snags, unless deemed unsafe to recreation users/campers.
These activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on Corp lands included
in the PSU boundary. There are no NFS old growth stands adjacent to any COE activities so no impacts
to this resource, such as edge effect, are anticipated.
Under all action alternatives, project activities (e.g. falling and yarding) are likely to cause pileated
woodpeckers to, at least temporarily, move away from the disturbed areas.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
The past reduction of functional OG as well as snags, as previously discussed, via forest management
actions and natural occurrences have contributed cumulatively to the existing habitat conditions for the
pileated woodpecker. Over time, these cumulative impacts have likely reduced both nesting and feeding
habitat as well as the number of nesting territories within the PSU and on the Forest. Based on the
expected low level of impacts to old growth acres from the action alternatives, (Table 3.80) the PPI is not
expected to change as seen in Table 3.87.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 232 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Table 3.87 - Potential Population Index by Alternative
ANALYSIS AREA

Cripple PSU
Forestwide

EXISTING PPI

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

9
429

9
429

9
429

9
429

EFFECTS of CURRENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this species are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
the treatment of FWF Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and would alter the
understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives on old growth. No projects under the
Forestwide Blowdown EA are planned within the East Reservoir analysis area /Cripple PSU at this time.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated OG would not reduce the amount and distribution of old growth below
KNFP requirements. However, due to cumulative edge effects (Table 3.80) there may be reduced old
growth quality for PWPs, such as resulting in less interior habitat and more edge where predation is more
likely to occur or where noxious weed invasions are more likely to become established. However, given
the level of impact and the quantity of old growth in the PSU, this effect should be minimal and would
diminish in approximately 50 years (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991; Russell et al. 2000).
Private lands in the Cripple PSU were assumed to not provide any old growth, based on past harvest
practices.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning (5,563 ac), Christmas tree cutting, boughs collection, pine cone
collecting would maintain the designated management level of old growth by avoidance. In the instance
where existing old growth is burned or blown down, replacement old growth will be designated to
account for this loss.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of old growth habitat,
snags or down woody debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive. Grazing
cattle predominantly move along road systems and within past harvest units where an abundance of
forage can be found.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in snags and down woody debris because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
impacts to old growth habitat and the pileated woodpecker. Conversely, wildfire suppression also serves
to preserve existing old growth habitat. Suppression activities are typically subject to input from District
Resource Advisors, and protection of special habitats, including old growth, is considered. However, if
cumulative effects to old growth habitat result in the habitat no longer functioning as old growth,
additional old growth habitat would be designated.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect old growth and other
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 233 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

specialized habitats (e.g. snags, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation
removal. These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the
summer or fall of 2012. The standing tree and snag component would only be affected if considered a
hazard to road users. These activities would not result in any change to the quantity of old growth, thus no
adverse cumulative effects on the pileated woodpecker would be expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the
cumulative impact on old growth and the pileated woodpecker because maintenance of these facilities do
not typically involve removal of old growth elements such as large trees or snags unless deemed to be a
safety hazard to forest users. In this situation, the removal of a tree or snag is considered negligible.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on resources such as old growth have been included under the existing condition and would have no
additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on old
growth and the PWP at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from old growth along open road corridors and
these acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other forest use activities such
as mushroom and berry picking, camping, hunting, Christmas tree cutting, bough collection, etc. have
little to no measurable impact on old growth and the PWP because they are largely non-consumptive or
rapidly re-established and would not contribute to the cumulative effect on this resource.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. However, these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old
growth type on NFS lands and therefore would have no edge effect on old growth stands. Section 2??
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Alternative 1 would not measurably contribute any cumulative effects. The Forestwide PPI (Table 3.87)
reflects cumulative changes from each alternative and all past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions.
Only 25 acres of prescribed burning under FWF 598 would occur in old growth under this alternative.
Alternatives 2or 3 would not measurably contribute to cumulative effects on PWP habitat. Other planned
management activities, such as prescribed burning in old growth under Alternative 2 is expected to both
create and reduce woodpecker feeding and nesting habitat equally. The potential for firewood cutters to
reduce PWP habitat coinciding with old growth habitat along forest roads was previously accounted for in
the discussion of old growth. Likewise, the impacts of timber harvesting immediately adjacent to old
growth areas, has also been disclosed under the old growth section. No other current or reasonably
foreseeable activities occurring within the PSU (Pg. 3-5) are expected to impact this resource because
most are prohibited from occurring within old growth areas.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 234 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Based on the analysis for pileated woodpecker, the MIS for old growth, snags and down wood, and the
KNF Conservation Plan (Johnson 2004), habitat for old growth forest species and cavity habitat users
should be provided in sufficient quality and quantity to meet the needs for viable populations. Because
sufficient old growth forest, and snag and down wood habitat is available, the populations of species
using that habitat should remain viable.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan
All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for old growth (see old growth section). All
alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for snags and down wood (see snag and down wood
section)
All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations (FP II-1 #7) by maintaining appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in
order to maintain species viability based on best science.
National Forest Management Act
The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for old growth.

OTHER SPECIES of INTEREST
NORTHERN GOSHAWK
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Goshawk population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are
described in McGrath et.al. (2003), Brewer et al. (2009) and Reynolds et al. (1992).That information is
incorporated by reference. Goshawk occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation
records and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife). Goshawk habitat was modeled using TSMRS
vegetation data filtered through a series of queries of associated habitat elements such as forest types,
aspect, slope and elevation (see project file). The potential population index (PPI) (habitat acres divided
by average territory acres) was calculated using 5,400 acres as the average goshawk pair territory
(Reynolds et al. 1992). Therefore, the analysis boundary for project direct, indirect and cumulative
impacts to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple PSU containing over 92,000 acres of forest stands.
The boundary for determining trend or viability is the Kootenai National Forest.
Management Status
In 2004, the Region reevaluated the set of species that would be placed on the Sensitive Species List. A
standardized process to evaluate each species was followed. The goshawk was not placed on the 2004
sensitive species list based on the criteria used. It was added to the list in 2005 (Kimbell 3/31/2005)
because it had been previously petitioned for listing under ESA, remained a focal point of project appeals,
and was a species of special interest with certain segments of the public.
The goshawk was to remain on the list until the Region completed new data collection and evaluation, at
which time its status was to be reconsidered. The work of Samson (2005) and a Region-wide survey
(2006) provided the data and evaluation on which to base reconsideration of the goshawk status as
sensitive. Based on these works, the Forest Wildlife Biologists across the Region asked the Regional
Forester to remove the northern goshawk from the Region 1 sensitive species list in March of 2007. In
July of 2007, the Regional Forester responded to the biologists request stating: “The Forest Service
Manual (2670.5) states that Sensitive Species are those for which there is a significant current or
predicted downward trend in population numbers/density and a similar downward trend in habitat
capability that would reduce distribution of the species. Regional data collection and analysis
demonstrates that neither condition exists; therefore, the species no longer meets the definition for
“sensitive.” Due to this decision, the northern goshawk is no longer listed as a “sensitive” species for the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 235 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

KNF. The species is being addressed under this proposal due to concerns raised during public scoping.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Goshawk observation and monitoring data indicates that goshawks are utilizing at least portions of the
Cripple PSU. Surveys conducted in the summer of 2011 confirmed their presence in the PSU with one
new active nest located and mapped. Johnson (1999) shows goshawk presence confirmed in all eight
planning units on the KNF. At the end of 2008, Forest survey records show 37 nest sites, with four sites
no longer in use. This information included the results of surveys conducted on the KNF from 2006-2008
under an agreement with the Natural Heritage Program (Johnson 2008).
Goshawk habitat modeling identifies approximately 57,006 acres of primary (nesting) goshawk habitat in
the Cripple PSU based on the habitat parameters used for the modeling (see Project File). Brewer et al.
(2009) summarized reports from various research projects that indicate goshawks utilize a wide range of
habitats for hunting including: forest edges with riparian, clearcuts and sage, as well as non-forested
openings, dense forests and open forests. Based on these findings, the Cripple PSU may provide as much
as 64,569 acres of suitable habitat. Since most goshawk populations are thought to be limited by available
food sources (Brewer et al. 2009), the amount of habitat available for goshawks to forage becomes
increasingly important. A conservation assessment by Samson (2005) also suggests the importance of
goshawk foraging habitats and the varying age classes and structures suitable for a variety of prey species.
Based on the average goshawk pair territory and the modeled nesting habitat acres, the PPI for the Cripple
PSU is 10 goshawk pairs. Using the nesting (modeled) habitat acres from Johnson (Ibid), the minimum
PPI for the KNF would be 139 goshawk pairs. The most recent data show 37 known or suspected pairs
and an additional ten known individual goshawks on the KNF(KNF goshawk data). The confirmations of
the nest sites found in the Cripple PSU and on the Three Rivers Ranger District in 2011 will update this
information.
Research shows that while goshawks use structural components found in old growth (e.g. large diameter
trees, high crown closure) those same components are also found in other age classes of forested habitat.
Approximately eleven percent (8,533 acres) of the Cripple PSU, below 5,550 feet, is made up of MA 13
old-growth in both the designated effective and replacement categories. Additional information on oldgrowth conditions and its management indicator species, the pileated woodpecker, can be found in those
respective sections.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Table 3.88 summarizes the cumulative changes in habitat acres and PPI due to each alternative.
Table 3.88 - Nesting Habitat and Cumulative PPI Remaining by Alternative
Nesting Acres – Cripple PSU
(% change)
PPI - Project Area Pair Territories
(% change)
All Habitat Acres (Forest-wide)
(% change)
PPI - Forestwide Pair Territories
(% change)
Foraging Acres - Cripple PSU
(% change)1

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

57,006
(0%)
10
(0%)
752,2962
(0%)
139
(0%)
64,569
(0%)

49,580
(-13.0%)
9
(-1%)
744,870
(-1%)
137
(-2%)
56,176
(-13.0%)

50,411
(-11.6%)
9
(-1%)
745,701
(-.88%)
138
(-1%)
57,010
(-11.7%)

1

Foraging acres modeled are not mutually exclusive from nesting habitat acres affected. FS managed lands equate to
approximately 78,607 of the acres within the Cripple PSU. Timber stands treated by prescribed burn only were considered to
maintain suitable habitat for goshawks.
2
approximately 203 Forest-wide acres are foreseeable to be treated by the State of Montana within the Cripple PSU which
would equate to approximately 3.8% of a given territory.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 236 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 (no-action) would have no immediate direct or indirect effects on the northern goshawk or
its habitat due to the lack of action. However, lack of at least prescribe burning, over portions of the
territory, would likely result in poorer quality foraging habitat due to the natural maturing of the forest
canopy. This effect could result outside of any natural vegetation altering occurrences such as wildfires,
insect infestations, etc. General nesting habitat would continue to naturally develop under Alternative 1.
The East Reservoir proposal as described under Alternative 2 would alter a newly discovered (summer
2011) goshawk nesting site based on field surveys and monitoring. Details of alterations by treatment unit
are displayed in the accompanying process paper (Volume U of the Project File). Briefly, Alternative 2
would propose to treat approximately 1,913 acres within the established territory (based on Reynolds et
al. 1992) by some type of timber harvest including precommercial thinning and help maintain habitat via
prescribe underburning on approximately 1,519 acres. The timber harvesting would bring the territory
above (to 50.7%) suggested management levels according to Reynolds (ibid) which recommends to
manage no more than 40% of suitable habitat within a territory and to maintain at least 60% of the
territory in mature/late seral forest stands while Alternative 3 slightly below or better than
recommendation at 35%.
Of general modeled habitat, both action alternatives would alter potential goshawk habitat as disclosed in
Table 3.88. As can be seen, of the foraging habitat within the PSU, Alternative 2 would alter
approximately 8,393 acres of foraging habitat leaving 56,176 acres following implementation. Vegetation
alterations would largely impact prey species associated with more dense forest canopies including
squirrels. Alternative 2 would alter 7,426 acres (not exclusive of foraging acres) of goshawk nesting acres
making the goshawks and their young more susceptible to predation and competition from other raptors
like the red-tail hawk, therefore resulting in unsuitable nesting habitat. Effects are similar, though on less
acreage, for Alternative 3.
Alternative 3 would alter approximately 7,559 acres of foraging habitat, within the PSU. Indirectly, these
habitat alterations may temporarily displace goshawks and/or their prey species from currently suitable
habitat. Indirect effects on goshawks should abate after approximately 15 to 25 years depending upon the
growing site. Impacts to prey could diminish as recent as five years following habitat alterations
depending upon the species of prey (e.g. game birds, some songbirds, rodents, etc.)
Also under Alternative 2, the new road construction (9.3 miles) and temporary road
construction/reconstruction (approximately 4.26 miles), especially when occurring adjacent to suitable
nesting habitat, could have similar effects on goshawks as those timber harvest effects, described
previously, resulting in competition for nesting habitat and predation of young by other raptors. Road
storage or decommissioning would have long-term beneficial effects to goshawks as these prisms return
to forest cover decreasing forest edge effect.
Alternative 2 proposes motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 37 miles of
motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted
roads into an intermittent stored status and remove 9.3 miles of road from the landscape. Alternative 3
proposes motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 27 miles of motorized trails to
non-motorized and covert approximately 17.6 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an
intermittent stored status and remove 12.4 miles of road from the landscape. All of these actions would
benefit any adjacent goshawk habitat by making them less susceptible to firewood cutting and by
lowering human disturbance levels.
Contrarily, both action alternatives propose to convert approximately 1.6 to 1.8 miles of seasonally
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 237 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use.
Although this is a legal access change, any impact to adjacent goshawk habitat has likely already occurred
from illegal firewood gathering due to the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir.
Additional impacts to any goshawks and mature forest stands in these areas are not anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to goshawk habitat may result in noxious weed invasion. The project design
should include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g. washing equipment, weed spraying). These
activities would not remove habitat attributes, such as snags, unless deemed unsafe to recreation
users/campers. These activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on Corp lands included
in the PSU boundary. There are no known goshawk nests adjacent to any COE activities so no impacts to
this resource, such as edge effect, are anticipated.
Under all action alternatives, project activities (e.g. falling and yarding) within a half-mile of known nests
are likely to cause goshawks to, at least temporarily, move away from the disturbed areas.
In summary, the proposed action may disturb individuals and/or their habitat, but would not contribute to
a trend toward federal listing or loss of species viability for the northern goshawk. This determination is
based on:
1) Known nests have been avoided by the proposed alternatives;
2) All alternatives maintain the existing level of all categories of old growth within the PSU;
3) All alternatives maintain goshawk habitat above 50% in mature stands which is close to management
recommendations of Reynolds 1992;
4) The distribution of habitat needed for viable populations on a Forest level would not be affected;
5) based on Region 1 reviews (Brewer et al. 2009; Samson 2005) habitat for the northern goshawk is
readily available and well-distributed and there is no evidence that goshawk numbers are declining
based on increases in the amount, distribution and connectivity of forested habitat since European
settlement; decline in the level of timber harvesting in the region; and the natural succession of forested
habitats.
For disturbance to goshawk habitat falling within all old growth types within the Cripple PSU please refer
to the Old Growth Resource Section of this document and associated maps.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Cumulative changes in habitat and PPI levels are displayed in Table 3.88. The existing condition includes
the results from all past activities. Alternative 1 includes all reasonably foreseeable projects that were able
to be modeled. Based on the modeled acres that are suitable as goshawk habitat versus the land area under
federal management, it can be deduced that past activities and natural incidences of wildfires have
contributed to cumulative altering of suitable and available goshawk habitat. As previously stated,
approximately 64,569 acres or 82% of the federally managed land in the Cripple PSU (includes nesting
acres), are currently modeled as suitable goshawk foraging habitat. When comparing this figure to the
average recommended age class distribution for VRUs 3 through 9, where the majority of northern
goshawk habitat would be found on the KNF, the Cripple PSU is within the range (roughly 20 to 95% for
these VRUs age classes greater than 101 years old) of historic vegetation patterns (USDA, Gautreaux
1999 p169). The cumulative effect becomes more evident when modeling potential goshawk nesting
habitat, which is currently approximately 72.5% (or 57, 006 of 78,607 ac), falling slightly lower in this
historic range of availability. The effect, also becomes more evident, with the amount of MA 13 (old
growth) remaining in the PSU. Therefore, proposed long-term vegetation management benefits should
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 238 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

outweigh immediate impacts to existing goshawk nesting habitat.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect goshawks are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There is 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
the treatment of FWF Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and would alter the
understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives. These types of projects have the
potential to reduce the down wood component or element of mature stands thereby potentially impacting
associated species that provide prey for goshawks.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated OG, that can serve as goshawk habitat, would not reduce the amount and
distribution of old growth below KNFP requirements. However, due to cumulative edge effects (Table
3.80) there may be reduced OG quality for some plant and animal species, such as resulting in less
interior habitat and more edge where predation is more likely to occur or where noxious weed invasions
are more likely to become established. However, given the level of impact and the quantity of old growth
in the PSU, this effect should be minimal and would diminish in approximately 50 years (Russell and
Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991; Russell et al. 2000). Private lands in the Cripple PSU were assumed to not
provide any old growth, based on past harvest practices.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning (140 ac in suitable habitat), Christmas tree cutting, bough
collection, pine cone collecting would maintain the designated management level of old growth and other
mature forest stands by avoidance. In the instance where existing old growth is burned or blown down,
replacement old growth will be designated to account for this loss.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile Allotment, Warland Allotment) would not result in a change of old growth or
mature habitats that provides nesting areas for this species, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead
or alive. Additionally, changes to the grass/herbaceous layer of vegetation would not affect goshawk
habitat characteristics and generally, due to the lack of ungulate forage in old growth and mature forest
stands, cattle grazing is typically not an issue.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on goshawks or their habitat because
treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to many species or their prey (USDA
Forest Service 1997, 30). No loss or change in specific habitats (e.g. old growth, mature forests),
including snags and down woody debris inhabited by prey species would result from this activity because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in disturbed areas. Typically,
approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
With the direction to suppress all wildland fires on NFS lands, construction of firelines, safety zones and
other control structures could impact individuals on a site-specific basis. Avoidance of known goshawk
nests would be attempted during suppression efforts but some impacts may still occur. Due to the
unpredictable nature of wildfires, contributions of fire suppression to the cumulative effect on this species
can only be surmised but may certainly include temporary disturbance and loss of individual snags and or
potential nest trees. Also refer to cumulative effects on old growth.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 239 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect goshawks and
specialized habitats (e.g. snags, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation
removal. Although road restoration and maintenance projects (brushing, blading, gate repairs, culvert
replacement, etc.) may temporarily displace goshawks from a localized area or impact individuals, they
typically benefit the species in the long-term, especially if the projects involve closing previously open
road systems (refer to road storage in Transportation/Hydrology Sections. Also refer to cumulative effects
on old growth). These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in
the summer or fall of 2013. The standing tree and snag component of goshawk habitat would only be
affected if considered a hazard to road users. These activities would not result in any change to the
quantity of old growth, thus no adverse cumulative effects would be expected to that resource.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites have the potential to remove
nesting and foraging trees for goshawks if they are close to a trail or road and present a safety hazard.
Effects would include removing site-specific, individual trees, and would not be expected to contribute
measurably to the cumulative effect on the northern goshawk.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Operations of
outfitter/guides would not result in any change to general and specialized goshawk habitats (e.g. old
growth or mature forests, snags or down woody debris), as they do not involve the harvest of trees. There
would be no cumulative effects to goshawks or their habitats associated with these activities other than
possible temporary and local avoidance of an area due to the presence of humans. Ground disturbance on
resources such as old growth and mature forest stands have been included under the existing condition
and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for
potential impacts on goshawks at that time.
There are no known land exchanges planned within the PSU at this time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands.
Public Use
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, and berry picking)
versus fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (nesting, rearing) when goshawks may be more sensitive
to human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts. There may be some
situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur, due to an overlap of forest activities,
but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist through the lifecycle of the raptor,
either temporally or spatially.
Other forest product activities occurring presently and typically on an annual basis are the gathering of
pine cones, bough collection and commercial gathering of Christmas trees. These activities occur
throughout the PSU, and have little-to-no effect on the landscape due to the unspecific nature of the use
and the low impact on the resources (foot traffic, hand tools). Additionally, Christmas trees are harvested
from existing regeneration units, so this activity would have no cumulative effect on the specialized
habitats of goshawks, such as old growth and riparian areas.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 240 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands. Any cumulative effects to goshawks would be partially
dependent on the duration (seasonal versus year-round) of use of these parcels and homes. Anticipated
effects include species displacement, nest failure, habitat alteration and/or habitat loss.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. While these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped OG type
on NFS lands and therefore would have no edge effect on old growth stands, they are in mature forest
stands. The regeneration of these stands would reduce potential goshawk habitat by 198 acres. These
acres are not reflected in Table 3.88 because they would not occur on NFS lands. The disturbance
associated with this activity would likely cause goshawks to avoid adjacent areas during implementation.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Direct, indirect and cumulative impacts on potential goshawk habitat are disclosed in Table 3.88 and
show slight reductions within the Cripple PSU and on the KNF. However, the proposed activities would
not affect the 10% standard for old growth at either the PSU or KNF scale. The most recent Forestwide
old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet elevation is designated for
old growth management. Overall, the habitat reductions from the East Reservoir Project are minimal and
would not result in habitat fragmentation nor inhibit this species’ from reproducing and maintaining its
viability on the KNF.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain a minimum of 10% old growth below
5,500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or compartment, or a combination of compartments
(Kootenai Supplement No 85; supplement to FSM 2432.22).
• Based on April 26th, 2004 direction (Castaneda 2004), old growth will be analyzed at the PSU scale.
After implementation of the action alternatives, the Cripple PSU would have 11.2% designated old
growth below 5,500 feet elevation. In addition, 1,147 acres of undesignated old growth would remain.
The most recent Forestwide assessment as documented in the KNFP Monitoring and Evaluation Report
(USDA Forest Service 2011) shows that the KNF has 11.6% old growth designated (includes both
effective and replacement). The KNFP established that maintaining 10% of OG habitat is sufficient to
support viable populations of old-growth dependent species (Vol 1 II-1 7; III-54; Vol 2 A17).
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations (FP II-1 #7) by maintaining appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in
order to maintain species viability based on best science.
National Forest Management Act
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for old growth.
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.”

NORTH AMERICAN BEAVER
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
American beaver population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships are described in
www.nhptv.org/natureworks/beaver; www.wikipedia.org/wiki/beaver; Allred (1980); Loates and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 241 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Hvenegaard (2008).That information is incorporated by reference. Beaver occurrence data comes from
recent District wildlife observation records and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife). Beaver habitat was
modeled and noted during field review of the analysis area, via information request from FS personnel,
and later mapped for display purposes as part of the Project File. Defensible territories were assumed to
be similar in size found in research, being at least 1km in length (0.62 miles) and in low gradient streams
(<6 percent). The analysis boundary for project and cumulative disturbance to individuals and their
habitat is the Cripple PSU. The boundary for determining trend or viability is the KNF.
Management Status
In the State of Montana, the beaver is considered a species that is hunted, trapped or fished and a
furbearer. In Montana as well as most of the northwest United States, beaver populations have rebounded
well from their bleak numbers of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Beavers have become so numerous in
Montana that the State no longer requires trappers to tag or report them as in the past; therefore, a
reasonable estimate on current population numbers is unavailable (Thier, pers. comm. 2011). Beavers are
also not a listed species under Endangered Species Act (ESA) nor do they have any special status on the
KNF or Northern Region of the Forest Service. The North American beaver is being analyzed for this
project due to public concerns raised during the initial scoping process.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
As stated previously, population numbers of beaver within the State of Montana are currently unknown.
However, some information suggests that current beaver numbers in North America are believed to range
between 10 and 15 million (www.wikipedia.org). During field reviews of the Cripple PSU or East
Reservoir analysis area, crews documented two active beaver colonies and several of past beaver use.
They are considered a keystone species in an ecosystem by creating wetland habitats used by a variety of
species including fish. Beaver dams and created wetlands can have both beneficial and negative impacts
on other resources such and fisheries and hydrology (refer to the Fisheries and Hydrologic analyses for
associated effects) by altering water levels and stream courses, however, their functions are largely
beneficial to shaping the landscape and expanding wetland habitats. Other effects of beaver activity and
dams include; increased water surface area, regulation of stream flow, newly created water reservoir,
filtration system for low density particulates, and simply creating a diversity of wildlife habitats (Allred
1980). Modeling stream gradients (<6%) within the Cripple PSU indicated that approximately 49 linear
stream miles may be suitable and available for beaver occupancy.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Table 3.89 summarizes the cumulative changes in habitat acres due to each alternative.
Table 3.89 - Habitat Changes by Alternative
Habitat miles – Cripple PSU (% change)
Number of suitable habitat crossing by roads in
the PSU removing riparian veg.
Estimated number of acres removed by stream
crossing (1/4 ac per crossing)
D = direct effect

ALT 1

ALT.2

ALT. 3

49 (0%)
D, I = 0
C = 28
D, I = 0 ac
C = 7 ac

49 (0%)
D, I = 0
C = 28
D, I = 0 ac
C = 7ac

49 (0%)
D, I = 0
C = 28
D, I = 0 ac
C = 7ac

I = indirect effect

C = cumulative effect

ALTERNATIVES 1, 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
All alternatives, including the action alternatives would not result in any direct or indirect effects on
existing beaver habitat. No additional road crossings which would disturb or remove foraging habitat
would be constructed. Likewise, none of the alternatives propose timber harvesting in riparian areas
which would also reduce foraging and vegetation suitable for dam construction. All alternatives would
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 242 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

allow natural progression of beaver habitat to occur.
Under Alternatives 2 and 3, the new (9.3 to 8.1 miles) and temporary (4.3 to 4.1 miles) miles of road
construction, especially when occurring adjacent to suitable beaver habitat, could expose the species to
increased trapping due to increased human access. Contrarily, road decommissioning or storage would
have long-term beneficial effects to beavers as these prisms return to forest cover decreasing the access
effect.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 to 27
miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 to 17.6 miles of seasonally or
yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would benefit any
beavers by making them less susceptible to trapping. Contrarily, Alternatives 2 and 3 each propose to
convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of
undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. However, these roads are located along
Koocanusa Reservoir where suitable beaver habitat is largely absent.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) are not likely to directly or indirectly impact beavers due to their location in reference to known
beaver use areas. These recreation areas are along Koocanusa Reservoir where suitable beaver habitat is
largely absent. These activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
in the PSU boundary. There are no known beaver sites adjacent to any COE activities so no impacts to
this resource, such as habitat loss, are anticipated.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
North American beaver populations reached their low point during the late 19th century due to overtrapping for their fur which was used to make clothing and hats (www.wikipedia.org). Since then, the
beaver, through conservation efforts, have made a complete recovery and have been documented on every
district of the KNF (Deavours 2011 pers. comm. with KNF biologist; various emails). Forest activities
including timber harvesting and the associated road building have likely contributed to the cumulative
disturbance on beavers and their habitat. Forest road systems provide easier trapper access to beaver
populations and increase waterflows can result in the weakening or loss of beaver dams. Overall,
however, the disturbances to beavers from forest practices are negligible compared to the fur trapping
days of the 19th century. Today, beaver sign is fairly common in the PSU with efforts to increase their
populations continuing on the Libby District.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect the North
American beaver are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
No blowdown projects are planned within the East Reservoir analysis area/Cripple PSU at this time.
These types of projects would have the potential to reduce the down wood component or element of
riparian stands thereby potentially impacting associated species. Also please refer to vegetation
management activities under Other Lands.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of known beaver habitat.
Cattle grazing and beaver foraging areas do not overlap in content. Some resource damage can occur due
to cattle grazing along stream courses but these are very localized and typically corrected through
additional fencing and consulted with the forest range specialist.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 243 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Noxious Weed Treatment
Beavers away from wetlands or home sites could accidently be sprayed with herbicides being utilized
along road systems, however the chances of incidentally spraying the mammal would be extremely low
based on their periods of activity. The effect of being sprayed is accounted for in the application
rates/toxicity and chemicals disclosed in the 2007 KNF Invasive Plant Management FEIS (pp3-72 to 373). Any herbicide application within the Cripple PSU and near riparian areas would be consistent with
that document and its range of effects on small mammal species. Typically, approximately 200 acres are
treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
With the direction to suppress all wildland fires on NFS lands, construction of firelines, safety zones and
other control structures could impact individuals on a site-specific basis. Avoidance of known beaver
dams and riparian areas would be attempted during suppression efforts but some impacts may still occur.
Due to the unpredictable nature of wildfires, contributions of fire suppression to the cumulative effect on
this species can only be surmised but may include loss of riparian food sources, reduction of riparian
down wood cover and increase sediment into areas streams due to emergency fireline construction near
streams.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect beavers and
specialized habitats (e.g. riparian food sources, dam sites, down woody debris) because they generally do
not result in vegetation removal. Although road restoration and maintenance projects (brushing, blading,
gate repairs, culvert replacement, etc.) may temporarily disturb beavers in localized areas they typically
benefit the species in the long-term, especially if the projects involve closing previously open road
systems (refer to road decommissioning in Transportation/Hydrology Sections). The Koocanusa Marina
re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013 would not impact beavers due to
avoidance of suitable habitat.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites has little potential to disturb
beavers or their habitat largely due to avoidance. Some trails may follow closely or cross stream courses
so disturbance could occur but this impact would be very limited in scope in both time and space.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Operations of
outfitter/guides would not result in any change to general and specialized beaver habitats (e.g. riparian
areas) by avoidance. There would be no cumulative effects to beavers or their habitats associated with
these activities other than possible temporary and local avoidance of an area due to the presence of
humans. Ground disturbance (e.g. stream crossings, road construction) on this resource has been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits
would be analyzed for potential impacts on beavers at that time if this species is an issue.
There are no known land exchanges, which could involve riparian habitats, planned within the PSU at this
time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of riparian habitat nor any stream courses.
Public Use
Other forest product activities occurring presently and typically on an annual basis are the gathering of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 244 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

pine cones, boughs and commercial gathering of Christmas trees. These activities occur throughout the
PSU, and have little-to-no effect on the landscape due to the unspecific nature of the use and the low
impact on the resources (foot traffic, hand tools). Additionally, Christmas trees are harvested from
existing regeneration units, so this activity would have no cumulative effect on the specialized habitats of
beavers, such as streams and associated riparian areas.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. While most of these activities avoid stream side riparian areas and
associated beaver food sources, some impacts to these resources could occur. Anticipated effects include
species displacement, breeding failure, habitat alteration and/or habitat loss but area outside of FS
jurisdiction. Occasionally the State of Montana will trap beavers considered a nuisance on private lands
and relocate them to NFS lands in lieu of removing them from the ecosystem.
Other Lands
The State of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. These acres contain one mapped stream course and associated riparian area that
may facilitate beaver travel across the PSU. The State would have to comply with state management
direction for timber harvesting near streams, therefore any potential habitat within this block of state land
would be protected by stream management zones. State of Montana activities on this parcel may disturb
any beavers in the area or cause them to temporarily avoid the area.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (breeding, rearing) when beavers may be more sensitive to
human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts. There may be some
situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur, due to an overlap of forest activities,
but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist through the lifecycle of the beaver,
either temporally or spatially.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations (FP II-1 #7) by maintaining appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in
order to maintain species viability based on best science.
• All Alternatives are consistent with KNFP riparian standards and guidelines (FP Vol 1 II-28 thru 33) as
amended by INFS and by creation of SMZs.
National Forest Management Act
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.”
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for vegetation treatments in
or near riparian habitats as well as State SMZs.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 245 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

SENSITIVE SPECIES
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The sensitive species analysis in this document meets the requirements for a biological evaluation as
outlined in FSM 2672.42.
Sensitive species are administratively designated by the Regional Forester (FSM 2670.5; updated 2011)
and managed under the authority of the National Forest Management Act (NFMA). FSM 2670.22
requires the maintenance of viable populations of native and desired non-native species and to avoid
actions that may cause a species to become threatened or endangered.
The NFMA (36 CFR 219.19) directs the FS to “provide for diversity of plant and animal communities
based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet overall multiple-use
objectives.” [16 U.S.C. 1604(g) (3) (B)] Providing ecological conditions to support diversity of native
plant and animal species in the planning area satisfies the statutory requirements [(36 C.F.R. 219.10(b)].
The Forest Service’s focus for meeting the requirements of NFMA and its implementing regulations is on
assessing habitat to provide for diversity of species.
The KNF Land and Resource Management Plan (1987) establishes forestwide goals, objectives,
standards, guidelines and monitoring requirements. Direction for sensitive species includes determining
the status of sensitive species and providing for their environmental needs as necessary to prevent them
from becoming endangered (FP II-1). The KNFP also requires the maintenance of diverse age-classes of
vegetation for viable populations of all existing native, vertebrate wildlife species (FP II-1).
Table 3.90 - Sensitive Wildlife Species on the Kootenai National Forest
(Kimbell 2004 2005; Weldon 2011)
SENSITIVE SPECIES

STATUS IN ANALYSIS AREA

COMMENTS**

K
K
K

Analyzed for this project
Analyzed for this project
Analyzed for this project

NS

1

NS
S
K
NS
NS
NS
NS

1
Analyzed for this project
Analyzed for this project
1
1
2
1

K

Analyzed for this project

K
K

Analyzed for this project
Analyzed for this project

Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus)
Bighorn sheep (Ovis Canadensis)
Black Backed Woodpecker (Picoides arcticus)
Coeur d’Alene Salamander
(Plethodon vandykei idahoensis)
Common loon (Gavia immer)
Fisher (Martes pinnanti)
Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus)
Harlequin Duck (Histrionicus histrionicus)
Northern Bog Lemming (Synaptomys borealis)
Northern Leopard Frog (Rana pipiens)
Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus)
Townsend’s Big-eared Bat
(Corynorhinus townsendii)
Western Toad (Bufo boreas)
Gray Wolf (Canis lupus)

K = This species is known to occur within the project area.
S = Species is suspected to occur within project area based on historical records, however recent sightings are scarce
primarily due to lack of documentation and formal surveys..
NS = Species is not suspected to occur within the project area, and is dropped from further evaluation.
1 = Suitable habitat does not occur in the analysis area
2 = Only known location on Rexford Ranger District north of the Cripple PSU.

BALD EAGLE
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Eagle population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 246 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

described in USDI U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USDI 1995), USDI 1999, Montana Bald Eagle
Working Group (MBEWG) 1991, MBEWG 1994 and FWS 2007a. That information is incorporated by
reference. Eagle occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records, Forest historical
data (NRIS Wildlife), and other agencies (USFWS, MFWP).
The National Bald Eagle Management Guidelines (FWS 2007a) provide the recommendations for
avoiding disturbance to bald eagles. Habitat management guidelines from the Montana Bald Eagle
Management Plan (MBEMP) (MBEWG 2010, 1994, 1991) serve as the measure for bald eagle habitat
management on the KNF. The effect of any proposed activity on potential eagle habitat (½ mile of major
water source; MBEMP 1994) and any known eagle nests located within the bald eagle habitat will be
discussed in relation to the 2010 Montana Bald Eagle Management Guidelines in lieu of the National
Bald Eagle Management Guidelines (NBEMG; USFWS 2007a). This rationale is based on the fact that
the NBEMG are more appropriate for states such as Florida which, have higher concentrations of bald
eagles and have built nests near pre-existing human activity whereas Montana bald eagles are likely more
accustomed to areas with less human activity and rural areas.
The analysis boundary for project impacts to individuals and their habitat is all lands within the Cripple
PSU that fall within ½ mile of open water and defined in the 1994 Bald Eagle Management Plan (2010
Addendum). The boundary for cumulative effects and making the effects determination is the Cripple
PSU because it contains more than adequate shoreline for more than one bald eagle territory. The
boundary for determining trend and population viability is the Kootenai National Forest.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The Bald Eagle was officially removed from the threatened species list on August 8, 2007. It was
immediately placed on the FS Northern Region’s sensitive species list for a period of five years, after
which a status review will be made to determine the need to remain on or be removed from that list.
Bald eagles occur as both seasonal migrants and year-round residents within the boundaries of the KNF.
Nesting has increased significantly over the last two decades within the boundaries of the KNF. Only one
active nest was known to occur in 1978, whereas 45 nests (20 on NFS and 25 other lands) were known
and monitored in 2009. Nest success for active nests over the last twenty-year period is about 84%, with
an average of 1.3 fledglings per active nest (KNF Bald Eagle Monitoring Records).
Wintering bald eagle numbers have fluctuated over the years depending on food sources (fish from open
waters and dead animals along roads and railroad tracks) and winter conditions (open verses frozen water
for foraging habitat). Mid-winter bald eagle counts have averaged 95 bald eagles over the past 25 years
(KNF Bald Eagle Monitoring Records).
About 11,229 acres of the bald eagle habitat area occur in the Cripple PSU based on forested acres
influenced by Koocanusa Reservoir. Forestwide potential bald eagle habitat covers about 564,558 acres
(242,965 NFS; 275,470 PVT; 46,123 water; based on USDI 2001).

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Direct and Indirect Effects
The Montana Bald Eagle Management Guidelines (2010 Addendum) provide the following
recommendations for avoiding disturbance effects to bald eagles at nest sites:
Seasonal Restrictions
Recommended seasonal restrictions from approximately February 1 through August 15th for the following
activities (do not apply to unoccupied or alternate nest sites, nests with fledged eaglets, failed nests):
• Construction and maintenance including buildings, roads, trails or any other outside construction
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 247 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

within direct line of sight of an active nest.
• Loud noises such as fireworks, blasting, and operation of forest harvest machinery (skidders, trucks,
chainsaws, etc.), jackhammers, construction equipment, etc.
• Forest management activities, thinning and fuels reduction including all activities associated with the
removal of forest vegetation around occupied nests.
• Concentrated recreation including but not limited to, hiking, bird-watching, fishing (on and offshore),
hunting, boating and use of personal watercraft.
There is one known bald eagle nest (Dunn Creek) tree in the Cripple PSU on COE lands; any proposed
treatment units (COE3, COE4, COE5, COEF12, COE7) within the influence area of this nest would be
implemented post-fledging (generally August 15) in conjunction with visual and distance buffers as
recommended. These treatment units total approximately 322 acres and are a mixture of improvement
cuts (188 ac) and fuels reductions/burning (134 ac).
Visual Buffers
Recommended activities for visual buffer maintenance and enhancement:
• Managing forest and riparian habitats to protect and enhance important habitat components (i.e. perch
trees, visual screening, etc.)
• Thinning around large potential or active bald eagle nest trees to protect them from crown fires.
Thinning should be done so as not to compromise visual buffers (direct line of sight) between nest
trees and potential human disturbance.
• Placing new construction (homes, buildings, trails, boat launches/marinas, etc.) only in areas where
visual buffers around nests can be retained.
• Retaining a natural buffer around active nests, alternate nests, and large live trees and snags during
fire protection activities that meet Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) safety requirements and
recommendations while providing visual security (direct line of sight) for bald eagles.
There is one known bald eagle nest tree in the Cripple PSU on COE lands; any proposed treatment units
(COE3, COE4, COE5, COEF12, COEF7) within the influence area of this nest will be implemented post
fledging (generally August 15) in conjunction with timing restrictions and distance buffers as
recommended. These treatment units total approximately 322 acres and are a mixture of improvement
cuts (188 ac) and fuels reductions/burning (134 ac).
Distance Buffers
Recommended distance buffers in the absence of a visual buffer; are intended to apply to activities near
nest sites, concentrated foraging areas and communal roost sites during the appropriate season of eagle
use. A half (½) mile for the following activities:
• Any activity that will result in more than one house or permanent construction to include commercial
use, buildings three or more stories high, activity that would increase human use, or project with a
footprint greater than ½ acre.
• Construction of new marinas with routine use by six or more boats.
• Any use of explosives or activities that produce extremely loud noise, such as blasting, use of
jackhammers or gravel crushing equipment, or fireworks.
• Forest management activities that include harvesting and heavy truck traffic in areas that don’t
normally have that type of activity.
• Construction of new above ground power and utility lines.
The proposed treatment units (COE3, COE4, COE5, COEF12, COEF7) include timber harvesting,
hauling, slashing and burning and are within the ½ mile influence area of this nest. These activities would
not only protect the nest tree but would maintain adjacent trees, and forest stand integrity, to break up
direct line of site from activities occurring on Koocanusa Reservoir. The treatments would be
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 248 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

implemented post-fledging (generally August 15) on approximately 322 acres and are a mixture of
improvement cuts (188 ac) and fuels reductions/burning (134 ac). The road construction, reconstruction,
storage and access changes are outside the influence of this bald eagle nest territory and would not impact
the species’ ability to nest or forage in suitable habitat. Likewise, the improvements of the Fivemile and
Yarnell Campgrounds are outside of the ½ buffer of influence for this known eagle nest and would not
impact the species.
A quarter (¼) mile for the following activities:
• Any permanent construction to include single home properties (<3 stories tall) and outbuildings.
• Any construction of infrastructure such as roads and trails including dozer lines for fire management
activities, except when specifically constructed to save a bald eagle nest from fire.
• Forest management activities to include timber harvest layout, snag removal, prescribed fires,
planting and thinning.
• Recreation activities during the breeding season such as non-motorized hiking, fishing, hunting,
camping, rafting, bird-watching, biking, as well as motorized activities including driving, off-road
vehicle use, boating and personal watercraft (continued movement activities listed previously have
less impact than those that include stopping (camping, anchoring boats) or constant human use
(popular hiking trails).
• Or 1,000 feet above nest sites for helicopter and aircraft use during breeding season except for
biologist conducting bald eagle nest surveys.
The associated activities with proposed treatment units (COE3, COE4, COE5, COEF12, COEF7) include
timber layout, marking, and cruising, in addition to those mentioned previously, and are within the ¼ mile
influence area of this nest. These activities would be implemented post-fledging (generally August 15)
and prior to spring occupancy depending on crew availability. These activities would also occur on
approximately 322 acres as previously described.
MBEMP guidelines identify four general habitat categories and management concerns for bald eagles.
They are: nesting habitat, foraging habitat (including perch sites), winter habitat (including roost sites)
and mortality risks.
Nesting habitat is typically associated with mature forest stands in close proximity (less than 1 mile) to
large bodies of water, including lakes and fourth order streams, which provide an adequate prey base.
Potential effects from this project on nesting habitat were previously addressed.
Foraging habitat consists of lakes, rivers, wetlands and meadows that provide open flight paths, perches
and adequate prey. It also includes highway and railroad corridors (especially in the winter) due to dead
animals found in these areas. Any forest management activities associated with the COE treatment units
listed previously will occur following the post-fledgling period and avoid impacts on foraging bald eagles
for this nest territory.
Winter habitat is generally dictated by the presence and abundance of food, open water and secure night
roost sites (MBEWG 1994). Eagles are known to winter within or near the Cripple PSU. While some
forest activities including winter timber harvest could occur within ½ mile of the Dunn Creek eagle nest,
impacts on foraging eagles is expected to be minor given the abundance of winter foraging along
Koocanusa Reservoir and below Libby Dam along the Kootenai River.
The MBEMP (1994) identifies bald eagle mortality risks as shooting, accidental trapping, poisoning,
diseases and electrocution. On the KNF, bald eagles have also died from collisions with motor vehicles
and trains. Accidental electrocution due to utility lines, servicing private residences or near Libby Dam
would represent the highest probability for eagle mortality within the Cripple PSU with motor vehicle
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 249 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

collision representing the second highest risk for mortality during the winter carrion feeding months.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Past management actions occurring since the initial operation of Libby Dam in 1972 are not believed to
have measurably contributed to cumulative impacts on bald eagles or their habitat. The higher quality
bald eagle habitat north of the dam was covered with the creation of Koocanusa Reservoir. With the
development of the Forest Plan, management activities have been largely restricted along the reservoir
outside of established recreation areas. Additionally, wildfire suppression near the reservoir has
contributed to protecting large diameter trees suitable for perching, roosting and nesting. It is likely that
windstorms have had, and will continue to have, the greatest impact on suitable bald eagle habitat on the
Libby Ranger District.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect bald eagles are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, bough collection, pine cone collecting and
blowdown salvaging, would maintain suitable bald eagle habitat by avoidance. Other than possibly
annoying individual birds, human disturbance from these activities would have minimal impacts on area
bald eagles especially in concert with recommended timing restrictions from the MBEMP (2010).
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile Allotment; Warland Allotment) would not result in a change of old growth or
mature habitats that provides nesting areas for this species, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead
or alive. Additionally, changes to the grass/herbaceous layer of vegetation would not affect eagle habitat
characteristics and generally, due to the lack of ungulate forage in old growth and mature forest stands,
cattle grazing is typically not an issue.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities, implemented according to the 2007 KNF Invasive Plant Management EIS
ROD would not lead to any adverse effects on bald eagles or their habitat because treatment of weeds
would actually benefit forage species important to many species or their prey (USDA Forest Service
1997, 30). No loss or change in specific habitats (e.g. old growth, mature forests, lakes, wetlands)
inhabited by prey species would result from this activity because weed treatments primarily focus on the
herbaceous layer along roads and in disturbed areas. Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within
the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
With the direction to suppress all wildland fires on NFS lands, construction of firelines, safety zones and
other control structures could impact individuals on a site-specific basis. Avoidance of known eagle nests
would be attempted during suppression efforts but some impacts may still occur. Due to the unpredictable
nature of wildfires, contributions of fire suppression to the cumulative effect on this species can only be
surmised but could include loss of actual nest tree (nest failure), loss of forested habitat around wetlands
or lakes, avoidance of habitat by eagles due to heavy smoke or suppression activities.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect bald eagles and
specialized habitats (e.g. snags, wetlands, nest trees) because they generally do not result in vegetation
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 250 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

removal. Although road restoration and maintenance projects (brushing, blading, gate repairs, culvert
replacement, etc.) may temporarily displace eagles from a localized area or impact individuals, they
typically benefit the species in the long-term, especially if the projects involve closing previously open
road systems (refer to road storage in Transportation/Water Sections) that would reduce the risk of human
disturbance. Under the East Reservoir Project, these activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving
project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013. The standing tree and snag component of eagle
habitat would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. These activities would not result in
any change to the quantity of habitat, thus no adverse cumulative effects would be expected to that
resource.
Recreation Maintenance
Normal road and trail maintenance activities have the potential to remove nesting and foraging trees for
eagles if they are close to a trail or road in suitable habitat, as defined, and present a safety hazard. These
situations are extremely rare and are often mitigated via distance buffers. Effects could include removing
site-specific, individual trees, and would not be expected to contribute measurably to the cumulative
effect on the bald eagle under consultation with a biologist.
Routine maintenance of dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the cumulative impact on bald
eagles because maintenance of these facilities do not typically involve removal of habitat elements such
as large trees or snags unless deemed to be a safety hazard to forest users. In this situation, the removal of
a tree or snag is considered negligible. In the situation where nest trees need to be removed due to safety
concerns, removal would occur upon conclusion of the reproduction period.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Operations of
outfitter/guides would not result in any change to general and specialized eagle habitats (e.g. mature
forests, snags, wetlands, lake shore), as they do not involve the harvest of trees. There would be no
cumulative effects to eagles or their habitats associated with these activities other than possible temporary
and local avoidance of an area due to the presence of humans. Ground disturbance on resources such as
mature forest stands have been included under the existing condition and would have no additional
impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on eagles at that
time.
There are no known land exchanges planned within the PSU at this time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and are outside of the ½ mile influence area of the Dunn Creek eagle nest.
Public Use
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (nesting, rearing) when eagles may be more sensitive to
human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts. There may be some
situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur, due to an overlap of forest activities,
but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist through the lifecycle of the raptor,
either temporally or spatially.
Other forest product activities occurring presently and typically on an annual basis are the gathering of
pine cones, boughs and commercial gathering of Christmas trees. These activities occur throughout the
PSU, and have little-to-no effect on the landscape due to the unspecific nature of the use and the low
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 251 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

impact on the resources (foot traffic, hand tools). Additionally, Christmas trees are harvested from
existing regeneration units, so this activity would have no cumulative effect on the specialized habitats of
eagles, such as mature trees and riparian areas. During the reproduction period, adult eagles may become
agitated if humans partaking in activities mentioned above become too close to active bald eagle nests.
Typically, public use, outside of those water related, are outside of the more sensitive distance buffers
recommended by the MBEMP.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands. Any cumulative effects to eagles would be partially dependent
on the duration (seasonal versus year-round) of use of these parcels and homes and their proximity to
known bald eagle nest territories. Anticipated effects include species displacement, nest failure, habitat
alteration and/or habitat loss.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. While these proposed actions are in mature forest stands they are greater than
½ from the Dunn Creek eagle nest and Koocanusa Reservoir where eagle foraging occurs. Therefore
these state activities would have minimal impacts on any bald eagles utilizing suitable habitat in the
general area.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Project scheduling/staging would be required in order to avoid possible cumulative impacts from various
vegetation management and fuel reduction activities occurring within and adjacent to the Dunn Creek
bald eagle nest. These activities in conjunction with recreation activities occurring along the Kootenai
River near this nest have the potential to displace resident bald eagles and result in nest failure if allowed
to occur during the breeding season. See season restriction recommendations addressed previously.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY

• All Alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol. 1, II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• The project is consistent with the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 668-668C 1978) by
avoiding disturbance or resulting in take of bald eagles by avoiding the nesting season of the Dunn
Creek bald eagle territory.
• The project is consistent with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (17 U.S.C. 703-712) by avoiding the
nesting season when eggs or chicks could be impacted and by protecting the nest tree from management
activities.

National Forest Management Act
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.”
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for potential impacts on this
habitat resource.

STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
Alternative 1 will have no direct impact on bald eagles due to the lack of action. However, the lack of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 252 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

action may indirectly result in forest habitat conditions that could lead to more stand replacement fires
which would remove suitable nesting habitat for the eagle. No action could also result in growing
conditions less suitable for producing large diameter nest trees due to increased competition for soil
nutrients and moisture. Neither of these conditions are supportive of the purpose and need for this project.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals or their habitat but will not contribute to a trend toward
federal listing or loss of species viability for the bald eagle. This determination is based on:
1) Adherence to timing, distance, and buffer recommendations for forest management activities occurring
near active bald eagle nests;
2) Although management activities would occur during the post-fledgling period, some foraging bald
eagles may be agitated if utilizing the immediate area, however this effect would be minimal due to the
abundance of foraging habitat both above and below Libby Dam
3) The actions would protect known nest tree(s) and would have no direct impacts on major prey species
(fish, waterfowl) of the bald eagle.

BIGHORN SHEEP
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Bighorn sheep population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research
are described in Geist (1971), Buechner (1960), and Couey (1950). That information is incorporated by
reference. Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep are the largest of several species of mountain sheep in North
America. They are a very social species and segregate into groups of mature males only or females, lambs
and immature males for most of the year. Primarily, they eat grasses and forbs, although herds in
northwest Montana eat more shrubs than herds in other areas. The most important habitat requirement for
the species is suitable escape habitat; steep, rocky terrain is necessary for them to escape from predators.
This type of escape terrain must be found in all of their seasonal ranges in order for the habitat to be
usable by bighorn sheep. Their rut begins in early November and lasts for approximately two months.
Mature females produce 1 lamb in late May.
The greatest threat to bighorn populations is from disease. The animals are susceptible to pneumonia and
a population involved in a pneumonia outbreak would see a significant number of animals die and
reproduction and recruitment would be reduced for several years. The reasons for disease outbreaks are
unclear. However, there is evidence to suggest that contact with domestic sheep or goats can play a role
(MFWP 2010). The recent die-off of Montana’s bighorn sheep populations was instrumental in the listing
of the species as sensitive within the NFS Region 1. Three neighboring NFS Regions (R2, R3, R4)
previously listed the sheep as sensitive prior to 2011 even with larger sheep populations. With these
dramatic die-offs and widely accepted knowledge of reduced sheep habitat, Region 1 finalized listing for
the bighorn sheep in 2011 (Tomasik 2011).
Bighorn occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records and Forest historical
data (NRIS Wildlife). Additional data comes from Montana FWP records. The analysis boundary for
project impacts and cumulative effects to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple PSU. The boundary
for determining trend or viability is the Kootenai National Forest.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
There are four herds of bighorn sheep within the boundaries of the KNF. Two of the herds (Ural-Tweed,
Ten Lakes) are native herds, totaling 90 individuals based on observations. The Kootenai Falls and
Cabinet (Berray Mtn.) herds are both transplanted herds, herds that have been reestablished or established
by the relocation of sheep from other populations.
The Cripple PSU or East Reservoir analysis area includes the Koocanusa/Ural-Tweed “Trench” bighorn
sheep herd (Hunting District 101). The herd is estimated at 30 individuals with only two actually
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 253 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

observed via aircraft (MFWP 2010). Most observations come from government personnel and the general
public while traveling Montana Highway 37 along Koocanusa Reservoir as compiled by MFWP. The area
used by the herd includes about 22,400 acres of sheep habitat all on NFS lands except approximately 100
acres of privately owned lands. The habitat extends from the upper Pinkham Creek area in the north to
Fivemile Creek in the south and generally consists of steep, rocky and primarily dry forested terrain. The
habitat management strategies for this herd (MFWP 2010) include as summarized; cooperative work with
FS and Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) in habitat needs/improvements and continuing
cooperation with the Montana Department of Highways to identify possible sheep crossings along
Highway 37, high risk areas of vehicle collisions as well as solutions to these issues. This analysis will
evaluate how well the East Reservoir project assists in meeting or meets these habitat management
strategies and objectives.
Forestwide, there are 90,880 acres of bighorn sheep habitat (Hunting Districts #100, 101, 102, 123). It is
found widely distributed in pockets that include steep, rocky terrain. The total number of bighorn sheep
on the KNF is 248, statewide the total number of sheep is 5,694 animals in 49 herds (MFWP 2010). This
analysis modeled primary bighorn sheep habitat within the Cripple PSU based on parameters from the
conservation strategy and the associated map is located in the Project File for this project. Briefly, the
results indicate that there are approximately 940 acres of bighorn sheep escape habitat, 3,060 acres of
foraging habitat, and 9,049 acres of winter range available within the Cripple PSU. However, some of
these acres are outside of the known Ural-Tweed bighorn herd home range as previously described. Local
biologists agree that the limited use (known 22,400 acre home range) of the Cripple PSU by bighorn
sheep can likely be attributed to the limited amount of quality bunchgrass winter range which has been
encroached by various conifers during years of continued fire suppression.
There are no domestic sheep grazing allotments within the Cripple PSU and no known domestic sheep on
private lands that could pose a risk to this sheep herd via transfer of epizootic diseases such as
pneumonia.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
According to the Montana Bighorn Sheep Conservation Strategy (MFWP 2010) there are three essential
elements of managing bighorn sheep habitat and these elements are subject to degradation by humans and
plant succession. These elements in brief are: 1) escape cover or terrain in all seasons; 2) high visibility to
detect predators and access to forage; 3) low elevation winter range near escape cover receiving no more
than ten inches of snow cover. Forest activities and treatments that can assist in maintaining or enhancing
these habitat needs will assist in perpetuating this species (Table 3.91).
Proposed activities for Alternatives 2and 3 have the potential to expand or improve foraging
opportunities. Timber harvest (regeneration or thinning) and slash treatment (burning) have the potential
to improve bighorn sheep foraging habitat (Table 3.91). Opening the canopy and burning decadent
grasses and shrubs improves conditions for grasses and forbs.
Another issue which can have impacts on bighorn sheep, especially on critical winter range and lambing
habitat is human disturbance much of which typically results from recreation activities. The East
Reservoir Project will be analyzed on how, if at all, it may contribute to human disturbance of sheep on
these habitats.
Table 3.91 - Change in Bighorn Sheep Habitat
HABITAT CHANGE
(% change)

Change in Habitat Quality
due to vegetation
management /1

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

HABITAT ELEMENT
EFFECT

198

1573 ac = WR
0.02 ac = ESC
106 ac = FOR

1,473 ac = WR
0 ac = ESC
106 ac = For

Increase foraging, improve escape
visibility, decrease encroachment
of trees on winter range

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 254 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

HABITAT CHANGE
(% change)

Change in Habitat Quality
due to prescribed burning

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0

2,641 ac = WR
786 ac = ESC
1,507 ac = FOR

2,641 ac = WR
786 ac = ESC
1507 ac = FOR

HABITAT ELEMENT
EFFECT

Improve winter range foraging,
summer foraging, escape visibility

/1 – Not all harvested or thinned forested acres may be suitable for sheep due to lack of escape habitat as in steep rocky slopes,
however, these areas do provide foraging habitat for other ungulates therefore decreasing foraging competition on steeper habitats.
WR = winter range
ESC = escape habitat
FOR = foraging habitat within 300 meters of escape habitat.

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 (no-action) would largely maintain/allow the natural successional processes to continue,
treating only 2% of potential sheep winter range. Open foraging areas would continue to decrease in size
and productivity as conifers encroached upon the openings on all seasonal ranges. No cooperative habitat
improvements outside of weed management along area roads would occur under this alternative. Human
recreational use of the area would remain at or near current levels growing closely with population
increase of the general area. No new recreation facilities that may enhance human use of the area would
occur.
ALTERNATIVES 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Generally, agency management practices that may have impacts (both negative and positive) to bighorn
sheep can include: domestic sheep allotments; non-sheep livestock allotments; domestic sheep trailing
routes; noxious weed management or lack thereof; fire exclusion; prescribed fire; thinning of conifers;
management of conifer encroachment; placing treatments that will attract bighorns between bighorns and
domestic sheep or goats on non-NFS ownership; use of domestic sheep or goats for weed treatment; use
of pack goats; human disturbance (and associated dogs) in lambing and wintering habitats; and motorized
or non-motorized routes in key habitat areas (Tomasik 2011).
As can be seen in Table 3.92, Alternative 2 would create forest openings with various harvest
prescriptions on 17% of the potential (available, but underutilized by Ural herd) bighorn sheep winter
range in the PSU, zero percent on escape habitat and 3.5% on general foraging habitat. This alternative
would burn approximately 29% of the potential bighorn sheep winter range in the PSU, 84 % on escape
habitat and 49% on general foraging habitat in the PSU. However, only about 11% of the estimated big
horn sheep habitat for the Ural-Tweed herd (25,600 ac) is within the Cripple PSU as the southern extent
of their range ends at Fivemile Creek.
Similarly, Alternative 3 would create forest openings with various harvest prescriptions on 16% of the
potential bighorn sheep winter range in the PSU, zero percent on escape habitat and 3.5% on general
foraging habitat. This alternative would burn approximately 29% of the potential bighorn sheep winter
range in the PSU, 84% on escape habitat and 49% on general foraging habitat in the PSU. Additionally,
the remaining vegetation treatments outside of the home range may serve to shift other foraging ungulates
into other areas and decrease foraging competition in the immediate area. In summary, all of the action
alternatives would benefit bighorn sheep habitat and assist in meeting the purpose and need for this
project.
Both action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 37 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 to 17.5 miles of
seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would
benefit bighorn sheep by making potential habitat more secure from human activities. Although not
overly sensitive to humans outside the lambing season, bighorn sheep are measurably stressed by
uncontrolled dogs that often accompany forest recreationists. Contrarily, Alternatives 3 and 4 each
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 255 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5
miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change
would facilitate human activities, the effect would be largely negligible because these roads are located
near Koocanusa Reservoir where the sheep avoid until winter and early spring when humans are largely
absent.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) may result in noxious weed invasion. The project design should include measures to reduce this
potential risk (e.g. washing equipment, weed spraying) and its potential effects on sheep winter range.
The disturbance of these improvements would occur during the summer and fall when bighorn sheep are
typically absent from the lower elevation winter range and are not expected to impact the species. These
activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
in the PSU boundary. Because the management activities would occur during the late spring, summer and
fall, they should have little disturbance impact on big horn sheep. However, the fuel treatments would
likely have beneficial effects for bighorn sheep foraging during the winter, especially in conjunction with
noxious weed treatments.
Ability of the East Reservoir Project to meet or contribute to the specific management strategies for the
Ural-Tweed bighorn sheep herd, as paraphrased:
1) Cooperative work between FS and MFWP in habitat needs/improvements (Obj., Strategy): The FS
and State of Montana have worked cooperatively on habitat enhancement burns on the Woods Ranch
Wildlife Management Area (WMA) in the past for the northern Kootenai Ten Lakes Bighorn Sheep
Herd. Similarly, under this project, there are several proposed prescribe burn treatment units within the
Ural herd home range that would be opportunities to again work cooperatively. Additionally, this
project would allow for continued management of noxious weeds on NFS and COE lands, on and
adjacent to bighorn sheep winter range.
2) Maintain/develop cooperative relationships with domestic sheep owners including double fencing
(Obj., Strategy): Direct management of bighorn sheep and potential risk from domestic sheep or goats
beyond NFS grazing allotments are outside of FS jurisdiction and must be addressed by State of
Montana personnel. However, fencing opportunities on NFS lands that may contribute to the control of
domestic sheep and goats may exist and could be explored via a cooperative agreement.
3) Maintain High Quality Habitat (Winter Range) within the Ural-Tweed Bighorn Sheep Herd Home
Range (aggressive management of weeds and grazing) (Obj., Strategy): These opportunities exist and
were addressed previously under objective/strategy 1.
4) Continuance of cooperative relations with land trust organizations to assist in protecting private
lands adjacent to FS sheep habitat (Strategy): This strategy is outside the scope of the East Reservoir
Project, it does not appear that areas adjacent to the Ural sheep home range have this need.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Past management actions, in the general area, especially within or adjacent to the known home range of
the Ural-Tweed Bighorn Sheep Herd have been both beneficial and harmful to bighorn sheep. While past
trail and recreation facility construction has exposed the sheep to humans and any accompanying dogs,
vegetation management has increased foraging opportunities for sheep. Conversely, years of active fire
suppression have not benefited the sheep by allowing conifers to encroach, not only on winter range, but
also on escape habitat, in general, degrading the habitat. Likely the greatest benefits to the local herd were
implementation of the Forestwide Fuels EA (2001) and years of noxious weed control.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 256 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

EFFECTS of CURRENT and REASONABLY FORESEEABLE ACTIONS
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 (265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF
589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2012 and 2014 and may kill individual green trees within these units on the
drier end of the burning prescription. This loss however, should be minimal and not result in measurable
impacts to large ungulate cover. Steep slopes (>60%) are more critical for sheep escape cover than is its
ability to hide in vegetation.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like elk, bears, lynx, etc. are more
likely to be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home ranges.
Bighorn sheep are not likely to be disturbed by these activities due to the known range of the local UralTweed herd and lack of overlap with these projects.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and rock collecting (Pg. 3-5) would have minimal impacts on
sheep cover due to their limited spatial scope and minimal removal of vegetation. They may cause sheep
to temporarily (hours) avoid an area until the human activity has ceased.
Livestock Grazing
Although grazing allotments (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) cover several thousand acres of the
PSU, competition between cattle and resident sheep for forage is not expected to be an issue. Domestic
cattle typically utilize forage areas readily available along roadsides and recently harvested areas that
have more gentle slopes whereas sheep utilize forage on and adjacent to steep, rocky slopes where they
are likewise safe from most predators.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on bighorn sheep or their habitat because
treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to sheep and other big game species
(USDA Forest Service 1997, 30). Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an
annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, heli-spots and safety zones could potentially result in
displacing bighorn sheep and other big game from site specific areas until the event is contained. Upon
completion of wildfire suppression activities, rehabilitation of these same areas can create micro-foraging
areas since these sites are seeded for soil stabilization. Suppression activities are typically subject to input
from District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats is considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection, and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats,
such as most sheep range because they generally do not result in vegetation removal nor do they occur on
such steep slopes. Although not overly sensitive to humans, sheep may simply avoid the disturbance area
until human activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours. These activities include the
Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013. This action would
not result in a loss of cover because the road already exists. The area of this road is also highly unlikely to
be used by sheep during the summer or fall due to lack of need. Although water restoration projects may
temporarily displace sheep and other wildlife from a localized area, they typically benefit wildlife in the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 257 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

long-term by increasing security, providing pulses of foraging when seeded, or by simply stabilizing soils
where certain habitat components can remain available.
Recreation Maintenance
Actions such as road, trail, or campground maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably affect sheep and
other big game species. These species would typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human
activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as sheep winter range, escape habitat and cover, etc. have been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits
would be analyzed for potential impacts on bighorn sheep at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but could add to the cumulative impact from human activities and their effects on sheep if
human activity remains high in the winter which is typically not the situation.
Public Use
Other public uses such as wildlife viewing, berry picking, firewood gathering, camping, snowmobiling,
etc. have negligible impacts on sheep given their limited scope (time and space) and the unlikelihood for
overlapping with sheep habitat during much of the year. Infrastructure, such as roads and campgrounds,
that facilitate these activities have already been accounted for under the existing condition.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the Cripple PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a slight impact on sheep
cover, especially on winter range where most privately owned acres occur. For road construction on
private lands, an estimated four acres per mile of cover can be expected to be lost. For home construction,
garage, parking, lawn, approximately 1-2 acres of cover can be estimated to be lost per resident. These
acres would be affected on private lands and would cumulatively add to those disclosed impacts on NFS
and COE lands under the action Alternatives 2and 3 in Table 3.92.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities will likely result in cover loss and would cumulatively
add to those disclosed impacts on NFS and COE lands under the action Alternatives 2and 3.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Timber sales and other management projects, such as salvaging, road work, precommercial thins and fuels
reductions, listed previously, may have temporary effects on bighorn sheep and other big game. These
effects may include avoidance of activity areas, increase in vulnerability during the hunting season, raised
stress levels and short-term displacement from key habitats, like foraging areas or winter range. Although
these effects may occur, they are not expected to result in lower sheep populations due to the utilization of
seasonal design criteria, such as avoidance of the lambing season. Contrarily, vegetation management
activities can have beneficial effects, once management activities cease, by providing additional and/or
reconditioned areas of big game foraging. Other forest activities such as hiking and berry picking are
thought to have minimal impacts to sheep, typically resulting in temporary (hours) avoidance of an area.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 258 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol. 1, II-1 #6) by utilization of best
science in support of the species, maintaining associated habitat for the sheep, and meeting KNFP
direction for big game with the Ural-Tweed bighorn sheep herd home range.
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for big game species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #12) by meeting KNFP
standards for big game hiding and thermal cover and open road densities.
• All alternatives, with their associated Regional Forester approval for the over 40 acre unit request, are
consistent with the KNFP (1987) for distance to cover for big game.
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.”
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for big game.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1, due to its lack of action, will have no direct impact on individual sheep or their habitat.
However, a lack of action would allow vegetation to continue to encroach on foraging and escape habitat
which could have long-term negative impacts to the species by decreasing forage and increasing risk of
predation.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals but will not contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss
of species viability for the bighorn sheep. This determination is based on:
1) The limited amount of activities within the Ural-Tweed sheep herd home range;
2) The beneficial effects of vegetation management and access changes (producing secure habitat) both
within the home range and the Cripple PSU;
3) Continued monitoring and control of noxious weeds in the area; and 4) implementation, as applicable
to NFS, of the management strategies for the Ural-Tweed herd.

BLACK-BACKED WOODPECKER
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Black-backed woodpecker population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by
research are described in Powell (2000), Cherry (1997), Hutto (1995) and O’Connor and Hillis (2001).
That information is incorporated by reference. Black-backed occurrence data comes from recent District
wildlife observation records and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife). Black-backed woodpecker habitat
was modeled using TSMRS/FACTS vegetation data and running the Kootenai TSMRS black-backed
woodpecker habitat model (KNF Wildlife Model 2007). The potential population index (PPI) (number of
potential territories) was calculated for a breeding pair by dividing general forest habitat acres by 800
acres (approximate largest home range) and by dividing high quality habitat acres by 175 acres
(approximate smallest home range; Johnson et al. 2004 Appendix G). The difference in territory size used
in the two habitat components is based on the assumption that higher quality habitat can support a
breeding pair with fewer acres. High quality habitat is defined as recent (< 5 years old) mixed-lethal or
stand-replacement fire areas where an abundance of snags are available. Black-backed woodpeckers
(BBWs) have been found to be almost restricted to early post-fire forests (Hutto 1995). Territory sizes are
from the summary paper by Cherry (1997). The analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative
effects to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple PSU. The boundary for determining trend or viability
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 259 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

is the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Habitat for black-backed woodpeckers consists of boreal and montane forests where beetle outbreaks are
occurring as a result of disturbances caused by fire, wind and disease. In the PSU, BBW habitat consists
mainly of lower quality effective old growth habitat with small scattered patches of snags produced by
insect and disease. This lower quality habitat supports low populations of resident black-backed
woodpeckers. The Kootenai TSMRS/FACTS black-backed woodpecker habitat model (KNF Wildlife
Model 2007) identified 9,296 acres of lower quality habitat (categorized as unburned effective old
growth, designated and undesignated, as well as recent areas of insect infestations). High quality habitat
in the form of recent (in the last five years) mixed lethal and stand-replacing wildfire or prescribed fire
consists of zero acres in the PSU. The most recent wildfires occurred between 1986 and 1994 totaling
about 7,415 acres (see map in Project File), however these are long past serving as primary or premium
habitat for BBWs. The available low quality and high quality habitat combined would produce a PPI of
11 to possibly 12 pairs.
As a primary cavity-nester, BBWs require dead or live trees with heartwood rot and show a preference for
Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pine and western larch. According to Thomas (1979 p.74), a snag
level of 40% or more should maintain viable populations of birds dependent on cavities for nest sites. The
existing snag habitat level for the PSU is conservatively estimated at 67.9%.
On a Forestwide level, modeled BBW habitat is abundant, broadly distributed and amounts to 201,577
acres of lower quality habitat (unburned effective old growth habitat; KNF Files, 1987 KNFP Monitoring
Old Growth spreadsheet; Libby, MT). Recent (Spring 2011) sightings of the black-backed woodpecker
occurred in the Cripple PSU by Libby District personnel conducting goshawk surveys in an old growth
forest stand. Historical documentation in the PSU includes three additional sightings dating back to 1992.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Proposed activities for Alternatives 2and 3 have the potential to alter or reduce low quality habitat
foraging opportunities, and at the same time, create foraging habitat during post-harvest burning and
prescribed burning activities. Regeneration harvest would remove general opportunities, leaving a
minimum number of wildlife trees available for foraging. Regeneration harvest almost always includes
underburning, and with heavier slash, has potential to kill trees left on site. Overall, a larger amount of
low-quality habitat would be replaced with a smaller amount of higher-quality habitat. Commercial
thinning would leave a number of trees on site for general foraging opportunities. Underburning in these
stands would create more potential for BBW foraging habitat than regeneration harvest. Commercial
thinning with underburning and stands with underburning-only would be most similar to historical
conditions created by mixed-severity fires, and could provide high-quality BBW habitat for 2-3 years,
then declining and rarely providing insect food sources beyond 5-7 years ( Murphy and Lehnhausen
1998).
Table 3.92 - Cumulative Change in Black-Backed Woodpecker Habitat and PPI
HABITAT CHANGE (% CHANGE)

Number of acres treated that may result in isolated patches of
high-quality habitat due to underburning and/or thinning
Change in Lower-Quality Habitat (OG; insect infested areas)
Change in High-Quality Habitat (recent burn areas)
PPI – Pair Territories in Project Area
Reduction in Lower-Quality Habitat Forest-wide
PPI – Pair Territories Forestwide

Existing
Condition

0
N/A
N/A
11
201,577*
251

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

223

13,361

14,748

N/A
N/A
11
0
251

0
N/A
11
0
251

0
N/A
11
0
251

*Only includes Forestwide OG acres below 5,500 feet in elevation; insect and disease area were not mapped for the PSU; this is the existing
condition.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 260 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 would maintain and allow the natural insect and disease processes to occur. Effective old
growth stands would continue to provide low quality foraging. The potential for stand-replacing fires
escaping initial attack would continue to increase as fuel levels increased. If a wildfire were to occur,
prime BBW habitat would be created, and conditions would benefit this species. Local populations would
experience an immediate increase as bark beetles increased, lasting three to five years, until beetle
populations declined. Habitat patch size resulting from wildfires would largely be dependent upon the
conditions at the time of the fire, however, the sizes could be expected to be larger than historical events
due to 100 years of continued fire suppression.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2and 3 would create forest openings with regeneration harvest on 2,443 (includes
improvement/shelterwood prescriptions), and 2,868 acres in the PSU, respectively. The action alternatives
would also commercially thin/improvement/salvage cut on 5,649 and 4,945 acres, respectively. While
these activities reduce and/or alter the amount of mature forest available for general woodpecker use
(low-level of foraging) they would also create some good forage trees following underburning, especially
in the commercially thinned areas. Habitat reductions in high-quality habitat (recent burned areas) or lowquality habitat (effective old growth areas) would not result following implementation of any of these
alternatives because the action does not include salvaging in any recently burned forest stands.
A minimum of approximately 12% or 9,296 acres of lower-quality habitat would remain following
implementation of all action alternatives. There are currently no areas of recently burned stands within the
PSU to qualify as high-quality habitat. Additionally, both action alternatives proposed to prescribe burn
anywhere from 11,427 (Alternative 2) to 11,358 (Alternative 3) acres that may create isolated, small
pockets of high quality black-backed woodpecker habitat in the PSU. On a Forestwide level, there would
be no reduction in the quantity of either lower-quality or high-quality BBW habitat as previously defined.
No effects on distribution of habitat needed for viable populations of black-backed woodpeckers in the
PSU or the Forest would occur. In addition, the thinning and underburning treatments may provide
additional foraging trees if tree stress or mortality occurs during or following the prescribed burns,
however, these newly areas of habitat would likely be smaller than many historical events due to slash
treatments and Forest direction on treatment unit sizes. There would be no change in the PPI for either the
PSU or Forest as a result of the action alternatives based on modeled habitat.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these
actions are likely to have little effect on the black-backed woodpecker either positively or negatively.
Alternatives 2 and 3 also propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads
and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is
a legal access change, any impact to snags has likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due
to the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to any old growth
in these areas are not anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) would have negligible effects on the snag resource and old growth because these areas are
maintained as natural as possible. Only those snags determined to be a threat to users and campers would
be removed. The potential for tree or snag due to the creation of permanent or temporary roads has
already been accounted for in the effects of road systems (see Table 3.82 on snag capability in that any
areas 100 feet from any road are considered to have a zero capability to produce snags.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 261 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
in the PSU boundary. The impacts on snags from these activities would be similar to those described
above and were included in the snag capability results found in Table 3.82. The potential for these COE
actions to produce black-backed habitat were accounted for in the acres presented above in Table 3.92.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Past and present actions, including wildfire suppression, have resulted in measurable cumulative impacts
to BBWs and their habitat. These impacts have largely been in the form of either removal of prime
nesting/foraging habitat via fire salvage, harvesting of old growth forest considered low-quality habitat, or
unintentionally affecting potential habitat via wildfire suppression. Suggestions (Cherry 1997) related to
wildfire salvage (retaining 30 to 50% depending on size of fire) as well as old growth protection would
assist in perpetuating this species into the future. Likewise, implementation of the wildfire use
management concept would also assist in creating additional habitat for this species across the KNF.
The existing situation provides habitat for eleven BBW territories based on the availability of lowerquality habitat of adequate size and even distribution. There are no recent burned areas to provide highquality habitat however, snag habitat, which is above the minimum needed of 40%, would assist in
perpetuating the species through time until new areas of wildfire occur on the landscape. Being that the
existing habitat for black-backed woodpeckers consists only of lower quality effective old growth, please
refer to the Old Growth Resource Section for further discussion of possible cumulative effects on blackbacked woodpeckers.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this resource are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
the treatment of Forestwide Fuels Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and would
alter the understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives and perhaps create micro acres
of high quality habitat.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated OG would not reduce the amount and distribution of old growth below
Forest Plan requirements. However, due to cumulative edge effects (Table 3.80) there may be reduced old
growth quality for some plant and animal species, such as resulting in less interior habitat and more edge
where predation is more likely to occur or where noxious weed invasions are more likely to become
established. However, given the level of impact and the quantity of old growth in the PSU, this effect
should be minimal and would diminish in approximately 50 years (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al.
1991; Russell et al. 2000). Private lands in the Cripple PSU were assumed to not provide any old growth,
based on past harvest practices.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning ,Christmas tree cutting, boughs, pine cone collecting would
maintain the designated management level of old growth by avoidance. In the instance where existing old
growth is burned or blown down, replacement old growth would be designated to account for this loss.
Any burned old growth would become high-quality habitat for BBW for at least 2 to 3 years, then
diminishing overtime.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile Allotment, Warland Allotment) would not result in a change of old growth
habitat, snags or down woody debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 262 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

and therefore would not affect the suitability of OG stands to serve as low-quality BBW habitat. Grazing
cattle predominantly move along road systems and within past harvest units where an abundance of
forage can be found.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in OG as low quality BBW habitat, because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
impacts to old growth habitat serving as low-quality BBW habitat. Ironically, wildfire suppression serves
to preserve existing old growth habitat while directly reducing production of high quality habitat created
by wildfires. Suppression activities are typically subject to input from District Resource Advisors, and
protection of special habitats, including old growth, is considered. However, if cumulative effects to old
growth habitat result in the habitat no longer functioning as old growth, additional old growth habitat
would be designated.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect old growth and its
suitability as BBW habitat because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. These activities
include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013. The
standing tree and snag component would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. These
activities would not result in any change to the quantity of old growth, thus no adverse cumulative effects
would be expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the
cumulative impact on old growth because maintenance of these facilities do not typically involve removal
of old growth elements such as large trees or snags unless deemed to be a safety hazard to forest users. In
this situation, the removal of a tree or snag is considered negligible.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on resources such as old growth have been included under the existing condition and would have no
additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on old
growth as low quality BBW habitat at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from OG along open road corridors and these
acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other forest use activities such as
mushroom and berry picking, camping, hunting, Christmas tree cutting, bough collection, etc. have little
to no measurable impact on old growth because they are largely non-consumptive or rapidly reestablished and would not measurably affect the suitability of surrounding forest stands to serve as lowquality BBW habitat.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 263 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there would likely be a decrease in dry-site OG within the
PSU, but outside of NFS lands. Unless these lands were consumed in wildfire(s) or suffered insect
infestation(s) prior to becoming harvested, there would be negligible impacts on any resident BBWs.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. However, these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old growth
type on NFS lands and therefore would have no measurable impact on BBW or its habitat.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
As previously stated, fire suppression over the last century has altered stands historically maintained by
fire disturbance and had a net reduction in quality BBW habitat. The affected stands have developed fuel
loading and ladder fuels that are uncharacteristic for some sites. These conditions would continue to
develop until a natural disturbance occurs.
Potential natural disturbances (wildfire, insect or disease epidemics, wind) could reduce old growth
characteristics or completely remove an area of old growth under extreme conditions. Likewise, there is
the potential for human caused fires initiating on private lands to move on to adjacent NFS lands and
remove old growth that has not been, at least partially, managed either by prescribed burning and/or
removal of ladder fuels. Conversely, these same disturbances would create high-quality BBW habitat
resulting in beneficial impacts to the species or at least 3 to 5 years.
The most recent Forestwide old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet
elevation is designated for old growth management. The proposed activities would not affect the 10%
standard for old growth at either the PSU or Forest scale.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan:
• All Alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for old growth below 5,500’ (FP Vol 1 II-1 #7; II7; II-22 & 23; Appendix 17; and Kootenai FSM 2432.22 Supplement No. 85) by maintaining a
minimum of 10% old growth below 5500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or
compartment, or a combination of compartments (PSU).
National Forest Management Act:
• KNFP direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. The diversity requirement of NFMA is met by all alternatives as
documented in the individual sensitive species and MIS analyses and supported by the statement of
findings for each species.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1 will have no direct impact to individual black-backed woodpeckers but may contribute to
extreme forest stand conditions (fuel loadings) where wildfire intensities may reach beyond what would
be expected, historically.
Alternatives, 2and 3 will have no impact individuals or their habitat and will not contribute to a trend
toward federal listing or loss of species viability for the black-backed woodpecker. This determination is
based on the fact that: 1) the project does not involve the removal of high-quality or lower-quality habitat
as previously defined; 2) the current and foreseeable snag level is maintained above the 40% viability
threshold as described by Thomas (1979); 3) the project meets KNFP standards and guidelines for this
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 264 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

species related to old growth and snags; and 4) associated prescribed burn activities may produce small
isolated pockets of high quality habitat for this species.

FISHER
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Fisher population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are
described in Powell and Zielinski (1994) and Heinemeyer and Jones (1994). That information is
incorporated by reference. Fisher occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records
and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife) and other agencies (MFWP). Fisher habitat was modeled using
the KNF Fisher Model using vegetation data from various sources including TSMRS and FACTS
databases. The potential population index (PPI) (habitat acres divided by average home range acres) was
calculated using 10,000 acres as the average male and 3,700 acres as the average female fisher home
ranges (Powell and Zielinski 1994). The index shows both male and female fisher because their home
ranges overlap extensively (Ibid). The analysis boundary for project impacts to individuals and their
habitat is the Cripple PSU. The boundary for cumulative effects is the PSU because the size of the PSU is
much larger than the average home range of the fisher. The boundary for determining trend or viability is
the KNF because of the association of fisher with riparian habitats which can naturally limit (i.e. available
habitat versus home range size) fisher densities.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Johnson (1999) shows fisher presence confirmed in five of the eight planning units on the Kootenai, and
the Cripple PSU, located in the larger Koocanusa Planning Unit, is not an area of confirmed presence.
However, fisher observations and monitoring data indicates that one fisher mortality was recorded (2000)
on lands managed by the State of Montana within the Young Dodge PSU (also Koocanusa Planning Unit)
to the north on the Canada boundary. It is likely that the fisher was a transient from Canada based on the
occurrence of a re-introduction project out of Cranbrook, British Columbia in 1995. Another sighting
(Sheep Creek, 1983) was only about six air miles from the Cripple PSU but is nearly 30 years dated, so its
status remains uncertain in the PSU. This fisher may have been genetically linked to those transplanted in
Pink Creek in 1959 (Vinkey 2003), however this is purely speculative as most of these individuals are
thought to have migrated east to the Whitefish Range. The most recent sightings of fisher have been the
result of a wolverine study conducted by the Friends of the Scotchman Peaks (2011-2012). This study
documented the presence of fisher 23 times during this timeframe; however, it is unknown how many
individual fisher sightings occurred versus repeated counts of the same individual. This study area is more
than 36 air miles southwest of the Cripple PSU on the Montana-Idaho border.
Population Information and Potential Habitat
According to Vinkey (2003), there is little known of fisher populations beyond 1989 for the Purcell
Mountains with few verified records. Other than those sightings listed previously in the adjacent areas,
there are no additional sightings that may hint fisher use of the Cripple PSU. Likewise, there are no State
trapping records for fisher in Lincoln County (Trapping District 1) since 2003 when five fisher were
harvested within the county (www.fwp.mt.gov). It is uncertain whether this lack of information is due to
fewer trappers or fisher distribution or both. Vinkey speculated that the more recently established
populations pulsing from transplant efforts may have “vanished due to habitat alterations, direct mortality,
random demographic and environmental events, or a combination of these factors.” Regardless of the
cause, there is no recent information on fisher in the Cripple PSU to suggest nothing other than transient
use of any habitat that may be available and suitable. Additionally, the fisher spends much of its time
within thick, riparian habitats where human access and use is limited due to ruggedness. For this reason,
fisher go largely undetected from humans by avoidance. Therefore potential habitat has been modeled
assuming fisher may be present as a transient species and each alternative will be analyzed for its impact
on potential habitat.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 265 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Reudiger (1994) shows the KNF as a primary habitat area for fisher. Modeling (KNF Model 2010) fisher
habitat identifies 1,291 acres of potential fisher habitat and 22,150 acres of riparian habitat (within ¼ mile
of a perennial stream) in the Cripple PSU. Following the identification process outlined in Reudiger
(Ibid), the Koocanusa Planning Unit (major drainage) is assigned as a secondary fisher conservation area
(Johnson 2004a). The Cripple PSU (sub-drainage) was determined to be low quality fisher habitat area
(Ibid).
Based on the average male and female fisher home range sizes and the modeled habitat acres, the PPI for
the Cripple PSU is possibly one female and one male fisher. Using the yearlong (modeled) habitat acres
from Johnson (1999), the minimum PPI for the KNF would be 29 male and 80 female fisher.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Table 3.93 summarizes the changes in habitat acres and PPI due to each alternative.
Table 3.93 - Cumulative Habitat and PPI Changes by Alternative
Habitat Acres – Cripple PSU
(% decrease)
Riparian Habitat w/in ¼ mile of Perennial Stream
(% treated)
PPI - Project Area (Males/Females)
Habitat Acres - Forest-wide
(% change)
PPI - Forest-wide (Males/Females)

EXISTING CONDITION

ALT 2

ALT 3

1291 ac
(0%)
22,150 ac
(0%)
1 / 1*
294,531

-483
(-37%)
-4500
(-20.3%)
1 / 1*
294,048
(-0.16%)
29 / 80**

-353
(-27%)
-4119
(-18.6%)
1 / 1*
294,178
(-0.12%)
29 / 80**

29 / 80

*Adequate amount of suitable habitat may not be present under the existing condition or under any action alternative.
Live fishers have not been recently documented (last 5 years) in the associated Koocanusa fisher planning unit.
**Due to the limited amount of habitat present under the existing condition and the effect of the action alternatives, the
effect on PPI for this species within the PSU and Forest is difficult to quantify.

ALTERNATIVES 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 (no-action) would have no direct effects on fisher habitat within the PSU due to the lack of
action. However, potential natural disturbances (wildfire, insect or disease epidemics, wind) could reduce
old growth characteristics or completely remove an area of fisher habitat under extreme conditions.
Likewise, there is the potential for human caused fires initiating on private lands to move on to adjacent
NFS lands and remove old growth and possibly riparian habitats that have not been, at least partially,
managed either by prescribed burning and/or removal of ladder fuels. In either case, if the large tree
component of old growth is removed then replacement old growth would need to be designated.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Two action alternatives propose vegetation management activities that would reduce or alter the amount
of fisher habitat in the Cripple PSU (Table 3.93). Alternative 3 would adjust several proposed treatment
units to avoid more modeled fisher habitat. Both alternatives would still adhere to KNFP direction for
vegetation treatments in riparian zones and follow state SMZ regulations. The treatments as disclosed in
Table 3.93, may alter or remove habitat for prey species of the fisher, locally affect the way fisher move
through the habitat, remove denning habitat in the form of down and hollow logs, as well as remove
resting habitat in the form of large, mature trees and again, down hollow logs. However, given the
scattered nature of the proposed treatment units and the adherence to SMZ laws and regulations,
Alternatives 2and 3 are not expected to prevent the movement of any transient fisher that may utilize the
Cripple PSU. In that respect, the project is not expected to contribute to any perceived or documented
downward trend in population by limiting their movement via habitat fragmentation.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 266 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

While research does not show fisher to be highly sensitive to human activity, the presence of people and
machines during project implementation may still displace fisher using the suitable habitat in or near the
proposed units. The displacement would last until the machines are turned off or leave the area and the
people are gone. Heinemeyer and Jones (1994) show the most sensitive time for fisher is the breeding,
denning and rearing period (Feb. 15-June 30). Impacts within 200 meters (1/8th mile) of perennial streams
are especially important to avoid (Ibid). The project design, for Alternatives 2and 3, includes timing
constraints that only allow activities from July 1 to February 15 on all units in this zone if fisher are
confirmed in the PSU. This measure should reduce displacement impacts during the most sensitive time
for fisher.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. In addition, both
alternatives covert 5.9 miles of restricted roads to decommissioned. All of these actions are likely to result
in beneficial effects for fisher by reducing motorized access which can facilitate trapping for furbearers.
Alternatives 2 and 3 also propose to convert approximately 1.8 (Alt 2) to 1.6 (Alt 3) miles of seasonally
restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use.
Although this is a legal access change, additional impacts to fisher or their habitat is unlikely because
these roads are along Koocanusa Reservoir and away from potential fisher habitat. Additional impacts to
any old growth, which is often present in riparian environments and coincides with fisher habitat in these
areas, is not anticipated based on past use of the area and the resulting existing condition.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) would have negligible effects on the riparian and old growth elements of fisher habitat because
these areas are maintained as natural as possible and planned to avoid more sensitive wet environments.
Only those snags determined to be a threat to users and campers would be removed. The potential for tree
or snag due to the creation of permanent or temporary roads has already been accounted for in the effects
of road systems (Table 3.82) on snag capability in that any areas 100 feet from any road are considered to
have a zero capability to produce snags.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 to acres on COE lands
included in the PSU boundary. The treatment areas avoid Dunn Creek which provides the only potential
fisher habitat on these lands. Therefore, the actions on COE lands would not impact this species.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition

As previously stated, fire suppression over the last century has altered stands historically maintained by
fire disturbance. The affected stands have developed fuel loading and ladder fuels that are uncharacteristic
for some sites. These conditions would continue to develop into quality fisher habitat until a natural
disturbance occurs.
The most recent Forestwide old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet
elevation is designated for old growth management, much of which is in riparian areas and available to
fisher. The proposed activities would not affect the 10% standard for old growth at either the PSU or
Forest scale.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this species are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There is 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 267 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

the treatment of Forestwide Fuels Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and would
alter the understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives. However, this is dry type
ponderosa pine old growth which has limited suitability as fisher habitat.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated old growth would not reduce the amount and distribution of old growth
below KNFP requirements. However, due to cumulative edge effects (Table 3.80) there may be reduced
old growth quality for the fisher, such as resulting in less interior habitat which may impede movement.
However, given the level of impact and the quantity of old growth in the PSU, this effect should be
minimal and would diminish in approximately 50 years (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991;
Russell et al. 2000). Private lands in the Cripple PSU were assumed to not provide any old growth, based
on past harvest practices.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like the fisher are more likely to be
disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home ranges. Area fisher may
temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are occurring. Rearing, foraging, and resting
habitat may also be removed or altered depending on the treatment prescriptions. Although these areas
may cumulatively add to disturbance on fisher or its habitat, these projects will also be required to adhere
to streamside management regulations where the highest quality fisher habitat is typically found.
Additionally, there are approximately 26,000 acres within the analysis area that are available for the
species as secure habitat.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, boughs, pine cone collecting would
maintain the designated management level of old growth by avoidance. In the instance where existing old
growth is burned or blown down, replacement old growth would be designated to account for this loss
with emphasis in riparian ecosystems which serve well as movement corridors for many species including
the fisher.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of old growth or riparian
habitat, snags or down woody debris in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive.
Grazing cattle predominantly move along road systems and within past harvest units where an abundance
of forage can be found.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in fisher habitat, as defined, because weed
treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Riparian ecosystems are considered to be more sensitive to herbicides and are largely avoided by noxious
weed treatments. Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
impacts to old growth and riparian habitats. Conversely, wildfire suppression also serves to preserve these
ecosystems serving as fisher habitat. Suppression activities are typically subject to input from District
Resource Advisors, and protection of special habitats, including old growth, is considered. However, if
cumulative effects to old growth habitat result in the habitat no longer functioning as old growth,
additional old growth habitat would be designated.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 268 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect old growth and other
specialized habitats (e.g. riparian, wetlands, etc.) because they generally do not result in vegetation
removal. These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the
summer or fall of 2013. The standing tree and snag component would only be affected if considered a
hazard to road users. These activities would not result in any change to the quantity or suitability of old
growth and riparian areas to serve as fisher habitat, thus no adverse cumulative effects would be expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the
cumulative impact on old growth because maintenance of these facilities do not typically involve removal
of old growth elements such as large trees or snags unless deemed to be a safety hazard to forest users. In
this situation, the removal of a tree or snag is considered negligible.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on resources such as old growth and riparian habitats have been included under the existing condition and
would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential
impacts on old growth and fisher habitat at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands or riparian
areas serving as fisher habitat.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from old growth along open road corridors and
these acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other forest use activities such
as mushroom and berry picking, camping, hunting, Christmas tree cutting, bough collection, etc. have
little to no measurable impact on old growth or riparian areas because they are largely non-consumptive
or rapidly re-established and would not contribute to the cumulative effect on this resource or the fisher.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands and primary fisher habitat.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. However, these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old growth
type on NFS lands and therefore would have no edge effect on old growth stands. This area does contain
one riparian zone which may serve as fisher habitat, however, these acres did not model as such. This
riparian area would be subject to state SMZs and would be protected in accordance with its status as a
perennial or intermittent stream.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
As previously stated, fire suppression over the last century has altered stands historically maintained by
fire disturbance. The affected stands have developed fuel loading and ladder fuels that are uncharacteristic
for some sites. These conditions would continue to develop into fisher habitat until a natural disturbance
occurs.
Potential natural disturbances (wildfire, insect or disease epidemics, wind) could reduce old growth
characteristics or completely remove an area of old growth under extreme conditions. Likewise, there is
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 269 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

the potential for human caused fires initiating on private lands to move on to adjacent NFS lands and
remove old growth that has not been, at least partially, managed either by prescribed burning and/or
removal of ladder fuels. In either case, if the large tree component of old growth is removed then
replacement old growth would need to be designated.
The most recent Forestwide old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet
elevation is designated for old growth management, much of which is in riparian areas and available to
fisher. The proposed activities would not affect the 10% standard for old growth at either the PSU or
Forest scale.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• All alternatives are consistent with Forest Plan riparian standards and guidelines (FP Vol 1 II-28 thru
33) as amended by INFS.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for old growth below 5500’ (FP Vol 1 II-1 #7; II7; II-22 & 23; Appendix 17; and Kootenai FSM 2432.22 Supplement No. 85) by maintaining a
minimum of 10% old growth below 5500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or
compartment, or a combination of compartments (PSU).
National Forest Management Act:
• Forest Plan direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and
quantity to maintain viable populations”. The diversity requirement of NFMA is met by all
alternatives as documented in the individual sensitive species and MIS analyses and supported by the
statement of findings for each species.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1 would have no direct impact on the fisher or its habitat due to the lack of action. Also refer
to old growth section, previously addressed.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals and/or their habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend
towards federal listing or cause a loss of species viability for the fisher. This determination is based on: 1)
lack of confirmed presence of live fisher in the Koocanusa fisher planning unit and the minimal quantity
of habitat available; 2) all action alternatives meet the 40 acres regeneration harvest limitation required by
NFMA (with Regional approval) and/or KNFP requirements to maintain 400 feet between regeneration
units (MA 15), both of which assist in avoiding forest fragmentation; 4) INFS guidelines protect the
highest-quality fisher habitat along major stream courses in the PSU; 5) no alternative results in an
increase of open roads or an overall increase in human access in the PSU that would facilitate the trapping
of fisher.

FLAMMULATED OWL
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Flammulated owl population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research
are summarized in Hayward and Verner (1994). More recent research on nesting, food habits, home range
and territories, and habitat quality conducted in Colorado, Idaho, and Montana is discussed in Linkhart
(2001), Linkhart and Reynolds (1997), Linkhart et al. (1998), Powers et al. (1996), Wright (1996) and
Wright et al. (1997). That information is incorporated by reference. Flammulated owl occurrence data
comes from recent District wildlife observation records and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife).
Flammulated owl habitat was modeled using TSMRS vegetation data and running the Kootenai TSMRS/
FACTS flammulated owl habitat model (KNF 2010; see Project File).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 270 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

The Kootenai National Forest “A Conservation Plan: Based on The Kootenai National Forest Land
Management Plan, as amended, (Johnson 2004) determines potential population index (number of
potential territories) for breeding pairs by dividing habitat acres by 40 acres. Changes to habitat and
resulting potential population index were used to display the effects of alternatives.
The analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative effects to individuals and their habitat is the
Cripple PSU because of the small home range of the owl and the quantity of habitat available in the PSU.
The boundary for determining trend or viability is the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
A KNF status summary, of the flammulated owl, was documented by Johnson (1999 unpublished). The
summary shows that potential habitat occurs across all eight planning subunits. Forestwide, there are
237,098 acres of potential habitat (Ibid). Field surveys have confirmed flammulated owl presence in six
of eight planning units. The population size on the KNF is unknown (Ibid), however Libby District
records indicate at least 11 past sightings/vocalizations of flammulated owls within the Cripple PSU
(NRIS Wildlife) dating from 1992 to present. The latest flammulated owl documented to occur in the
Cripple PSU was during recent surveys (2011) which solicited responses using taped owl calls.
Unsuccessful surveys for this species can often be attributed to the presence and response from other owl
species, especially great horned owls, which are known to prey on the flammulated. Once other owl
species respond, the flammulated owl, out of self-preservation, typically do not answer solicited calls.
Surveyors are trained to stop calling for flammulated owls when other (large predators) owls respond at a
given survey point(s). Due to the abundance of great horned owls and the risk of predation, the
flammulated owl can be difficult to find.
Implementation of the KNF TSMRS/FACTS Flammulated Owl Model (KNF 2010) indicated that there is
approximately 17,518 acres of potential flammulated owl habitat on NFS lands within the Cripple PSU.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Proposed timber harvest has the potential to impact flammulated owl habitat. Selective logging that
removes large ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir trees can decrease the availability of early-season feeding
sites, song and roost sites, and trees for snag recruitment in areas already limited in large snag abundance
(Wright 1996 p. 77). Snag removal during timber harvest for OSHA safety standards also removes
suitable habitat for flammulated owls.
Some research has suggested that flammulated owls are not likely to forage further than 300 feet from
forest cover (Goggans 1985). Regeneration harvest creating areas greater than 300 feet from cover would
likely receive minimal use. This equates to a harvest unit of about eight acres in size, or a relatively
square unit 600 feet on each side. Those proposed regeneration harvest units that are greater than eight
acres in size would, likely receive little or no foraging use until understory and mid-story canopies
develop.
Prescribed fires and/or slashing may have short-term (2-3 years) negative effects on the availability of
habitat for prey species, but in the long-term habitat for prey species would be maintained and/or
increased due to the vigorous shrub/forb layer that would result from the fire. These activities would
benefit flammulated owls (Illg and Illg 1994).
Cumulative changes in potential flammulated owl habitat caused by the various activities in the proposed
project are shown in Table 3.94.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 271 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Table 3.94 - Cumulative Acre Changes in Flammulated Owl Habitat
on NFS Lands in the Cripple PSU
ACTIVITY TYPE

Acres unsuitable due to regeneration harvest \1
Potential acres changed due to improvement harvest
Acres impacted by slash and/or burn/PCT
\1
\2

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

198
N/A
935\2

447
1049
5842

412
1045
45756

Includes acres of all regeneration units greater than 8 acres in size as worst case scenario and 4 ac for roads.
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 for 265 ac, FWF 536 for 195ac, FWF 52403 for 450ac, FWF 589 for
25ac) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA.

Based on the sum of acres impacted from Table 3.94, cumulative changes in suitable habitat acres and
PPI values on NFS lands are displayed in Table 3.95. Decreases in habitat quality may be less than
displayed as not all harvest acres are regeneration, and slashing and burning activity impacts are shortterm. However, this table displays a worst-case scenario as if all suitable snags, large-diameter trees, and
other characteristics of suitable flammulated owl habitat were removed, at least in the short-term.
Table 3.95 - Cumulative Changes in Flammulated Owl Habitat and PPI Changes
Habitat Acres – Cripple PSU
NFS lands (+/- % change)
PPI –Cripple PSU (# potential territories
remaining in unaltered habitat)
Habitat Acres – Forestwide – NFS
(+/- % Change)
PPI – Forestwide (# potential territories)

EXISTING CONDITION

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

17,518
0

202* + 935**
-1.2%

1,496
-8.5%

1,457
-8.3%

437

432

400

401

237,098
(0%)
5927

236,896
(-0.1%)
5,922

235,602
(-0.63%)
5,890

235,631
(-0.62%)
5,891

*Includes 198 acres of State of MT regeneration harvest plus 4 ac in roads and 935 acres** of FS slash/burning under the no action
alternative; only the 202 regeneration acres have the potential to remove owl habitat.

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
No activities are proposed under Alternative 1, so no direct effect to flammulated owls would occur. Plant
succession would continue, resulting in an increasing canopy closure and increasing density of understory
conifers. This plant succession could have an indirect effect on flammulated owls if they occur in the area
because the owls forage in open areas within the drier ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir forest. An
increasing density of understory conifers would decrease the available habitat for prey species, and may
also impede flight maneuvers needed for foraging (Illg and Illg 1994 58). Any impacts to flammulated
owl habitat under this alternative result from cumulative foreseeable activities in the PSU.
ALTERNATIVES 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2and 3 propose vegetation management activities that would reduce or impact the amount of
flammulated owl habitat in the Cripple PSU (Table-3.94). The changes in the amount of available habitat
could result in a PPI change in the Cripple PSU (Table 3.95).
The improvement harvests would follow a basal area reduction prescription (Table 3.94). The prescription
would favor ponderosa pine and larch by removing smaller Douglas-fir trees that are competing for
growing space. These stands are expected to retain the larger and older ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir
trees in the overstory, while exhibiting a more open understory complementing the purpose and need for
this project. Retaining large trees and snags in the overstory would preserve abandoned flicker and
pileated woodpecker cavities, which are the primary nesting sites for flammulated owls. While an upperdiameter size limit is not incorporated into the silvicultural prescriptions, larger diameter trees are
typically not removed because they are more resistant to subsequent prescribed fuel treatments and better
meet FP guidelines for snags. On those improvement harvests logged with skyline, fewer snags are
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 272 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

expected to remain due to OSHA safety standards.
The improvement harvest would however, alter or remove potential rearing and security habitat in the
form of sapling and pole-size Douglas-fir. Recommendations to retain areas of understory fir and young
ponderosa pine for these purposes would occur in specific treatment areas based on the feasibility to
protect un-thinned areas from prescribe burning.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status as well as 5.9
miles to decommissioned. Both of these actions would benefit any adjacent flammulated owl habitat by
making them less susceptible to firewood cutting (preserving cavity habitat) and by lowering human
disturbance levels. Contrarily, they each propose to convert approximately 1.8 (Alt 2) to 1.6 (Alt 3) miles
of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which
allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, any impact to adjacent owl habitat has likely
already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due to the easy topography of these lands along
Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to the flammulated owl and mature forest stands in these areas
are not anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to flammulated owl habitat may result in noxious weed invasion. The project
design should include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g. washing equipment, weed spraying).
These activities would not remove habitat attributes, such as snags, unless deemed unsafe to recreation
users/campers. These activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
in the PSU boundary. There are no known owl nests adjacent to any COE activities so no impacts to this
resource, such as edge effect, are anticipated. If any new flammulated nest trees are found, the cavity tree
and habitat would be protected during management activities by utilizing a treatment buffer and other
mitigating factors.
Cumulative Effects Summary of the Existing Condition
Over the past 75 to 100 years, partially due to the Warland Mill, low-elevation timber harvesting has
contributed cumulatively to the reduction or alteration of flammulated owl nesting and foraging habitat.
These timber harvests typically removed or reduced the large diameter ponderosa pine and often thinned
the understory affecting nesting, roosting and foraging habitats. Stands thinned too much also allowed for
increase predation on this small owl by larger owls, such as the great horned. Another forest management
activity that has contributed both positively and negatively to flammulated owl habitat is fuels reduction
in the urban interface where much of the low-elevation ponderosa pine forests grow. While the reduction
of ladder fuels assist in maintaining the mature canopy trees and nesting snags, it also reduces thickets of
young Douglas-fir that provide roosting and escape cover for fledgling owls. Contrarily, these same
activities can have beneficial effects to the owl’s foraging habitat. Given the current direction of the
agency related to the protection of the urban interface, it is anticipated that fuels management in the urban
interface would continue to have both positive and negative cumulative effects on flammulated owl
habitat where suitable habitat is present.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect flammulated owls
are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 (265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 273 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2012 and 2014, would likely remove and create snags therefore their impact is
considered negligible. All of these acres are reflected in Table 3.84, in that resource section. Twenty-five
of these acres are within designated dry-type old growth and would alter the understory as described
under direct effects for action alternatives. These treatments would likely impact security and rearing
habitat for young flammulated owls and have been reflected under Alternative 1 (no-action) in Table
3.95. Blowdown salvaging would have little, if any, impact to this owl given associated habitat typically
does not involve down wood material for either cover or foraging.
Cumulatively, the proposed activities (timber harvest, prescribed fire, ground fuel reduction) in
designated and undesignated old growth, that can serve as flammulated owl habitat, would not reduce the
amount and distribution of old growth below KNFP requirements. However, due to cumulative edge
effects (Table 3.80) there may be reduced old growth quality for some plant and animal species, such as
resulting in less interior habitat and more edge where predation is more likely to occur or where noxious
weed invasions are more likely to become established. However, given the level of impact and the
quantity of old growth in the PSU, this effect should be minimal and would diminish in approximately 50
years (Russell and Jones 2001; Ripple et al. 1991; Russell et al. 2000). Private lands in the Cripple PSU
were assumed to not provide any old growth, based on past harvest practices.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, boughs, pine cone collecting would
maintain the designated management level of old growth and other mature forest stands by avoidance.
Other than possibly annoying individual owls, in areas outside of old growth, (i.e. disturbing roosting
individuals) human disturbance from these activities would have minimal impacts on flammulated owls.
In the instance where existing old growth serving as flammulated owl habitat, is burned or blown down,
replacement old growth will be designated to account for this loss.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile Allotment, Warland Allotment) would not result in a change of old growth or
mature habitats that provides nesting areas for this species, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead
or alive. Additionally, changes to the grass/herbaceous layer of vegetation would not affect owl habitat
characteristics and generally, due to the lack of ungulate forage in old growth and mature forest stands,
grazing cattle are typically not an issue.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on flammulated owls or their habitat
because treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to many species or their prey
(USDA Forest Service 1997, 30). No loss or change in specific habitats (e.g. old growth, mature forests),
including snags for nesting, would result from this activity because weed treatments primarily focus on
the herbaceous layer along roads and in disturbed areas. Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated
within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
With the direction to suppress all wildland fires on NFS lands, construction of firelines, safety zones and
other control structures could impact individuals on a site-specific basis. Avoidance of known owl cavity
nests would be attempted during suppression efforts but some impacts may still occur. Due to the
unpredictable nature of wildfires, contributions of fire suppression to the cumulative effect on this species
can only be surmised but may certainly include temporary disturbance and loss of individual snags and or
potential nest trees. Also refer to cumulative effects on old growth.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect flammulated owls and
specialized habitats (e.g. snags, shrubs, fir thickets) because they generally do not result in vegetation
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 274 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

removal. Although road restoration and maintenance projects (brushing, blading, gate repairs, culvert
replacement, etc.) may temporarily disturb individuals, they typically benefit the species in the long-term,
especially if the projects involve closing previously open road systems (refer to road storage in
Transportation/Hydrology Sections). Also refer to cumulative effects on old growth. These activities
include the Koocanusa Marina repaving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013. The
standing tree and snag component of owl habitat would only be affected if considered a hazard to road
users. These activities would not result in any change to the quantity of old growth, thus no adverse
cumulative effects would be expected to that resource.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites have the potential to remove
nesting and foraging trees for flammulated owls if they are close to a trail or road and present a safety
hazard. Effects would include removing site-specific, individual trees, and would not be expected to
contribute measurably to the cumulative effect on the owl. In this situation, the removal of a single tree or
snag is considered negligible unless an owl nest is determined to be present.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on resources such as old growth and mature forest stands have been included under the existing condition
and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for
potential impacts on the owl at that time.
Operations of outfitter/guides would not result in any change to general and specialized flammulated owl
habitats (e.g. old growth or mature forests, snags or fir thickets), as they do not involve the harvest of
trees. There would be no cumulative effects to the owl or its habitats associated with these activities other
than possible temporary and local avoidance of an area due to the presence of humans.
There are no known land exchanges planned within the PSU at this time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands.
Public Use
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (nesting, rearing) when flammulated owls may be more
sensitive to human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts. There may
be some situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur, due to an overlap of forest
activities, but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist through the lifecycle of the
owl, either temporally or spatially.
Other forest product activities occurring presently and typically on an annual basis are the gathering of
pine cones, boughs and commercial gathering of Christmas trees. These activities occur throughout the
PSU, and have little-to-no effect on the landscape due to the unspecific nature of the use and the low
impact on the resources (foot traffic, hand tools). Additionally, Christmas trees are harvested from
existing regeneration units, so this activity would have no cumulative effect on the specialized habitats of
this owl, such as old growth and other mature forests.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth and
mature forests within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands. Any cumulative effects to flammulated owls
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 275 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

would be partially dependent on the duration (seasonal versus year-round) of use of these parcels and
homes. Anticipated effects include species displacement, nest failure, habitat alteration and/or habitat
loss.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. While these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old growth type
on NFS lands and therefore, would have no edge effect on old growth stands, they are in mature forest
stands. The regeneration of these stands would reduce potential habitat by 198 acres. These acres are
reflected in Table 3.95 under Alternative 1 (no-action). The disturbance associated with this activity
would likely cause flammulated owls to avoid adjacent areas during implementation.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Although, habitat changes, which add to those of the existing condition as previously described, would
occur under the proposed actions, the Cripple PSU would continue to provide habitat for resident
flammulated owls. Following implementation of the proposed activities, the Cripple PSU is expected to
potentially provide suitable habitat for at least 400 nesting pair of flammulated owls with minimal effect
on the Forest level to this species due to perpetuation of suitable habitat.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for old growth below 5,500’ (FP Vol 1 II-1 #7; II-7;
II-22 & 23; Appendix 17; and Kootenai FSM 2432.22 Supplement No. 85) by maintaining a minimum
of 10% old growth below 5,500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or compartment, or a
combination of compartments (PSU).
• Forest Plan direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. This direction is met by developing a full range of alternatives which
consider both habitat quantity and quality for resident species.
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for potential impacts on old
growth/mature habitats and their associated species.
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Implementation of Alternative 1 would have no direct impact on the flammulated owl as no activities are
proposed. Cumulatively other reasonably foreseeable activities on federal land (i.e. continued fire
suppression) would occur and may affect their habitat.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals and/or their habitat, but would not contribute to a trend
toward federal listing or loss of species viability for the flammulated owl. This determination is based on
the fact that: 1) avoidance or displacement could occur during implementation if owls are present; 2)
modeled foraging and nesting habitat would be impacted but locations of known owl nest(s) are
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 276 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

protected; 3) habitat change at the Forest scale is only -0.1 to -0.63%; 4) the potential decrease in PPI may
not occur as surveys indicate because occupancy level is less than the densities estimated by the PPI , and
potential to impact or displace an owl is low; 5) the prescribed burning and improvement harvest may
improve potential habitat; and 6) Forest Plan standards related to flammulated owl habitat (old growth)
are met.

TOWNSEND’S BIG-EARED BAT
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Townsend’s big-eared bat population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by
research are described in the following: Christy and West (1993), Thomas and West (1991), Reel et al.
(1989), Perkins and Schommer (1991), Kunz and Martin (1982), Montana Natural Heritage Program
(1993), Ross (1967), Whitaker et al. (1977) and Pierson et al. (1999). That information is incorporated by
reference. Townsend’s big-eared bat occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife survey records
and Forest historical data (NRIS Wildlife) and other agencies (MNHP).
All known caves, mines, tunnels or lakes, and old growth were located within the Cripple PSU. After
reviewing District records and mineral maps, no caves were identified, however field crews found one
mine (Hoyt Mine) location with at least two adits or entrance tunnels. These sites will require additional
documentation.
The analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative effects to individuals and their habitat is the
Cripple PSU. The boundary for determining trend or viability is the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
A KNF status summary of the Townsend’s big-eared bat was documented by Johnson (1999). Surveys of
the KNF (1993-1995) by Hendricks et al. (1995 1996) have located the species in all planning units
(Johnson 1999) but no key roosting sites such as caves or mines have been located. Population size on the
KNF is unknown. Lenard et al. (2009) also documented that Townsend’s big-eared bat occurs on every
district of the KNF. Libby District NRIS records show four documented sightings or vocalizations of this
species dating back to 1994 (map included in Project File).
Big-eared bats are known to feed along forest edges, and can be associated with either dry or wet type
coniferous forests. The species show a preference for old growth forest for roosting habitat (Thomas and
West 1991). Young and mature forests are used for feeding (Ibid), with primary foraging areas near lakes
(Grindal 1995). Based on this information, this species likely utilizes the major creek drainage bottoms
(Hendricks et al. 1995, 1996) within the PSU.
As stated previously, only one mine location is known to exist within the Cripple PSU. Therefore, as the
Townsend’s big-eared bat has the potential to roost in tree cavities (Perkins and Schommer 1991, MNHP
1993), the larger-diameter snags or trees with cavities in the area could be used for summer roosting. As
discussed in the old growth section of this document, the Cripple PSU has 11.2% (8533 ac) designated
effective old growth, and 12.1% (9262 ac) total old growth acres, both designated and undesignated.
These stands and the remaining timbered habitat provide suitable roosting habitat in the form of large
snags with cavities and slouching bark, as well as abundant foraging habitat across the forest landscape.
The analysis for cavity habitat within the Cripple PSU determined that the cavity habitat potential (CHP)
on NFS lands was 67.9%. Please see the Snag Habitat section of this document for more detailed
discussion.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternative 1, no activities are proposed, and no Townsend's big-eared bats would be directly
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 277 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

disturbed by any timber harvest or associated slashing and/or under burning. No direct effects to
Townsend's big-eared bats would be expected. Plant succession would continue on many of sites, with
increasing canopy closure and increasing density of understory conifers. This plant succession may have
an indirect effect on Townsend's big-eared bats since they forage in open areas within forests and the
increasing density of understory conifers may decrease the available habitat for prey species. It may also
impede flight maneuvers needed for foraging. If a wildland fire was to occur, potential roosting in the
form of snags could be both lost and created, but no direct effect on key roosting habitat, in the form or
caves, mines, or rock outcrops, would occur, as a wildfire should not disturb these types of fire resistant
habitats. There would be no expected change in the existing condition with implementation of Alternative
1 in the short-term other than those disclosed under cumulative effects. On NFS lands, no direct effect to
cavity habitat potential would occur, and CHP would remain at 67.9%.
ALTERNATIVES 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Under Alternatives 2and 3, regeneration and improvement harvest activities have the potential to disturb
or reduce day roosting habitat (trees and snags with cavities or thick, loose bark). The potential for
reduction in snags was disclosed in Table 3.82 in the Snag and Down Woody Resource Section.
Improvement harvests that open up suitable habitat or edge habitat created, may improve foraging
opportunities for bats that use the area. Underburning could both reduce and create snag habitat.
Disturbance or mortality of bats could occur if bats were using a snag that was cut down. Displacement
could occur during prescribed burning. Effects would be site-specific, affecting individuals rather than
colonies, and are not likely to affect the viability of the Townsend’s big-eared bat.
The maintenance of old growth habitat, as previously described would provide large-diameter tree and
snag habitat through time, and snag levels would be maintained at a minimum of 40% through time to
provide cavity habitat. None of the alternatives reduce the current designation level of old growth.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these
actions would benefit any adjacent bat habitat by making them less susceptible to firewood cutting
(preserving cavity/snag habitat) and by lowering human disturbance levels. Contrarily, Alternatives 2 and
3 each propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately
13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access
change, any impact to adjacent bat habitat has likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due
to the easy topography of these lands along Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to the bat and
mature forest stands in these areas are not anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to Townsend’s big-eared bat habitat may result in noxious weed invasion affecting
associated prey species. The project design should include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g.
washing equipment, weed spraying). These activities would not remove habitat attributes, such as snags,
unless deemed unsafe to recreation users/campers. These activities would occur in all action alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 to acres on COE lands
included in the PSU boundary. There are no known caves, mines, or old buildings, nor cavity trees
adjacent to any COE activities so no impacts to this resource, such as roosting loss, are anticipated.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Past and present activities and natural occurrences that have contributed to the cumulative effects on
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 278 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Townsend’s big-eared bat or its habitat include timber harvest, wildfires, wildfire suppression and the
sealing of caves or mines. There is one recorded mine within the Cripple PSU that may provide suitable
roosting or overwintering habitat. There have been a variety of timber harvests (Tables 3.2) and wildfires
that have both reduced potential bat roosting habitat but also likely provided additional foraging areas for
this species. Wildfires have also created snags suitable for roosting, even breeding for some bat species.
However, the suppression of wildfires has hampered this process. In general, the combination of these
activities and processes are thought have both created and reduced bat habitat and have had negligible
cumulative effects on Townsend’s big-eared bat except those that have affected old growth or latesuccessional forest stands, where an abundance of summer roosting habitat is typically available. For
more information on the cumulative effects to the snag resource, please refer to that section.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this species are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545 (265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF
589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2013 and 2015, would likely remove and create snags therefore their impact is
considered negligible. All of these acres are reflected in Table 3.84, in that resource section.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging (Pg. 3-5) would maintain the existing
level of snags by avoidance with the exception of small snags possibly lost to character wood(furniture)
gatherers. Most snags removed for furniture however are small diameter trees (<10” DBH) unsuitable for
most cavity nesters/roosters and this impact is considered negligible to a species such as the Townsend’s
big-eared bat.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of old growth habitat,
mature forest, or snags in the PSU, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in snags serving as bat roosting habitat
because weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed
areas. Herbicides are sprayed specifically on weed species and not broadcast over all vegetation,
therefore, treatments are largely beneficial to native plants by removing competition for soil resources.
Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities including the construction of firelines, helispots, and safety zones could
potentially result in impacts to specialized habitats (e.g. old growth, snags, riparian areas). The amount
and timing of such a loss cannot be predicted; however, the number of snags created by a wildfire would
far exceed those lost during fire suppression efforts. Suppression activities are typically subject to input
from District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats, including snags, is considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats
(e.g. snags, old growth) because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. These activities
include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall of 2013. The
snag component would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. These activities would not
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 279 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

result in any change to the snag component, thus no adverse cumulative effects on this bat species would
be expected.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites could involve the harvest of
snags or green replacement trees that pose a hazard to users. However, the scale of the impact would be
small and not measurable as a cumulative effect to snag levels or associated species such as the
Townsend’s big-eared bat.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on resources such as snags have been included under the existing condition and would have no additional
impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for potential impacts on the
Townsend’s big-eared bat and cavity/roosting habitat at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but could result in the loss of individual snags due to public safety concerns.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags from the open road corridors and these acres
were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other public uses such as wildlife
viewing, berry picking, camping, snowmobiling, etc. have negligible impacts on the snag resource. Most
campers utilize down wood for campfires in lieu of felling additional dead wood so this impact would
also be negligible.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore there will likely be a decrease in dry-site snags within the
PSU, but outside of NFS lands. For road construction on private lands, an estimated four acres per mile of
forest can be expected to be lost. For home construction, garage, parking, lawn, an estimated 1-2 acres of
forest can be estimated to be lost per resident. Because these acres are unknown they are not reflected in
Table 3.83.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in snag loss and were considered under
Alternative 1, no-action.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Cumulatively, with all lands considered, and all other reasonably foreseeable actions on private and state
lands considered, sufficient cavity habitat for the Townsend’s big-eared bat would remain in the Cripple
PSU (Table 3.83).
When other activities including the harvest on private, state and federal lands discussed under Alternative
1, and all past, present and reasonably foreseeable activities are considered, habitat on federal lands is
considered sufficient to provide cavity habitat to cavity-dependent species. After implementation of
Alternative 1 and the reasonably foreseeable FS projects, the primary cavity excavator PPL level on NFS
lands is estimated to remain at approximately 67.8% After implementation of Alternatives 2or 3 and the
reasonably foreseeable projects, the primary cavity excavator PPL on NFS lands would decrease from
67.9% to 60.0or 61.0% respectively. This level of snag habitat is still expected to provide for an
associated species population level above 40%, which is thought to be the minimum needed to maintain
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 280 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

self-sustaining populations of snag-dependent wildlife (Thomas 1979 72).
The 2007 KNFP Monitoring Report (USDA Forest Service 2008) documents results for the past 19 years,
and indicates the Kootenai National Forest is providing sufficient cavity habitat at the drainage or
compartment, as well as the Forest scale.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• All proposed units in Alternatives 1, 2and 3 maintain at least 40% snag level. No alternative causes the
Cripple PSU overall PPL to drop below the general forest 40% or riparian 60% primary cavity
excavator potential population level. This is consistent with KNFP standards. KNFP cavity habitat
standard (40% PPL) in MAs 15 and 16 is met. KNFP cavity habitat standard in MA 10 is met.
Alternatives 2and 3 would not require a project-specific amendment to suspend the requirement to
retain all existing cavity habitat in MA 10. All treatment units would be managed to meet the 40%
minimum snag level.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction for old growth below 5,500’ (FP Vol 1 II-1 #7; II-7;
II-22 & 23; Appendix 17; and Kootenai FSM 2432.22 Supplement No. 85) by maintaining a minimum
of 10% old growth below 5,500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or compartment, or a
combination of compartments (PSU).
• Forest Plan direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. This direction is met by developing a full range of alternatives which
consider both habitat quantity and quality for resident species.
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for potential impacts on
snags/mature habitats and their associated species.
• The project complies with NFMA direction (16 USC 1604 (G)(3)(b) to “provide for diversity of plant
and animal communities based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet
overall multiple-use objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan
adopted pursuant to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be
taken to preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the
plan.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1 would have no direct impact on Townsend’s big-eared bats or their habitat, however some
indirect impacts to habitat may result as previously described. This determination is based on: 1) no direct
change in the current availability of roosting and hibernacular habitat would occur, and 2) foraging habitat
and potential roosting habitat would remain distributed across the Cripple PSU and across the KNF.
Cumulatively, other reasonably foreseeable activities on federal land would occur and may impact
individuals or their habitat.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals and/or their habitat, but would not contribute to a trend
toward federal listing or loss of species viability for Townsend’s big-eared bat. This determination is
based on the fact that: 1) the action alternatives would not affect key roosting or hibernacula in the form
of caves and mines, or any buildings and no impacts to the species natality or mortality rates are expected;
however, displacement from summer roosting sites (snags) could occur; 2) cavity habitat in the form of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 281 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

snags, wildlife trees, and leave trees would continue to be provided across the Forest in managed (no less
than 40% snag habitat levels) and unmanaged areas; and 3) a forested environment suitable for foraging
would remain distributed across the Cripple PSU and Forestwide.

WESTERN TOAD
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Western toad ecology, biology, habitat use, status and conservation are described and summarized in
Maxell (2000) and Reichel and Flath (1995). That information is incorporated by reference. Western toad
occurrence data comes from District wildlife observation records and Forest historical data (NRIS
Wildlife) and other agencies (MNHP). The analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative effects
to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple PSU based on the wide-range of suitable breeding habitat.
The boundary for determining trend or viability is the Kootenai National Forest based on the species’
ability to disperse and use of generalized habitat.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Western toads require over-wintering, breeding/rearing, and foraging habitat, and may also be dependent
on habitats suitable for migration if the three required habitat types are isolated spatially (Maxell 2000).
As summarized in Maxell (2000), over-wintering may take place in underground caverns or in rodent
burrows; breeding/rearing takes place in aquatic sites such as shallow areas of large and small lakes or
temporary ponds; and foraging habitat is largely in terrestrial uplands. The highest elevation the species
has been documented in Montana is 9,220 feet.
A KNF status summary of the western toad was documented by Johnson (1999). The species has been
found in seven of the eight planning units. The population size is unknown and direct measures of
population trend on the KNF are not available (Ibid 1999). However, many surveys have been conducted
on the KNF since 1993. Surveys conducted between 1993 and 1995 located 63 adults. Of the 134 wetland
sites surveyed during the 1993-94 field season, 10 had evidence of successful breeding (Werner and
Reichel 1994); five additional sites were confirmed during the 1995 field season (Werner and Reichel
1996). Surveys of approximately 200 potential sites were conducted in the Bull River drainage during the
1997-98 field season with evidence of breeding sites (tadpoles and eggs) at eight sites (Corn et al. 1998).
Historic and active breeding sites by planning unit on the KNF are summarized by Johnson (1999).
Forestwide, approximately 35 breeding sites were verified between 1995 and 1998 (Ibid).
There are 11 known potential breeding (mapped wetlands) sites within the Cripple PSU. Their recent use
status was checked in 2011 along with seven additional potential sites. These sites are scattered
throughout PSU drainages. Of the 18 sites checked for boreal breeding evidence, two had confirmed
boreal tadpoles. Additional breeding habitat is likely to occur in temporal ponds and road ditches.
Another small breeding site was documented just outside the PSU boundary in the summer of 2011
during field visits to the PSU, and was also mapped for the Project File. The approximately 92,000
(78,607 NFS lands) acres of terrestrial habitat within the Cripple PSU is considered upland foraging
habitat and available to the western toad.
Criteria used to compare the alternative impacts on the western toad and its habitat includes:
1) Known breeding/rearing habitat impacted;
2) Acres of upland foraging habitat harvested and burned;
3) Acres of upland foraging habitat (prescribed burned only).

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Quantitative data regarding the western toad's use of upland and forested habitats is limited. Western
toads are known to migrate between the aquatic breeding and terrestrial non-breeding habitats (TNC
Database 1999). Movement of toads has been documented from 2.5 km to over 5 km between breeding
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 282 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

sites (Corn et al. 1998, Bartelt and Peterson 1994). Movement, in foraging areas, has been documented to
be significantly influenced by the distribution of shrub cover, and toads may have avoided macro-habitats
with little or no canopy and shrub cover (such as clearcuts) (Bartelt and Peterson 1994). Underground
burrows and debris were important components of toad-selected micro-sites in a variety of macrohabitats. The western toad digs its own burrow in loose soil or uses those of small mammals, or shelters
under logs or rocks, suggesting the importance of coarse woody debris on the forest floor (Ibid). Project
activities (e.g. timber harvest, prescribed fire) that remove vegetation resulting in reduced canopy and/or
shrub cover or reduced coarse woody debris are likely to impact western toad habitat and toad use
patterns. Soil compaction from ground-based logging machines may impact over-wintering habitat
(burrow sites).
ALTERNATIVES 1, 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Table 3.96 summarizes the direct and indirect and cumulative changes in habitat acres due to each
alternative and/or concurrent activities.
Table 3.96 - Cumulative Toad Habitat Impacted by Alternative
on NFS lands in the Cripple PSU (acres)
COMPARISON CRITERIA

Known breeding/rearing habitat impacted
Upland foraging habitat harvested/burned
Upland foraging habitat treated by prescribed burned only

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
1,133*
935

0
10,644**
10,049**

0
9,091**
10,049**

* Any acres disclosed in this column are not part of this project but are concurrent and cumulative actions (DNRC =
198 ac harvesting; NFS prescribed burning under FWF (2001) = 935 ac.
** Treated acres adding to the no-action alternative including Army COE lands.

Under Alternative 1, no direct effect to the western toad would be expected with this alternative. Any
impacts to potential toad habitat would be the result of cumulative effects from other planned or
foreseeable projects disclosed under this alternative, in Table 3.96. Plant succession would continue on all
other sites. Indirectly, this would result in an increase in canopy closure and density of understory
conifers. This increase in canopy closure and understory conifer density would have no direct or indirect
effect on breeding habitat, and little, if any, effect on upland habitat. Fuel loads would continue to
accumulate on the upland sites. Should wildland fire occur, typically aquatic breeding habitats would not
be directly affected; however, surrounding upland habitat could be burned and may have short-term
impacts to toad dispersal (cover connectivity). However, western toads have been noted to re-colonize
burned areas the following year with vegetation re-growth (B. Maxell, Herpetologist, State Zoologist with
MTNHP, personal communication April 2003, Troy Mt., J. Holifield (Libby District Biologist) personal
observation).
Timber Harvest and Road Building
A review of the available literature by Semlitsch (2000) in the United States indicates timber harvest and
road construction activities can impact aquatic breeding habitat by altering the hydrological cycle of
wetlands that can impair completion of larval metamorphosis through early pond drying (hydroperiod
shortened), or through increased predation (if hydroperiod is lengthened). Aquatic habitat quality can also
be reduced by sedimentation and increased water temperatures.
The effects of timber harvest on upland habitats are summarized in Semlitsch (2000) and can include
elimination of shade, increase surface temperatures, disruption and compaction of soil structure, reduction
in soil moisture, removal of coarse woody debris, and sedimentation of aquatic habitats from logging
roads. The fragmentation of natural habitats from timber harvesting and road building may impede
dispersal and decreases the probability of wetland re-colonization (Semlitsch 2000). Timber harvest
(especially clearcutting) and associated silvicultural practices appear detrimental to terrestrial amphibian
populations (Bury et al. 2000). Impacts from intensive forest management (e.g. even-aged harvesting)
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 283 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

practices extend beyond the boundaries of harvested stands (DeMaynadier and Hunter 1998).
Recommendations for buffer zones and terrestrial habitats for corridors of movement for amphibian
species are discussed by several authors (Semlitsch 1998, Hannon et al. 2002). However, western toads
are considered to be more terrestrial generalists (DeMaynadier and Hunter 1998), and tend to be more
tolerant than salamanders of forest edges, tree harvests and declining patch size (Renken et al. 2004).
The proposed timber harvest activities could result in incidental mortality to western toads due to ground
disturbance (crushing by logging equipment), however limited the risk. If present, the toad would likely
retreat under cover, underground or move away from the disturbance during project activities.
Additionally, once breeding season completes in the spring, the toad is largely nocturnal in behavior
which would reduce the likelihood for individual mortality due to logging equipment.
Alternatives 2 and 3 would be similar in their timber harvest effects except in quantity. See Table 3.96 for
acreage comparisons. All of the action alternatives propose new road construction including temporary
road construction as well as road storage (Tables 2.0 and 2.15, Chapter 2). The use of road construction
equipment, like logging machinery, could impact or remove individual toads.
Fire
A review of the available literature by Russell et al. (1999) indicates that replacement of the fire-adapted
vegetation by fire-intolerant associations indirectly leads to accompanying declines in overall
herpetofaunal abundance and diversity. Without fire, species that use or can tolerate dense vegetation
would be benefited, while those species that prefer open sites would continue to decrease through time.
There are few reports of fire-caused injury to herpetofauna even though many of these animals,
particularly amphibians, have limited mobility (Russell et al. 1999). The resultant micro-site variation
within burns may account for observations that fire has little effect on herpetofaunal species (Lyon et al.
2000). Maintaining preferred or required habitat features presumably outweighs any fire-induced
mortality that occurs (Russell et al. 1999). Mortality may be associated with the direct and indirect effects
of fire that alter prey availability or change shelter and microclimate (Lyon et al. 2000, Russell et al.
1999). Indirectly, although fire-induced disturbance may decrease herpetofauna within a particular patch,
the prescribed burning should result in a mosaic of successional stages and habitat structure that should
increase diversity on a broader scale assisting in meeting the purpose and need to enhance wildlife habitat
within the Cripple PSU (Russell et al. 1999).
Site preparation burning in timber harvest units is also proposed under the action alternatives (Table
3.96). All activities associated with timber harvest, road construction/decommissioning, intermittent
stored service and prescribed fire would be consistent with INFS and direct or indirect effects on riparian
habitat (potential breeding sites) associated with the western toad would be unlikely. No harvest would
occur within Streamside Management Zones.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these
actions would benefit the western toad by making them less susceptible to being accidentally crushed by
motorized vehicles. Contrarily, Alternatives 3 and 4 each propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6
miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads
which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, any impact to adjacent toad habitat has
likely already occurred from illegal firewood gathering due to the easy topography of these lands along
Koocanusa Reservoir. Additional impacts to any toads and down woody cover in these areas are not
anticipated.
Ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground improvements (Fivemile,
Yarnell) in or adjacent to western toad habitat may result in noxious weed invasion affecting associated
prey species. The project design would include measures to reduce this potential risk (e.g. washing
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 284 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

equipment, weed spraying). These activities would not remove habitat attributes, such as down woody
debris, unless deemed unsafe to recreation users/campers. These activities would occur in all action
alternatives.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 to acres on COE lands
included in the PSU boundary. These activities would reduce existing down woody debris as cover for
western toads but would also likely create new snags and subsequent down wood for this species.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
The combination of past timber harvest and years of wildfire suppression in the PSU are believed to have
resulted in a balance of cumulative impacts, both positive and negative, on western toad habitat. While
timber harvest have opened forest canopies, removed down woody debris, possibly altered hydroperiods,
as previously discussed, and created roads, wildfire suppression has largely had the opposite effect (see
Direct and Indirect Effects). With exception to trail and firebreak creation, wildfire suppression has
maintained vast areas of thick forest canopy and an abundance of large woody debris on the forest floor,
facilitating western toad travel across the landscape and has assisted in maintaining breeding/rearing
habitat by protecting wet micro-sites.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545(265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403(450ac), FWF
589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2012 and 2014, would likely remove and create down wood (new snag
creation) therefore, their impact is considered negligible.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging (Pg. 3-5) would maintain the existing
level of snags, and subsequent down wood, by avoidance with the exception of small quantities possibly
lost to character wood (furniture) gatherers. Most wood removed for furniture however are small diameter
trees (<10” DBH) unsuitable for most cavity nesting or hollow log rest areas. Down wood lost to
firewood gatherers within 100 feet of a road has already been accounted for in the PPL for snags. These
activities would have little impact on the ability of the western toad to move or forage across the
landscape nor measurably increase the risk of being crushed by equipment.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change in down woody debris in
the PSU to serve as toad habitat, as it does not involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive. Livestock
watering in suitable toad habitat may however, crush the occasional individual with their hooves. Some
toad foraging habitat may also be damaged by grazing livestock, however measurable impacts are not
expected because of open range management.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Toads away from wetlands or breeding sites could accidently be sprayed with herbicides being utilized
along road systems or within infested ungulate seasonal ranges (e.g. winter range). The effect of being
sprayed is accounted for in the application rates/toxicity and chemicals disclosed in the 2007 KNF
Invasive Plant Management FEIS (pp. 3-72 to 3-73). Any herbicide application within the Cripple PSU
would be consistent with that document and its range of effects on amphibian species. Typically,
approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression activities including the construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 285 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

potentially result in impacts to specialized habitats (e.g. shrub layers and down woody debris). The
amount and timing of such a loss cannot be predicted; however, the number of snags and subsequent
down wood created by a wildfire would far exceed those lost during fire suppression efforts. Low level
vegetation, including shrubs, would be lost immediately following a wildfire, but would likely reestablish within five years. Overall, fire suppression activities serve to protect general toad habitat and are
typically subject to input from District Resource Advisors, and protection of specialized habitats,
including down wood, is considered.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect specialized habitats
(e.g. low-level vegetation, down woody debris) because they generally do not result in vegetation
removal. These activities could crush individual toads if present during operations. They could also result
in the draining of potential breeding sites in ditch areas when water accumulation is a threat to the road.
These activities include the Koocanusa Marina repaving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall
of 2013. The down wood component would only be affected if considered a hazard to road users. It is
likely however, that any or most down wood within the permitted area of the Marina would be lost to
campers for campfires. Given the number of acres (70 ac) under permit versus the size of the PSU
(>90,000), this impact is considered negligible.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites could involve the harvest of
down wood that pose a hazard to forest users and the removal of low-level vegetation to facilitate human
use. However, the scale of the impact would be small and not measurable as a cumulative effect to the
toad, other amphibians and reptiles.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as shrubs and down wood has been included under the existing condition
and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would be analyzed for
potential impacts on snags at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but could result in the loss some shrubs and down wood, due to public safety concerns. It is
likely however, that any or most down wood within the permitted area of the Marina would be lost to
campers for campfires. Given the number of acres (70 ac) under permit versus the size of the PSU
(>90,000), this impact is considered negligible.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some snags/down wood from the open road corridors and
these acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other public uses such as
wildlife viewing, berry picking, camping, snowmobiling, etc. have negligible impacts on this species due
to scope (type of use, risk of trampling, space).
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site shrubs and
down wood within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands. For road construction on private lands, an
estimated four acres per mile of forest/shrubs can be expected to be lost. For home construction, garage,
parking, lawn, an estimated 1-2 acres of forest can be estimated to be lost per resident. Because these
acres are unknown they are not reflected in Table 3.83.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 286 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in shrub, snag and subsequent down wood
loss and were considered under the No Action Alternative 1 under the snag analysis.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Cumulatively, with all lands considered, and all other reasonably foreseeable actions on private and state
lands considered as described above, sufficient down woody debris would remain in the Cripple PSU.
The 2007 KNFP Monitoring Report (USDA Forest Service 2008) documents results for the past 19 years
may be the best indicator that standing dead and down habitat is being retained via management
guidelines and recommendations. Additionally, based on district records, only 1,082 acres (1.4%) out of
78,607 (NFS lands) of timber harvest has occurred in the past five years within the PSU that may impede
the movement of the western toad in the analysis area.
In summary, both timber harvest and slash and/or burn units would not provide habitat until shrub cover
returned (2-3 years). The temporary reduction in habitat is not likely to result in a declining population
trend for this species due to its use of unspecialized habitat outside of breeding.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• There are no goals or standards for downed woody debris in the KNFP. It does contain the goal to:
“Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable populations of all existing native, vertebrate,
wildlife species.... (FP Vol 1 II-1 Goal #7)”. The KNFP provides guidelines in Appendix 16, Cavity
Habitat Management (FP Vol 2 App 16 6 - Guideline #9). All alternatives are consistent with the
KNFP, as a wide range of successional habitats, and associated amounts of downed wood would be
available.
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• KNFP direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. This direction is met by developing a full range of alternatives which
consider both habitat quantity and quality for resident species.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP riparian standards and guidelines (FP Vol 1 II-28 thru 33) as
amended by INFS by creation of SMZs.
• All proposed units in Alternatives 2and 3 maintain at least 40% snag level, which eventually contribute
to down woody resources. No alternative causes the Cripple PSU overall PPL to drop below the general
forest 40% or riparian 60% primary cavity excavator potential population level. This is consistent with
Forest Plan standards.
National Forest Management Act:
• The diversity requirement of NFMA is met by all alternatives as documented in the individual sensitive
species and MIS analyses by maintaining a full range of associated habitats and supported by the
statement of findings for each species. The project complies with the National Forest System Land and
Resource Management Planning rule of March 27, 2013, as amended by meeting Kootenai National
Forest Land Management Plan direction for a variety of vegetation age classes.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Implementation of Alternative 1 would have no impact (direct, indirect) on the western toad due to the
lack of action. Similar (to those disclosed below) localized impacts could occur from cumulative activities
displayed in Table 3.96.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 287 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Implementation of Alternatives 2and 3 may impact individuals or habitat, but would not likely contribute
to a trend towards federal listing or loss of species viability for the western toad. This finding is based on:
1) removal and partial consumption of coarse woody material in upland sites due to harvest activities
and/or prescribed fire; 2) the longer-term recruitment of coarse woody debris due to fire-killed trees
falling over time; 3) no impact or change to the current availability of breeding habitat; 4) retention of
riparian movement corridors; 5) the low risk of direct mortality during burning and the limited direct
mortality risk during timber harvest activities; and 6) suitable habitat would remain in the Cripple PSU
and distributed across the Kootenai National Forest.

GRAY WOLF
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Strategies to protect and recover wolf populations in Montana, as well as the ecology, biology and habitat
descriptions are outlined in the Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan (USFWS 1987). The
Northwest Montana (NWMT) Recovery area is one of three wolf recovery areas identified for the
Northern Rocky Mountain wolf population (Sime et al. 2011). In 2009 (4-2-2009), Acting Director of the
FWS, Rowan W. Gould published in the Federal Register (Volume 74, Number 62 pp. 1512-15188) the
removal of the gray wolf from the Federal Endangered Species List in portions of the Rocky Mountain
distinct population segment (DPS) including those wolves in Montana and Idaho due to their recovery
success. However, subsequent lawsuits challenging the delisting were filed in both Montana and
Wyoming. Due to these lawsuits, the District Court of Montana set aside the 2009 delisting rule. Most
recently, the Northern Rocky Mountain gray wolf, which includes Montana, has once again been
recognized as a distinct population segment and delisted as part of the 2011 Department of Defense and
Full-year Appropriations Act. This act was signed on April 15, 2011 by President Obama and on May 5,
2011 the revised List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife took effect. Therefore the gray wolf is once
again considered a sensitive species for the KNF.
The KNF is within the NWMT Recovery Area. Information for this recovery area is provided by the
Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery 2010 Annual Report (Sime et al. 2011) and is incorporated here by
reference. Wolf occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records, Forest historical
data (NRIS Wildlife) and other agencies (USFWS, MFWP).
Measurement indicators for this wolf analysis include the following key habitat components found in the
Wolf Recovery Plan (USFWS 1987):
1) Sufficient, Year-Round Prey Base for Big Game or Alternate Prey: This component can be
measured by adhering to Forest Plan big game management recommendations. For this planning area,
elk management recommendations were applied. They include cover/forage ratios, road densities,
opening sizes, key habitat features, movement areas, habitat effectiveness levels, and security levels.
See the MIS Section for details.
2) Suitable and Somewhat Secluded Denning and Rendezvous Sites: Sensitivity to disturbance at den
sites and subsequent abandonment varies greatly among individual wolves. One incident of human
disturbance at the den may cause abandonment for some wolves, while other wolves will tolerate some
human disturbance (Thiel et al. 1998) and may not abandon dens unless there are repeated or severe
incidents of disturbance (Claar et al. 1999). One recommendation for protection of den sites from
human disturbance includes restricting human access within a 1.5 mile radius of an occupied den from
four weeks prior to whelping to the end of denning activity. Closure area should be irregular in shape to
avoid pinpointing den locations. Rendezvous sites should be similarly protected (Frederick 1991). Den
and rendezvous sites can also be protected by enacting timing restrictions on proposed activities within
the denning/rendezvous site areas. These restrictions would limit operating periods to the fall or winter
seasons when den or rendezvous sites are unoccupied.
3) Sufficient Space with Minimal Exposure to Humans: This component is associated with reducing
the risk of human-caused mortality to wolves. Human disturbance and accessibility of wolf habitats
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 288 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

(i.e. road densities) are the principle factors limiting wolf recovery in most areas (Leirfallom 1970;
FWS 1978; and 1987; all in Frederick 1991 and Thiel 1978). These components can be generally
measured by maintaining open road density standards required by the Forest Plan, as well as
maintaining any security habitat recommended in the big game habitat recommendations.
The analysis boundary for direct, indirect and cumulative effects to gray wolves and their habitat is the
Cripple PSU because there are no defined pack territories or known denning or rendezvous sites within
the PSU. The analysis boundary for trend and viability is the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
At the end of 2010, there were 85 wolf packs in all of Montana, with 23 meeting breeding pair criteria.
These packs contained a minimum estimate of 372 wolves with 72 mortalities (Sime et al. 2011). This
area includes the KNF. There are currently 16 packs (6 breeding packs) using the KNF for all or part of
their territories.
No known packs utilize the Cripple PSU as a portion of their home range however, members of the Lydia
Pack located north and east of this PSU or lone wolves may utilize the area during portions of the year.
Currently, there is no way to confirm use of the area by the Lydia Pack because none of the pack
members are known to be radio-collared.
Prey Base: The Cripple PSU supports both summer and winter habitat for most big game species. Whitetailed and mule deer are the most abundant big game species found within the Cripple PSU. Together, this
mix of species provides a good year-round prey base for wolves. See the MIS species section of this
document for more information on elk habitat conditions and population status in the Cripple PSU. The
elk was chosen as the MIS species for this PSU and is one of the key prey items for the gray wolf. Most
management recommendations for this species are being met in this PSU (MIS Section).
Den and Rendezvous Sites: There are no known den sites in the Cripple PSU. There are no known
rendezvous sites that have been used in the PSU since the Lydia Pack was established. Once individual
wolves are, again, fitted with radio collars, their activities will continue to be monitored, which will
provided additional information on their possible use of the PSU.
Sufficient Space with Minimal Exposure to Humans: Open road densities by management area (MA)
meet Forest Plan Standards for MA 12 (0.73 mi/mi2, standard = 0.75 mi/mi2) within this PSU. The
standard for MAs 15-18 also meet or exceed (better than) the FP standard of 3.0 mi/mi2 currently at 1.7
mi/mi2. Security habitat recommendations for elk are slightly below recommended levels of 30%, being
currently at approximately 28% (MIS Section).

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
No timber harvest or road openings/closings are proposed in this alternative. This alternative maintains
current conditions for prey habitat and human access within the PSU, therefore maintaining the existing
level of habitat security. A number of existing young timber stands would develop cover values over time.
Alternative 1 would not change the present 36 miles of motorized trail to non-motorized which would
increase security for big game as well as wolves in the PSU.
ALTERNATIVES 2and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Prey Base: As discussed in the effects analysis for elk, these alternatives would maintain and possibly
improve habitat conditions for elk, one of the wolves’ main prey bases within the Cripple PSU. The
action alternatives do increase elk secure habitat in the PSU from 28.1% to 35% (Alt 2) or 33% (Alt 3),
being better than the Hillis et al. minimum of 30%, as previously described. Therefore, prey conditions
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 289 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

for wolves are likely to at least be maintained with these alternatives. All habitat management
recommendations for elk and other big game ungulate species are being met, as previously discussed
(Table 3.86, MIS Elk).
Denning/Rendezvous Sites: There are no known denning or rendezvous sites within the PSU. Suitable
habitat for denning or rendezvous sites would remain available following all alternatives which security
conditions improving under Alternatives 2and 3.
Sufficient Space with Minimal Exposure to Humans: Open road densities (ORDs) by MA meet KNFP
standards under all alternatives as previously discussed. Some temporary increases in risk from humancaused mortality could accompany localized road use by contractors during harvest activities (roads
would not be legally accessible to the general public but unauthorized use could occur). This increased
risk would be measurable during harvest activities. Effects would be limited to avoidance of activity areas
however, transient use could still occur.
For timber regeneration harvest in Montana, the maximum cut is defined as 40 acres (36 CFR Part 219.27
(d)(2)). Alternative 2 includes units that would result in openings greater than 40 acres (Units 147-150;
73T; 188; 75; 80; 40). This strategy may result in openings that may not be fully utilized by wolves and
their prey as foraging areas, however, creating these openings reduces over edge effect and fragmentation
that would occur with greater number of openings of lesser acreage. Additionally, stringers and groups of
trees would be left within the units to provide screening and minimize the effect of the openings when
possible. There may be short-term disturbances within identified big game travel corridors due to project
related activities. Timber management in RHCAs would follow INFS guidelines and the state of Montana
Streamside Management Zone (SMZ) law, ensuring the maintenance of travel corridors within riparian
zones. Vegetated corridors facilitating movements in elevation would be maintained (see Cover/Forage
maps in the Project File).
Unit #62 (seedtree prescription) was designed for various wildlife species like wolves and other large
bodied mammals, to maximize forage potential within summer habitat while maintaining a 600 feet to
cover standard of the 1987 KNFP. This strategy allows prey species, like elk, to utilize both forage
opportunities along the unit’s edge and interior without the need to venture to far from forest cover. The
shape of the unit mimics naturally created openings and contributes to the juxtaposition of forage and
cover for the species.
Both action alternatives propose improvements (ground disturbance, facility installation) in recreation
facilities at the confluence of Fivemile Creek and Koocanusa Reservoir as well as Yarnell camping area.
Both of these areas receive high levels of recreation use and are not currently suitable, relative to
exposure to humans, for wolves. These areas are also near State Highway 37 which receives considerable
traffic, especially during summer months.
Both action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these
actions would benefit any wolves by lowering the risk of wolf mortality, either accidental or malicious.
Contrarily, Alternatives 2 and 3 each propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally
restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use.
However, these roads are located along Koocanusa Reservoir where human use has been occurring and
any area wolves are likely adjusted and aware of these disturbances. The access conversion should have
no additional impacts on any wolves possibly using the area.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
in the PSU boundary. These actions would have largely beneficial effects on ungulate prey winter range
on COE lands, including the management of noxious weeds currently outcompeting native bunchgrasses
for soil resources.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 290 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
The combination of past management activities including timber harvests, trail and road construction,
prescribed burning as well as natural forest altering occurrences in the PSU have resulted in similar
habitat conditions for wolves as previously described under the MIS elk. The cumulative effects on the
existing forest cover and prey base have largely been beneficial to the gray wolf, while the associated
road/trail construction has likely contributed, at least inadvertently (vehicle collision), to a heightened risk
of wolf mortality - facilitating human access. Generally, however, habitat for the gray wolf in the Cripple
PSU remains highly suitable, regardless of human use, as is evident by their successful recovery into
many adjacent areas.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545(265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF
589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2013 and 2015 and may kill individual green trees within these units on the
drier end of the burning prescription. This loss however, should be minimal and not result in measurable
impacts to wolf or large ungulate cover.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like wolves and their ungulate prey
are more likely to be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home
ranges. Wolves and their prey may temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are
occurring. Because the most critical period for wolves is the denning period (approx. April 1 – mid July),
these activities may add to the cumulative effect due to temporal overlap with the denning period. There
are however, approximately 26,000, well-distributed acres, within the analysis area that are available for
the species as secure habitat as calculated using the Hillis (et al. 1991) method for secure habitat.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging would have minimal impacts on wolf
and prey cover due to their limited spatial scope and minimal removal of vegetation. They may cause
wolves to temporarily (hours) avoid an area until the human activity has ceased.
Livestock Grazing
Although grazing allotment(s) cover several thousand acres of the PSU, competition between cattle and
resident ungulate prey species for forage is not expected to be an issue. Domestic cattle typically utilize
forage areas readily available along roadsides and recently harvested areas that have more gentle slopes
whereas resident ungulates are more widespread across the landscape. There have been no known
incidents of cattle depredation by wolves to date in this PSU. Any future depredation could result in an
indirect (management control) loss (mortality) of a wolf or wolves involved.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on wolf prey species or their habitat
because treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to elk and other big game
species (USDA Forest Service 1997 p30). Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU
on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
displacing elk and other big game prey from site specific areas until the event is contained. Upon
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 291 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

completion of wildfire suppression activities, rehabilitation of these same areas can create micro-foraging
areas because these sites are seeded for soil stabilization.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably contribute to the
cumulative impact on prey habitat due to their limited scope (time and space). On occasions when high
use areas may be impacted, such as calving areas, impacts would be mitigated with design criteria
including timing restrictions. Otherwise, elk and other large ungulate prey species would typically simply
avoid the disturbance area until human activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours.
These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or
fall of 2013. This action would not result in a loss of cover because the road already exists. Although
water restoration projects may temporarily displace wolves and prey species from a localized area, they
typically benefit prey species in the long-term by increasing security, providing pulses of foraging when
seeded, or by simply stabilizing soils where certain habitat components can remain available.
Recreation Maintenance
Actions such as road, trail or campground maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably affect elk and
other big game prey species. These species would typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human
activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as elk winter range, habitat effectiveness and cover, etc. have been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits
would be analyzed for potential impacts on elk at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but would add to the cumulative impact from human activities and their effects on elk.
Public Use
Other public uses such as wildlife viewing, berry picking, firewood gathering, camping, snowmobiling,
etc. have negligible impacts on wolves and ungulate prey species given their limited scope (time and
space). Infra-structure, such as roads and campgrounds, that facilitate these activities have already been
accounted for under the existing condition.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a slight impact on wolf/prey cover
and security, especially on winter range where most privately owned acres occur. For road construction
on private lands, an estimated four acres per mile of cover can be expected to be lost. For home
construction, garage, parking, lawn, an estimated 1-2 acres of cover can be estimated to be lost per
resident. Because the acres are estimates and unknown, they are not reflected in Table 3.86.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in wolf/prey cover loss and would
cumulatively add to those disclosed impacts on NFS and COE lands under Alternatives 2 and 3. Please
refer to MIS Elk section for measurement indicators.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 292 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Summary of Cumulative Effects
Timber sales and other management projects, such as salvaging, road work and fuels reductions, may
have temporary effects on wolves and ungulate prey species. These effects may include avoidance of
activity areas, increase in vulnerability during the hunting season, raised stress levels and short-term
displacement from key habitats, like foraging areas or rendezvous sites. Although these effects may
occur, they are not expected to result in lower prey populations due to the utilization of seasonal design
criteria, such as avoidance of the calving season. Contrarily, vegetation management activities can have
beneficial effects, once management activities cease, by providing additional and or reconditioned areas
of ungulate foraging. Other forest activities such as hiking and berry picking are thought to have minimal
impacts to wolves and prey species, typically resulting in temporary (hours) avoidance of an area.
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (spring calving and nesting) when wildlife may be more
sensitive to human disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts to wolves and
ungulate prey species. There may be some situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may
occur, due to an overlap of forest activities, but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not
persist through the lifecycle of any one species, either temporally or spatially.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• KNFP direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. This direction is met by developing a full range of alternatives which
consider both habitat quantity and quality for resident species.
• All alternatives, with their associated Regional Forester approval for the over 40 acre unit request, are
consistent with the KNFP (1987) big game standards by meeting FP or best science habitat parameters
which in turn maintain available and suitable habitat.
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for big game and by
maintaining a full range of available habitats.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1, due to lack of action, will have no impact direct on the gray wolf or its habitat. Indirectly,
this alternative will impact security by not closing 36 miles of currently open motorized trail. This
alternative will also depend on natural occurrences to enhance habitat in lieu of prescribed burning etc.
which could affect the quality/quantity of ungulate summer and winter ranges.
Alternatives 2and 3 may impact, but will not contribute to a trend toward federal listing or loss of species
viability based on the fact that: 1) proposed road and trail access changes increase habitat security within
the PSU; 2) mortality risk to the wolf is not expected to measurably increase during proposed activities
and would decrease after post-sale activities are completed in-conjunction with an increase in elk security
(+6.9 to +5.3%) as described by Hillis et al. 1991; 3) alternatives would not affect known denning/
rendezvous sites; 4) there may be a short-term avoidance of areas of activity however transient use could
still continue; 5) alternatives meet forest plan big game management recommendations with Regional
approval for some treatment units exceeding 40 acres.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 293 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

THREATENED, ENDANGERED and PROPOSED SPECIES
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973 declares that all Federal agencies … “ utilize their authorities
in furtherance of the purposes of this Act by carrying out programs for the conservation of endangered
species and threatened species listed pursuant to Section 4 of this Act.” The ESA (Section 7) requires
federal agencies to ensure that any agency action (any action authorized, funded or carried out by the
agency) is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any threatened, endangered, or proposed
species. Agencies are further required to develop and carry out conservation programs for these species.
As previously disclosed, the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) specifies that the NFS be
managed to provide for diversity of plant and animal communities to meet multiple-use objectives. The
“specific land area” (scale) for providing diversity is established in the framework as the area covered by
a Forest Plan (36 CFR 219.3). The regulations also say that Forests “must ensure well distributed habitat”
to provide for viable populations of native and desired non-native plants and vertebrate species (36 CFR
219.19). The NFMA defines a viable population as "... one which has the estimated numbers and
distribution of reproductive individuals to insure its continued existence and is well distributed in the
planning area." Under the implementation regulations, the Forest is considered the planning area.
In addition, the analysis considers how the action provides for diversity of plant and animal communities
based on the suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet overall multiple use
objectives, and within the multiple use objectives of a land management plan adopted 16 USC 1604
(g)(3)(B).
Species List
A current species list for the KNF was obtained from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) web site
(http://www.fws.gov/montanafieldoffice) on 2/27/2013. The FWS concurred with potential listed species
distribution maps and resulting consultation areas for the KNF in 2001 (USDI FWS Wilson). Terrestrial
wildlife species status in the influence area of the proposed project is shown in Table 3.97.
Table 3.97 - Threatened and Endangered Wildlife Species: Project Area Status
SPECIES

Grizzly Bear
Canada Lynx
Wolverine

ESA STATUS

Threatened
Threatened
Proposed Threatened

STATUS IN ANALYSIS AREA

COMMENTS

K
K
S

1&2
2
Consultation area pending

K = This species is known to occur within the project area.
1 = Analysis Area is outside Recovery Zone or reoccurring use area, or FWS agreed to consultation area.
2 = Analysis area is inside Recovery Zone or reoccurring use area, or FWS agreed to consultation area.

GRIZZLY BEAR
Data Sources and Life History
Grizzly bear population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are
described in FWS (1993), the annual progress reports for the Cabinet-Yaak grizzly bear research
(Kasworm et al. 1989-2009) and Kasworm and Manley (1988). That information is incorporated by
reference. Briefly, grizzly bears are habitat generalists, using a variety of habitats including the coniferous
forests of northwest Montana and north Idaho. Habitat is generally dictated by food availability and
distribution, as well as security from human disturbance and mortality. Because grizzly bears have large
home ranges, large areas of habitat are required. Grizzlies occupy low-elevation riparian areas, snow
chutes and meadows in the spring and late fall, and move up to higher sub-alpine forests in the summer,
early fall and winter. Excavated dens, often above 6,000 feet, are entered after the first snowfall and
occupied for four to five months. A majority of their diet is composed of vegetation (forbs, sedges,
grasses, roots, berries, pine nuts), but also includes fish, rodents, ungulates and insects. Grizzly bear
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 294 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records, Forest historical data (NRIS
Wildlife), and other agencies (FWS, MFWP).
Bounds of Analysis
Establishment and Appropriateness of Cumulative Effect Boundary
By 2002, agency biologists recognized that grizzly bears were occurring and sometimes living in areas
outside of established grizzly bear recovery zones and warranted some level of management consideration
(Wittinger, unpubl. rept., October 9, 2002; Wittinger, unpubl. rept. May 13, 2003).
In March of 2003, the Kootenai National Forest, Lolo National Forest and Idaho Panhandle National
Forest responded to this new information in cooperation with the FWS. Each Forest had to determine an
estimate of bear numbers, analyze habitat conditions relative to linear open and total road densities on
eight very large analysis areas (Bears Outside the Recovery Zone or “BORZ” polygons), analyze food
attractant and storage problems in each analysis area, and evaluate conflicts between grizzly bear and
livestock grazing in each area. In addition, the analysis had to display all steps to minimize “incidental
take” based on existing management direction. At that time, the Tobacco BORZ delineation (in which the
Cripple PSU is a portion) included lands east of Koocanusa Reservoir, west of Highway 93, north on NFS
lands nearly to the Town of Eureka and south to the boundary of the Flathead NF.
The 2009 reanalysis of the KNF BORZs resulted in slight boundary changes to the previously existing
Tobacco BORZ. These changes were based on the latest grizzly bear use information for the KNF broken
down into 6th order HUC polygons. For the Cripple PSU, this boundary change reduced the number of
acres within the Tobacco BORZ from 20,283 to 18,428 acres (see associated map in Project File).
Therefore, the analysis boundary for the East Reservoir Project impacts to individual grizzly bears and
their habitat is the Cripple PSU or East Reservoir project area. The boundary for cumulative effects and
making the effects determination is the updated Tobacco BORZ polygon (USFS 2009; Grizzly Bear
Access Amendment Level 1 Meeting).
Grizzly Bear Habitat Analysis Framework
Analysis Elements
The 2011 biological opinion (BO) on the KNFP Amendments for Motorized Access Management within
the Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zones on the Kootenai, Idaho Panhandle, and Lolo National
Forests includes standards to conserve grizzly bear habitat in BORZ polygons – or areas outside of the
recovery zones identified as having recurring grizzly bear use (BA 2010; see also Appendix A1 of BO).
Paraphrased and abbreviated, the standards include:
i. No permanent increases in the total linear miles of “open roads” and “total roads” on National Forest
System lands in any individual BORZ area above baseline conditions…
ii. Potential increases in linear miles of open or total roads must be compensated…
iii. There would be provisions for temporary increases in linear miles for projects…
iv. Scheduling considerations in future timber sale planning to avoid concurrent…
These analysis elements, in their entirety, are disclosed and addressed under the Environmental
Consequences “Effect” section in addition to potential impacts from livestock grazing and food
attractants.
Habitat Selection
Mace et al. (1996) and Mace and Waller (1997), point out the importance of other habitat components as
determinants of grizzly bear habitat selection. Specifically, their data emphasized that habitats were used
primarily because of their attractiveness as a food source and that displacement from roads occurred as a
subsidiary element of grizzly bear habitat use (e.g., spring habitat selection near roads in Mace et al. 1996,
and Waller et al. unpublished). In addition, food sources differ between the ecosystems. The Northern
Continental Divide Ecosystem (NCDE) provides army cutworms and whitebark pine seeds, which are two
food sources either not present or not found in large quantity in the Selkirk/Cabinet-Yaak Ecosystem
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 295 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

(SCYE). The physical location of these food sources contributes to habitat selection, which in the case of
the NCDE study resulted in bears selecting higher elevation areas (typically non-roaded or Core areas)
where these foods are found. There is very little habitat for these food sources within the Tobacco BORZ.
McGuire and Davis Mountain areas, within this BORZ, likely have very modest offerings of these grizzly
bear food resources.
Habitat Connectivity/Linkage/Fragmentation
The FWS in their 2011 BO describe the importance of habitat connectivity or linkage for wildlife
including the grizzly bear. Without this connectivity, species such as the grizzly bear, can be hindered
physically (i.e. fitness and fecundity), demographically and genetically (diversity/health). Habitat linkage
or fragmenting factors that the FS can address include the presence of highways, railways, forest roads,
recreation developments and or use, and forest cover. These factors are addressed under the East
Reservoir Project based on their presence in the analyses area (BORZ) for the bear.
Land Uses versus Bear Needs
The IGBC Guidelines (1986) applicable to the Tobacco BORZ portions in Management Situation 2 (MS
2) state: Management decisions will accommodate demonstrated grizzly populations and/or grizzly
habitat use in other land use activities if feasible, but not to the extent of exclusion of other uses (IGBC
Guidelines p4). Management Situation 2 lands are those, without distinct grizzly population centers, lack
high quality habitat, and unnecessary for survival and recovery of the species, or the need has not yet been
determined but habitat resources may be necessary (USDI 1993). The IGBC guidelines define a feasible
accommodation as: one which is compatible with (does not make unobtainable) the major goals and/or
objectives of other uses. The guidelines do not provide a specific definition of “compatible” however the
intent of these provisions is made clear by the discussion in the IGBC guidelines regarding FS Grizzly
Bear management policy: The FS will manage habitats essential to bear recovery for multiple land use
benefits, to the extent these land uses are compatible with the goal of grizzly recovery. Land uses which
cannot be made compatible with the goal of grizzly recovery, and are under FS control, will be redirected
or discontinued. Management guidelines and objectives, the cumulative effects process, and goals for
habitat capability and mortality will be used to guide activities which are compatible with grizzly bear
recovery. It is also the policy of the Forest Service to facilitate recreation use in occupied grizzly habitat
to the extent such levels or use are compatible with both human safety and grizzly recovery objectives
(IGBC Guidelines p2). Thus, it is apparent that the IGBC Guidelines recognize the multiple use nature of
National Forest management. Furthermore, it is apparent that land uses which are, or can be made,
compatible with grizzly bear recovery do not “compete” even if there is an impact on individual bears.
Appendix 8 of the KNFP incorporates management direction to meet the intent of the IGBC direction.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Grizzly bear reoccurring use areas outside the recovery zones (BORZ polygons) have been identified
(USFS 2009 Grizzly Bear Access Amendment Level 1 Meeting) and in their 2011 BO, the FWS
concurred with the existing motorized access conditions for areas of bear occupancy outside the recovery
zones. These conditions were determined and established by the 2010 Level One Team (Access
Amendment). The SCYE BORZ were re-evaluated by a multi-agency group of biologists in 2009 and
linear miles of open and total road were used to document the existing motorized baseline because they
are more easily communicated, monitored and calculated than road densities (Allen 2011). Table 3.98
displays the current condition of the Tobacco BORZ as currently defined.
Table 3.98 - Cumulative Baseline Condition of Tobacco BORZ
BORZ
NAME

GRIZZLY BEAR
ECOSYSTEM

Tobacco

Between SCYE and NCDE

TOTAL
SIZE
(acres)

NFS1
LANDS
(acres)

TOTAL LINEAR
MILES of ROADS
on NFS LANDS

TOTAL LINEAR
MILES of OPEN
ROADS on NFS LANDS

287,240

266,947

1,124

867

1

National Forest System Lands

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 296 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

The project is also partially within Grizzly Bear MS 2 and 3 as defined in the Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan
(1993). Briefly, MS 2 lands are those where grizzlies may occur although they do not contain high quality
habitat nor are they home to grizzly population centers. Grizzly bear needs are not the top priority for
management of these lands. MS 3 lands are those that do not contain suitable grizzly bear habitat and
their use is discouraged although grizzlies may occur infrequently. Examples of MS 3 are towns,
campgrounds and other residential areas. Approximately 6,917 acres of the East Reservoir project area is
within MS 2 lands with another 523 acres within MS 3 lands. The remainder of the Cripple PSU is
considered unoccupied habitat.
Grizzly bear sightings have been sporadic within the Cripple PSU and East Reservoir analysis area. Table
3.99 shows documented sightings/use from the past 15 plus years. The Cripple PSU is not known to be
used as grizzly bear denning habitat based on known collared grizzly bears. In 2009-2010, the limited
number of credible observations within Cripple Horse Creek HUC 6 resulted in this area being recategorized as unoccupied habitat. In turn, this re-categorization resulted in the size of the Tobacco
BORZ being reduced by 4805 acres. A credible observation is clearly defined in Kasworm et al. 2011,
and ranked 1 through 5 according to a rating system describing the experience level of an observer, use of
visual aids (binoculars, scopes) at the time of the observation, and presence of other evidence ( tracks,
photo taken, hair).
Additionally, this portion of the Cripple PSU lacks other evidence of grizzly bear use / occupation such as
captures, mortalities, documented females with cubs, cattle depredation, and complaints of human
encounters on private lands. Similarly, Libby District personnel spent multiple days in the area
conducting reconnaissance for various resources, including wildlife. There were no reports of grizzly
encounters during this three year process.
Table 3.99 - Historical Grizzly Bear Use of Cripple PSU
6TH CODE HUC

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek

GRIZZLY USE DETAILS

RECURRING USE AREA

1986 sighting of female w/cubs;
2003-04 radio collared female; linkage area
No data
1969 & 1971 sightings; 2005 sighting
No data
No data

Yes, and included in Tobacco
BORZ Polygon
No
No
No
No

There are four grazing allotments in the Cripple PSU including Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse and
Canyon Creek. The latter two allotments (Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek) have been closed through the
administrative closure process due to declining transitory range, lack of demand and riparian area
concerns. Warland has been inactive for five years but has renewed interest from a local rancher who
wishes to run 22 cow/calf pairs. A decision on activating this allotment is pending line officer approval.
Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek have been inactive for over 10 years. Fivemile is an active allotment
that supports 17 cow/calf pair with a grazing season of June 1 thru October 15. Much of the grazing is on
private land owned by the permit holder along Fivemile Creek and upland areas adjacent to Blue Sky
Road #6271.
There are developed campgrounds within the East Reservoir analysis area or Cripple PSU. One of the
campgrounds is on NFS lands however managed by concessionaires. Presently, the campground/marina
does not have bear resistant garbage containers but this situation would be changing due to the new KNF
mandatory food storage order. Additionally, the Army COE operates the Dunn Creek Flats campground
within the PSU. Currently this campground does not have bear-resistant containers however, the COE
plans to change to resistant containers in the near future (Kaiser email 2011). There is one other semideveloped camping area along Koocanusa Reservoir within the Cripple PSU, however, this area is
managed as a Pack it In – Pack it Out camping facility.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 297 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Selkirk Cabinet-Yaak Ecosystem Population Information and its Influence on the Tobacco BORZ
Habitat conditions in the nearby recovery zone have been improving steadily since 1987 as documented
by Summerfield et al. (2004), and the annual KNFP Monitoring Reports (monitoring item C7). Copies are
located in the Supervisors Office in Libby, MT. The minimum population estimate for bears for the
Cabinet-Yaak recovery zone has increased to 42 bears in 2008 based on current and previous captures and
sightings of unique individuals (Kasworm et al. 2010). Table 3.100 summarizes mortality information for
the CYRZ (Cabinet –Yaak Recovery Zone).
There is an apparent decreasing trend in mortalities occurring on NFS lands during the three time periods
delineated for Table 3.100. This is true both in terms of the average number of bears killed per year
among time periods, and the percentage of human-caused mortality within each time period. For the
period 1999-2008, 19% of the total number of human-caused mortalities occurred on NFS lands. An
estimated 82% of mortalities occurred on non-NFS lands or in Canada. Additionally, between 1984 and
2009, there were no human-caused grizzly bear mortalities within the Tobacco BORZ (W. Kasworm pers.
comm. with Lydia Allen, 2010); however there were five mortalities in 2011 though not within the
Tobacco BORZ (dated 5/2012). Two of the mortalities resulted from hunter misidentification (adult male
and sub-adult male; inside CYE Recovery Zone); two of unknown causes (unknown sex and age; inside
CYE; one under investigation) and one self-defense kill in November 2011 (Kasworm IGBC meeting
notes, 5/2012).
Causes of grizzly bear mortality have generally been due to factors beyond FS control (e.g., train
collision, management removal due to food attractant on private land, hunter mistaken identity or defense
of life, and illegal kill by a human).
Table 3.100 - History of Known Grizzly Bear Mortalities within-and-around the Cabinet-Yaak
Recovery Zone, by Time Period and Land Ownership
(K. Annis pers. comm. 2010, W. Kasworm pers. comm. 2010)6

TIME
PERIOD

1982-1986
1987-1998
1999-2009
TOTALS

KNOWN GRIZZLY BEAR
MORTALITIES
TOTAL #/AVE # KILLED PER YEAR
OVERALL
HUMAN-CAUSED

4/0.66
12/1.00
37/2.91
53/1.89

3/0.60
9/0.75
26/2.36
38/1.36

HUMAN-CAUSED MORTALITIES BY LAND OWNERSHIP
TOTAL #/AVE # KILLED PER YEAR
(% of TOTAL # of HUMAN-CAUSED MORTALITIES)1
NFS LANDS
NON-NFS LANDS
CANADA2

3/0.60 (100%)3
5/0.42 (56%)4
5/0.46 (19%)
13/0.34 (34%)

0/0 (0 %)
1/0.08 (11%)5
16/1.46 (62%)
17/0.61 (45%)

0/0 (0 %)
3/0.25 (33%)
5/0.46 (19%)
8/0.29 (21%)

1

Percentages are useful for comparing within time periods only, due to differences in the length of time represented by each of three time
periods.
2
Includes private and public lands. The CYRZ grizzly bear population extends into Canada.
3
Includes one mortality that occurred outside of the CYRZ. 4 Includes two mortalities that occurred outside of the CYRZ.
5
6
Includes one (1) mortality that occurred outside of the CYRZ
Table has not been updated with 2011-12 data.

A comprehensive program to minimize human-caused grizzly bear mortalities involves many elements,
and the Forest is actively pursuing these opportunities and partnering with other agencies (2010 IGBC
Accomplishment Report).
On the KNF, there has been an increase in bear resistant garbage containers in developed campgrounds
and a Pack In/Pack Out Policy for all other campgrounds and dispersed recreation sites. Many county
refuse sites are being fenced to keep bears from attractants. For instance, just north of the East Reservoir
analysis area, the KNF campgrounds now contains bear-resistant garbage containers. Additionally, in
June 2011, the KNF issued a mandatory food storage order to assist in reducing human-bear interactions
which can lead to habituation of bears to human foods and sometimes bear removal from the ecosystem.
Public information efforts are also ongoing to encourage people to live in a way that is more compatible
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 298 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

with the needs and behaviors of bears. Montana has instituted a mandatory black bear hunter testing and
certification program to help educate hunters in distinguishing bear species and reducing mistaken
identity. The KNF has installed signs along popular roads to inform people that they are in grizzly bear
habitat and they include grizzly bear identification information.
On the KNF since 1987, wheeled motorized vehicle access on open roads has decreased (USDA Forest
Service 2009c). In 1987, there were 6,200 miles of road (forestwide inside and outside the grizzly bear
recovery zone) of which 73% (4,530 miles) were open to wheeled motorized vehicle use during the bear
year. In 2008, there were 7,886 miles of road (inside and outside the grizzly bear recovery zone) of which
only 36% (2,856 miles) were open to wheeled motorized vehicle use during the bear year. This results in a
difference of 1,674 miles of roads open to wheeled motorized vehicle use between 1987 and 2008. In
addition, since 2002, the total miles of road on the landscape have declined. In 2002, there were 7,954
miles of road and in 2008 the total was 7,886 miles, which results in a difference of 68 miles (ibid).
Summerfield et al. (2004) also demonstrated reduced wheeled motorized vehicle access across the
Cabinet- Yaak Recovery Zone.
In the KNF portion of the Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zone as a whole, the average percent of a Bear
Management Unit (BMU) with open road density greater than one mile per square mile has decreased
(improved) from 31 to 30% since the 2004 Access Amendment (USDA Forest Service 2009c). The
average percent of a BMU with total road density greater than two miles per square mile has held steady
at 25% (ibid).
Since Core area was first implemented in 1998, the average percent Core area in a BMU across the KNF
portion of the recovery zone has increased (improved) from 52 to 60%(not weighted) (USDA Forest
Service 2002a; 2009c).
All of these efforts should assist in keeping available habitat within the Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zone
more compatible for grizzly bears making them less likely to venture onto adjacent lands (BORZ),
especially private lands. Currently, based on the movements of radio-collared grizzly bears, the NCDE
appears to have more influence on grizzly bear use of the Tobacco BORZ than does the CYRZ. This is
likely due to better habitat connectivity between the NCDE and the Tobacco BORZ than the CYRZ and
the Tobacco BORZ given the presence of the Kootenai River, Koocanusa Reservoir and State Highway
37 located physically between the Tobacco BORZ and the CYRZ.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Analysis Elements for Bears Outside Recovery Zone (BORZ) (18,428 ac)
As stated previously, the proposed project is partially in the Tobacco BORZ polygon (USFS 2009;
Grizzly Bear Access Amendment Level 1 Meeting) and grizzly bear MS 2. Bear activity in the Cripple
PSU portion of this BORZ polygon was previously discussed and MS 2 defined. The FWS has identified
three factors falling under FS jurisdiction that contribute to “taking” (ESA Section 9) of grizzly bears that
apply in these areas. They are: 1) access management; 2) food attractants (human and livestock food
storage and garbage); and 3) livestock presence. Additionally, under access management, there are four
standards that need to be addressed relative to the cumulative baseline condition for the Tobacco BORZ
disclosed in Table 3.98.
The 2011 BO on the KNFP Amendments for Motorized Access Management within the Selkirk and
Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zones on the Kootenai, Idaho Panhandle and Lolo National Forests includes
standards to conserve grizzly bear habitat in BORZ polygons – or areas outside of the recovery zones
identified as having recurring grizzly bear use (BA 2010; see also Appendix A1 of BO.). In summary, the
standards and subsequent responses include:
i. No permanent increases in the total linear miles of “open roads” and “total roads” on NFS lands in any
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 299 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

individual BORZ area above baseline conditions, except in cases where the Forests lacks discretion to
prevent road building across national forest lands due to legal or other obligations (examples include,
but are not limited to, ANILCA access claims, identification of RS2477 thoroughfares, etc.). The East
Reservoir Project does not propose any permanent increase in either linear open or total road miles
above baseline conditions with a net reduction of 0.3 (Alt 2) to 1.0 (Alt 3) miles of linear road and is
therefore consistent with the 2011 Access Amendment and subsequent BO. Outside the BORZ, the
project would result in the reduction of approximate 36 (Alt 2) to 27 (Alt 3) linear open miles of
motorized trail, storage of 16(Alt 2) to 17.6 (Alt 3) linear total miles of road as well as
decommissioning approximately 12 miles of road (from two different categories), therefore improving
habitat conditions for any grizzly bears that may wander outside to surrounding areas.
ii. Potential increases in linear miles of open or total roads must be compensated for with in-kind
reductions concurrently or prior to such increases. This standard is not applicable to the East
Reservoir Project because no net increase in linear miles of road, open or restricted would result from
the project (see standard one). Roads utilized for administrative purposes (e.g. timber hauling,
monitoring, etc.) but are not open to the general public are not considered “open,” and do not recategorize linear total road miles to linear open road miles. Under Alternative 2, the East Reservoir
Project has a cumulative reduction of 0.3 miles of linear total road miles following implementation.
Similarly, Alternative 3 has a cumulative reduction of 1.0 miles of linear total road miles following
implementation.
iii. There would be provisions for temporary increases in linear miles for projects but also measures to
minimize the impacts of such increases, such as seasonal restrictions of public use to the June 16 –
August 31 period. Any public use, such as personal firewood gathering, subsequent to East Reservoir
Project activities, would adhere to agreed upon timing restrictions during the active grizzly bear year
season.
iv. Scheduling considerations in future timber sale planning to avoid concurrent disturbance in multiple
adjacent watersheds. Disturbance of watersheds would be designed and scheduled, temporally and
spatially, as such to avoid “activating” adjacent watershed with the project area, defined as the
Cripple PSU and managed by FS sale administrator(s).
Other Disturbance Sources of the East Reservoir Project within the Tobacco BORZ
The FWS has identified other factors (within recovery zones, 2011 BO) falling under FS jurisdiction that
can contribute to the risk of grizzly bear mortality which are also present within the Tobacco BORZ.
These factors are analyzed in the following paragraphs. Bear activity in the Cripple PSU portion of this
BORZ polygon was previously discussed.
Vegetation Treatment
The point source disturbances from timber harvest actions inside the BORZ (all treatments buffered by
0.25 miles) may temporarily displace grizzly bears from approximately 10,742 acres during the period of
activity that could occur intermittently over several years. However, only a portion of these acres would
be unavailable at any given time depending on how the treatment units are divided into timber sales,
which would not be active simultaneously (Standard iv).
For timber regeneration harvest in Montana, the maximum cut is defined as 40 acres (36 CFR Part 219.27
(d)(2)). Alternative 2 includes units that would result in openings greater than 40 acres (Units 147-150;
73T; 188; 75; 80; 40). This strategy may result in openings that may not be fully utilized by grizzlies as
foraging areas, however, creating these openings reduces over edge effect and fragmentation that would
occur with greater number of openings of lesser acreage. Additionally, stringers and groups of trees
would be left within the units to provide screening and minimize the effect of the openings when possible.
Unit #62 (seedtree prescription) was designed for various wildlife species like grizzlies and other large
bodied mammals, to maximize forage potential within summer habitat while maintaining a 600 feet to
cover standard of the 1987 KNFP. This strategy allows prey species, like ungulates, to utilize both forage
opportunities along the unit’s edge and interior without the need to venture to far from forest cover. The
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 300 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

shape of the unit mimics naturally created openings and contributes to the juxtaposition of forage and
cover for the species.
Road Use/Timber Hauling
During hauling on restricted roads, an estimated 8,000 acres would be “unavailable” to grizzly bears
based on utilizing 25 miles of roads for timber hauling purposes at any given time. The range-of-effects of
these linear miles of open and total roads were analyzed within the 2011 BO as part of the baseline
condition for the Tobacco BORZ (Table 3.98). The East Reservoir Project would not affect the
benchmarks set for these analysis elements and therefore not increase the risk of grizzly bear mortality
within the Tobacco BORZ.
Livestock Grazing
Livestock are present in the Tobacco BORZ polygon and more specifically in Fivemile Creek of the
Cripple PSU. Recent use has been averaging 17 cow/calf pairs, with 17 pairs allotted. Most importantly,
to date, there have been no reports of cattle depredation by grizzly bears within the Fivemile range
allotment. The 2011 BO disclosed, that livestock grazing has been decreasing on the KNF since 1987
with no reports of cattle loss due to grizzly bears. The East Reservoir Project falls within the range-ofeffects analyzed by the 2011 BO because the project does not propose any changes to the current
allowable cow/calf numbers in the Fivemile Creek allotment nor expansion of the allotment. As
previously stated, there is renewed interest in the Warland Allotment, however the decision to allow cattle
grazing pending until the request can be further evaluated.
Food Attractants
Food attractants are present in the Tobacco BORZ polygon and inside the Cripple PSU. Area food
attractants include two community garbage collection sites with several bear resistant dumpsters and
domestic livestock (cattle, llamas, horses) on private lands, in addition to the range allotment previously
mentioned. To date there have been no documented problems with grizzly bears related to these
attractants on NFS lands. There have been occurrences of bears attracted to chickens, swine and garbage
immediately adjacent to the Tobacco BORZ on private lands. Management of attractants on private lands
are outside of FS control, however local FS representatives work cooperatively with State wildlife
personnel to inform private land owners on how to live compatibly with grizzly bears. Additionally, most
recently (2011), the KNF has issued a mandatory food storage order (FSO) for all NFS lands, which
would assist in maintaining the positive growth trend for the Cabinet-Yaak grizzly bear population and
help mitigate some of the less favorable conditions (e.g. greater potential for human encounters; private
lands; miles of linear open road) for grizzly bears outside of the CYRZ. This FSO is automatically
included in all permits and contracts issued and administered by the KNF. Similarly, the FSO is
applicable to and enforceable within all KNF recreation facilities.
Recreation
Recreation uses on the KNF is another factor disclosed by the 2011 BO that can affect the ability of
grizzly bears to live and reproduce within the CYRZ but may apply to the Tobacco BORZ. The East
Reservoir Project does include, under all action alternatives, improvements (ground disturbance, facility
installation) in recreation facilities at the confluence of Fivemile Creek and Koocanusa Reservoir as well
as Yarnell camping area. Both of these areas receive high levels of recreation use and are not currently
suitable, relative to exposure to humans, for grizzly bears. These areas are also near State Highway 37
which receives considerable traffic, especially during summer months.
Habitat Connectivity
The East Reservoir Project would not result in habitat conditions unfavorable to grizzly bear dispersal and
general movement across the surrounding landscape. The project maintains high levels (78.0% of analysis
area defined as Cripple PSU; Alt 2 worst case scenario) of movement cover based on calculation for large
ungulates. The project is consistent with the emphasis placed on this analysis element in the 2011 BO in
that movement cover is maintained in all directions, except west. The East Reservoir analysis area is
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 301 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

adjacent to Koocanusa Reservoir, which, may or may not impede grizzly bear dispersal to available
habitat west toward the Selkirk Cabinet-Yaak Ecosystem.
Direct and Indirect Effects – Outside Tobacco BORZ (74,116 ac)
Effects of Timber Harvest Activities (includes felling through loading)
Timber harvest activity in the remainder of the Cripple PSU would not affect grizzly bears because the
activities would be outside of the Tobacco BORZ polygon and there has been little to no bear use
documented in these drainages for 15 or more years with the exception of one possible 2005 sighting.
The COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included in the
PSU boundary. These actions would have largely beneficial effects on ungulate prey winter range on
COE lands, including the management of noxious weeds currently outcompeting native bunchgrasses for
soil resources. These lands are also outside of the Tobacco BORZ.
Effects of Road Construction and Use (includes hauling and all other types of road use)
Road construction and use in the remainder of the Cripple PSU would not affect grizzly bears because the
activities would be outside of the BORZ polygon and there has been little to no bear use documented in
these drainages for 15 or more years with the exception of one possible 2005 sighting. All roads
constructed would have a gate (or other restriction device) installed when they are built and public access
to the roads would be restricted yearlong.
Additionally, all action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert
approximately 36 (Alt2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert
approximately 16 to 17.6 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored
status. Although most of these trails and roads are outside of occupied grizzly bear habitat, both of these
actions would benefit any unexpected use by lowering the risk (via human encounters) of mortality, either
accidental or malicious. These actions would also benefit ungulate prey species due to increase security
value on spring and summer ranges. Contrarily, Alternatives 3 and 4 each propose to convert
approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of
undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. However, these roads are located along
Koocanusa Reservoir and outside of occupied habitat where high levels of human use has been occurring
for years and grizzlies are unlikely to utilize. The access conversion should have no measurable impacts
on any grizzlies possibly using the area.
Other Potential Disturbance Sources
Helicopter use associated with prescribe burning treatments would be scheduled spatially and temporally
throughout the PSU so not to impact any specific areas more than a day or two at a time and to avoid
affecting large areas of seasonal-use wildlife ranges. Flight paths would be from the valley floor up over
the burn area(s). The helispot, to be located outside the Tobacco BORZ, would temporarily displace
bears, if present, from approximately 402 acres (with one-mile buffer), though not mutually exclusive
from acres affected by the helicopter flight path(s) which is estimated to range between 5,000 and 25,000
acres depending upon size of burn unit, distance to unit and implementing a one-mile disturbance buffer
around flight path. However, the flight path(s) is located both within and outside the Tobacco BORZ.
Again, grizzly bear presence in the majority of the Cripple PSU has not been documented in the last 15
years, so no effects would result from these management activities outside the BORZ.
The proposed project does not currently involve livestock in the Warland, Cripple Horse, Canyon or
Dunn drainages; so no effects from livestock operations would occur under the East Reservoir Project
within lands in unoccupied habitat.
Although no grizzly bears occur in the remainder of the Cripple PSU (74,116 ac), poor sanitation
practices can lure grizzly bears into an area in search of food. The timber sale or stewardship contract(s)
would include the 2011 KNF Food Storage Order in its entirety and require contractors to maintain a
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 302 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

clean work area and store attractants in a bear-safe manner.
Summary of Effects for Unoccupied Habitat
Alternative 1would have no effect on grizzly bears or their habitat due to the lack of action. Alternatives 2
and 3 would have no direct or indirect effects to grizzly bears due to limited and /or lack of occupancy by
the species as disclosed above in Table 3.99.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
The Cripple PSU has had minimal management activities in the last 15 years (Table 3.1). These projects
treated approximately 3.2% of the PSU with a variety of harvest types: sanitation salvage, clearcut with
reserves, shelterwood and seed tree. Past harvests in the area are listed in Table 3.2 of this document. The
harvests of the past projects are now complete and the result of this management is a landscape that is a
mosaic of various stages of succession or pulses of high quality food sources. This existing condition is
now providing forage opportunities for grizzly bear in the form of huckleberries, herbs, big game and
some white bark pine.
However, the road construction that typically facilitated timber harvest has contributed negatively to the
cumulative effect of management actions on grizzly bears. Roads built for timber harvesting and to access
previously non-roaded forests have provided for easier human access, sometimes motorized, which
directly (vehicle collision) and indirectly (illegal take; displacement into unsuitable or unavailable habitat
where bears find conflict) have resulted in grizzly bear mortalities over time. Open road densities have
dramatically dropped in the past several years as a result of closing roads through decisions intended to
facilitate grizzly bear recovery. The habitat parameters incorporated the effects of these past and ongoing
activities as displayed in the existing condition (or before the activity).
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF 545(265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF
589 (25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these
units would occur between 2013 and 2015 and may kill individual green trees within these units on the
drier end of the burning prescription. This loss however, should be minimal and not result in measurable
impacts to the bear or large ungulate cover.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3,360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like grizzly bears are more likely
to be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home ranges. Grizzlies may
temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are occurring. Because two of the most
critical periods for grizzlies are the spring and fall foraging periods (approx. April 1 to June 30 and midSept thru November, especially when cubs are present), these activities may add to the cumulative effect
due to temporal overlap with the these periods. There are however, approximately 26,000, welldistributed acres, within the analysis area that are available for the species as secure habitat as calculated
using the Hillis (et al. 1991) method for secure habitat (see Elk MIS). Additionally, the majority of the
analysis area (roughly 74,000 acres) is outside of known occupied grizzly bear habitat.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture) and blowdown salvaging (Pg. 3-5) would have minimal impacts
on grizzly bear forage/cover due to the scale of these activities and the scattered occurrence across the
Libby Ranger District. These projects may result in short-term avoidance of the immediate area while
humans are present.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 303 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Livestock Grazing
Although grazing allotment(s) cover several thousand acres of the PSU, competition between cattle, bears
and resident ungulate prey species for forage is not expected to be an issue. Domestic cattle typically
utilize forage areas readily available along roadsides and recently harvested areas that have more gentle
slopes whereas resident ungulates are more widespread across the landscape. There have been no known
incidents of cattle depredation by grizzly bears to date in this PSU.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on grizzlies or their habitat because
treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to bears and other mammal species
(USDA Forest Service 1997 p30). Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated within the PSU on an
annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
displacing grizzly bears from site specific areas until the event is contained. Upon completion of wildfire
suppression activities, rehabilitation of these same areas can create micro-foraging areas because these
sites are seeded for soil stabilization. Wildfire suppression in areas lacking multi-story forest stands,
especially those adjacent to open motorized traffic, would be beneficial to the bear by maintaining cover
and summer resting habitat.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably contribute to the
cumulative impact on grizzly foraging habitat along road edges, due to their limited scope (time and
space). These activities would not impact denning habitat by avoidance.
These activities include the Koocanusa Marina repaving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or fall
of 2013. This action would not result in a loss of cover because the road already exists. Although water
restoration projects may temporarily displace grizzly bears and prey species from a localized area, they
typically benefit prey species in the long-term by increasing security, providing pulses of foraging when
seeded, or by simply stabilizing soils where certain habitat components can remain available.
Recreation Maintenance
Actions such as site or trail maintenance and administrative use associated with permit administration,
data collection and monitoring of NFS facilities are not likely to measurably affect grizzlies and their
ungulate prey species. These species would typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human
activities terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours. Also refer to road management activities,
previously discussed.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as grizzly bear forage areas, denning, cover, etc. have been included under
the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits would
be analyzed for potential impacts on grizzlies at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted but would add to the cumulative impact from human activities and their effects on grizzly bears
and prey species. Although currently outside occupied habitat, the marina would be required to adhere to
the 2011 KNF Food Storage Order which would mitigate any potential increase in risk of human-bear
interactions.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 304 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Public Use
Other public uses such as wildlife viewing, berry picking, firewood gathering, camping, snowmobiling,
etc. have negligible impacts on grizzly bears and ungulate prey species given their limited scope (time
and space) and largely non-consumptive nature. Infra-structure, such as roads and campgrounds, that
facilitate these activities have already been accounted for under the existing condition.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a slight impact on grizzly/prey cover
and security, especially on winter range where most privately owned acres occur. For road construction
on private lands, an estimated four acres per mile of cover can be expected to be lost. For home
construction, garage, parking, lawn, an estimated 1-2 acres of cover can be estimated to be lost per
resident. Because the acres are estimates and unknown, they are not reflected in Table 3.86.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section 12. These activities would likely result in bear/prey cover loss and would
cumulatively add to those disclosed impacts on NFS and COE lands under Alternatives 2 and 3. Refer to
MIS Elk Section for measurement indicators.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
The action alternatives of this project were designed to meet grizzly bear standards and guidelines.
Cumulatively, the potential exists to displace grizzly bears to areas not affected by the activities, but these
projects are not expected to contribute cumulatively to bear mortalities given that no new permanent open
roads would be constructed within the PSU and the project’s compliance with the 2011 BO on KNFP
Amendments for Motorized Access Management within the Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zones
on the Kootenai, Idaho Panhandle and Lolo National Forests. Additionally, the action alternatives, in
combination with the baseline conditions and reasonably foreseeable projects would improve the overall
ungulate security habitat, as defined by Hillis et al. 1991, from 28% to 35 or 33%. This increase in
ungulate security can easily be translated to an increase security for any grizzly bears moving through or
utilizing, at least intermittently, the PSU.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• The project complies with KNFP direction on Threatened and Endangered species that applies to the
grizzly bear (FP II-1 #s 5, II-22).
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations (FP II-1 #7) by maintaining appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in
order to maintain species viability based on best science. By meeting this FP direction, the project
maintains suitable habitat for forage/prey species of the bear.
Endangered Species Act:
• The project is consistent with the Endangered Species Act as evidenced through consultation with the
FWS and receipt of concurrence and by compliance with the 2011 BO on KNFP Amendments for
Motorized Access Management within the Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak Recovery Zones on the Kootenai,
Idaho Panhandle and Lolo National Forests.
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for this habitat resource.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS for UNOCCUPIED HABITAT
Alternative 1 would have no effect (direct or indirect) on grizzly bears or their habitat due to the lack of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 305 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

action. Known cumulative actions from other agencies are outside of the Tobacco BORZ and will have no
effect on the bear.
Alternatives 2 and 3 would have no direct or indirect effects to grizzly bears due to limited and /or lack of
occupancy by the species as disclosed above in Table 3.99.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS for GRIZZLY BEARS within the TOBACCO BORZ
Alternative 1, due to lack of action, will have no affect on the grizzly bear or its habitat.
Alternatives 2 and 3 may affect, are not likely to adversely affect the grizzly bear. This determination is
based on: 1) although the existing condition of the Tobacco BORZ is considered to have adverse effects
on grizzly bears, the East Reservoir Project activities fall within the range-of-effects analyzed in the
programmatic BO for the 2011 Forest Plan Amendments for Motorized Access Management within the
Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak Grizzly Bear Recovery Zones and therefore, in itself, is not likely to contribute
to the loss of grizzly bears from the Tobacco BORZ; 2) helicopter use associated with the this project is
consistent with the management strategies found in the Guide to Effects Analysis of Helicopter Use in
Grizzly Bear Habitat (2009) that are not likely to adversely affect grizzly bears; helicopter activities
would not prohibit bears from using the area during any period of biological importance such as breeding,
late fall foraging (hyperphagia), or denning; 3) the East Reservoir Project does not change the livestock
management of the Tobacco BORZ; 4) project activities would not result in an increase in food attractants
and would comply with the 2011 KNF Food Storage Order; 5) the project would not result in measurable
increases in recreation use of the Tobacco BORZ based on limited improvements; and 6) the project does
not involve changes to any type of mining activities within the Tobacco BORZ and would not result in
habitat fragmentation between grizzly bear ecosystems, SCYE and NCDE.

CANADA LYNX
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Lynx population ecology, biology, and habitat description and relationships are described in Ruggiero et
al. (2000) and Ruediger et al. (2000). That information is incorporated by reference. In addition, the final
lynx listing rule (Clark 2000) gives population and habitat status on a national scale. The most recent lynx
distinct population segment status is found in the Biological Opinion (BO) on the effects of the Northern
Rocky Mountains Lynx Amendment (USFWS 2007c). Lynx occurrence data comes from Forest historical
records (NRIS Wildlife, RMRS), and other agencies (MNHP, MFWP, FWS).
The Final EIS for the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction (Lynx Amendment) was completed
in March 2007 with the ROD signed March 23, 2007. This decision amends the 1987 KNFP by providing
lynx habitat management objectives, standards and guidelines. The decision replaces the interim
application of the Lynx Conservation Assessment and Strategy (LCAS). The direction provided in the
Lynx Amendment is applied to lynx habitat at the Lynx Analysis Unit (LAU) scale. In compliance with
the LCAS, the KNF delineated 47 LAUs that approximate a lynx home range size. Forestwide lynx
habitat was mapped in compliance with LCAS project planning Standard #1 and that map will be updated
to reflect the lynx habitat terminology from the Lynx Amendment.
On February 28, 2008 the FWS issued a proposed rule revising critical lynx habitat. Then, on February
25, 2009, the FWS issued their final rule in the Federal Register (Vol. 74, No. 36; pp. 8615-8702) to
revise the critical habitat designation for the lynx in the United States. The finding delineates lynx critical
habitat units and subunits across the lower 48 states from Maine to Washington. Based on these maps, the
Cripple PSU falls within Subunit #10 within the Northern Rocky Mountains (NRM) Critical Habitat Unit
#3. In addition to the critical habitat delineation, the proposal of the FWS also identified the primary
constituent element for lynx, defined as: “boreal forest landscapes supporting a mosaic of differing
successional forest stages,” containing the following sub-elements: snowshoe hares and their preferred
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 306 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

habitat, adequate winter snow conditions, denning habitat with abundant coarse woody debris, and
‘matrix’ habitat which facilitates lynx movement and dispersal and connects areas of suitable habitat.
The effects analysis follows the standards and guidelines established in the Lynx Amendment. Only the
standards and guidelines applicable to the proposed project are analyzed, and they are only applied to
lynx habitat on Federal lands (in compliance with the ROD). Lynx habitat, in impacted LAU(s), was
mapped using the timber stand database version of the KNF model. Connectivity was evaluated by
visually examining lynx habitat and past management activities to determine possible movement areas
and potential areas where lynx travel may be hindered. Ridge lines and draws were considered high value
movement areas.
The scale for direct and indirect effects analysis is the impacted LAU(s) as determined by life history
needs of the species, and includes adjacent LAUs for connectivity effects.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
On March 24, 2000 the FWS listed the contiguous U.S. distinct population segment of the Canada lynx as
threatened (Clark 2000). National population and habitat status descriptions in that document are
incorporated by reference. There are three occurrences (MFWP) of lynx found in the historical records
that are within the Cripple PSU.
Currently, the Cripple LAU (14511) meets the Lynx Amendment standards (USDA Forest Service 2007).
See Map Section of this document for LAU map.
Lynx habitat in the impacted LAU was modeled in terms consistent with the Lynx Amendment. Table
3.101 displays the current lynx habitat conditions in the PSU.
Table 3.101 - Lynx Habitat by LAU in the Cripple PSU
LAU #

14,511

LAU / LYNX
HABITAT in LAU
(acres)\1

UNSUITABLE
HABITAT
acres/(%)\2

HABITAT CHANGED to UNSUITABLE
Over PAST 10 YEARS by TIMBER
MANAGEMENT with REGENERATION
HARVESTS acres/(%) \3

# of ADJACENT LAUs that
EXCEED 30% LYNX
HABITAT in an UNSUITABLE
CONDITION

55,789 / 30,463

1,233 / 4.0%

511 / 1.7%

0

\1Acres do not include ‘matrix’ stands which are considered unavailable as winter snowshoe hare habitat but are considered suitable for lynx
habitat connectivity
\2 These acres are lynx habitat that currently do not provide sufficient vegetation quantity or quality (height) to be used by snowshoe hare and
lynx. No additional regeneration harvest allowed if more than 30% of lynx habitat in an LAU is in a stand initiation structural stage that does
not provide winter snowshoe hare habitat.
\3 Percent is the percent of total LAU acres that provide lynx habitat (suitable + unsuitable acres). No more than 15% of lynx habitat on NFS
lands in an LAU may be changed by regeneration harvest in a 10 year period.

There are no identified linkage corridors (USDA Forest Service 2004 Figure 1-1; USDA Lynx Taskforce
1997a) in the Cripple PSU or potentially impacted LAUs or adjacent LAUs.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Direct and Indirect Effects
Objectives, Standards, Guidelines Applicable to ALL Management Projects in Lynx Habitat
Objective ALL 01: Maintain or Restore Lynx Habitat Connectivity in and Between LAUs and in
Linkage Areas.
The East Reservoir project would serve to re-initiate several areas of general lynx habitat (stem
exclusion) no longer providing foraging opportunities. Stand re-initiation, while impacting movement or
travel habitat in the short-term would greatly benefit snowshoe hares 5 to 50 years following
management treatments. None of the alternatives would affect the ability of the lynx to move in and
between LAUs or established linkage areas.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 307 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

For timber regeneration harvest in Montana, the maximum cut is defined as 40 acres (36 CFR Part
219.27 (d)(2)). Action alternative 2 includes units (Units 147-150; 73T; 188; 75; 80; 40) that would
result in openings greater than 40 acres. This could result in openings that may not be fully utilized by
lynx and snowshoe hare as foraging areas. Creating these openings reduces over edge effect and
fragmentation that would occur with greater number of openings of lesser acreage. Additionally,
stringers and groups of trees would be left within the units to provide screening and minimize the effect
of the openings, when possible. The effect on cover would likely alter the foraging behavior of hare and
lynx for approximately ten years (summer foraging) to 30 years (winter foraging) unit adequate cover
has been re-established in the interiors of these units. Unit #62 (seedtree prescription), however, was
designed for various wildlife species like lynx and other large bodied mammals, to maximize forage
potential within summer habitat while maintaining a 600 feet to cover standard of the 1987 KNFP. This
strategy allows prey species, like snowshoe hare, to utilize both forage opportunities along the unit’s
edge and interior without the need to venture to far from forest cover. The shape of the unit mimics
naturally created openings and contributes to the juxtaposition of forage and cover for the species.
All action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert approximately 36 (Alt
2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 (Alt 2) to 17.6
(Alt 3) miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these
actions would benefit any lynx by lowering the risk of mortality, either accidental or malicious.
Contrarily, Alternatives 2 and 3 each propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6, respectively, miles of
seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which
allow legal use. However, these roads are located along Koocanusa Reservoir where human use has been
occurring and outside of suitable lynx habitat. The access conversion should have no additional impacts
on any lynx possibly using the area during winter.
Projects Must Maintain Habitat Connectivity in and LAU and/or Linkage Area.
This standard is met because there are no permanent developments within the associated LAU. Habitat
connectivity within the impacted LAU is very good and connectivity with other LAUs is good to the
north, south and east. Koocanusa Reservoir and low elevation/non-habitat are adjacent to the west.
There are no identified linkage corridors (USDA Forest Service 2004: Figure 1-1; KNF Lynx Taskforce
1997: 6) in or adjacent to the Planning sub-unit or potentially impacted LAUs.
Guideline ALL G1: Methods to Avoid or Reduce Effects on Lynx should be used when
Constructing or Reconstructing Highways or Forest Highways Across Federal Land. Methods
Could Include Fencing, Underpasses or Overpasses.
No highway or Forest highway construction or reconstruction activities are planned, therefore this
guideline does not apply.
Standard LAU S1: Changes in LAU Boundaries shall be Based on Site-Specific Habitat
Information and After Review by the Forest Service Regional Office.
No changes in LAU boundaries are proposed, therefore this standard does not apply.
Objectives, Standards and Guidelines Applicable to Vegetation Management Projects in Lynx
Habitat within LAUs
Standard VEG S1: If more than 30% of the lynx habitat in the LAU is currently in a stand
initiation structural stage that does not yet provide winter snowshoe hare habitat, no additional
habitat may be regenerated by vegetation management projects. Exception: Fuel treatment projects in
the WUI, as defined by HFRA, subject to the following limitation - fuel treatment projects in the WUI
that do not meet Standards VEG S1, S2, S5 and S6 shall occur on no more that 6% (cumulatively) of lynx
habitat on each National Forest. In addition, fuel treatment projects may not result in more than three
adjacent LAUs exceeding this standard. For fuel treatment projects in the WUI, see guideline VEG G10.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 308 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Table 3.102 displays how the impacted LAU meets or exceeds the 30% standard.
Table 3.102 - % Habitat Not Providing Winter Snowshoe Hare Habitat within Impacted LAU
LAU

ALTERNATIVE 1

ALTERNATIVE 2

ALTERNATIVE 3

14511

4.0

8.3

7.0

The proposed activities would increase the existing level of lynx habitat not providing snowshoe hare
winter habitat in one LAU. In LAU 14511, 2,944 acres (834 modeled as multi-story but were found to be
stem-exclusion in field surveys; 1,638 matrix; 435 stand initiation (were found to be above hare foraging
height); 37 ac (stem-exclusion) would be converted to unsuitable for winter snowshoe hare habitat by
Alternative 2. Alternative 3 would alter 574 acres modeled as multi-story but were found to be stemexclusion in field surveys; 1,581 matrix; 286 stand initiation (were found to be above hare foraging
height); 29 ac (stem-exclusion) for a total of 2470 acres. Both action alternatives meet (better than) the
VEG S1 standard.
Standard VEG S2: Timber Management Projects shall not Regenerate more than 15% of Lynx
Habitat On NFS Lands within a LAU within a 10-Year Period. The same exception described in
standard VEG 01 for fuels projects in the WUI applies to this standard.
This standard is met in the affected LAU. Table 3.103 provides a comparison, by alternative, of how the
impacted LAU complies with this standard.
Table 3.103 - % Regeneration Harvest in Lynx Habitat in the Last 10 years in Impacted LAU
LAU

ALTERNATIVE 1

ALTERNATIVE 2

14511

1.7

6.0

ALTERNATIVE 3

4.6

Standard VEG S5: Precommercial Thinning Projects that Reduce Snowshoe Hare Habitat may
Occur from the Stand Initiation Structural Stage Until the Stands No Longer Provide Winter
Snowshoe Hare Habitat Only:
1. Within 200 feet of administrative sites, dwellings or outbuilding; or
2. For research studies or genetic tree tests evaluating genetically improved reforestation stock; or
3. Based on new information that is peer reviewed and accepted by the regional level of the Forest
Service and state level FWS, where a written determination states:
a. that a project is not likely to adversely affect lynx; or
b. that a project is likely to have short-term adverse effects on lynx or its habitat, but would result in
long-term benefits to lynx and its habitat; or
4. For conifer removal in aspen, or daylight thinning around individual aspen trees, where aspen is in
decline; or
5. For daylight thinning of planted rust-resistant white pine where 80% of the winter snowshoe hare
habitat is retained; or
6. To restore white bark pine.
Exceptions 2 through 6 shall only be utilized in LAUs where standard VEG S1 is met.
Alternative 2 meets Standard VEG S5 by utilizing the exception of the Lynx Amendment for daylight
thinning around white bark pine or planted rust-resistant white pine. Under this exception, Alternative 2
would precommercial thin a total of approximately 212 acres out of 1,060 acres within lynx habitat in the
stand initiation stage or winter snowshoe hare foraging habitat as well as lynx summer foraging or
unsuitable winter snowshoe hare foraging habitat. Fuels reduction thinning within the WUI is not
applicable to this project because all precommercial thins within the WUI are outside of suitable lynx
habitat.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 309 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Alternative 3 meets Standard VEG S5 as it does not propose any precommercial thinning within LAU
14511, nor does it utilize the exception for thinning around white bark pine or planted rust-resistant white
pine as allowed by the Lynx Amendment. Fuels reduction thinning within the WUI is not applicable to
this project because all precommercial thins within the WUI are outside of suitable lynx habitat.
Standard VEG S6: Vegetation Management Projects that Reduce Snowshoe Hare Habitat in MultiStory Mature or Late-Successional Forests may Occur Only:
1. Within 200 feet of administrative sites, dwellings, outbuildings, recreation sites and special use
permit improvements, including infrastructure within permitted ski area boundaries; or
2. For research studies or genetic tests evaluating genetically improved reforestation stock; or
3. For incidental removal during salvage harvest (e.g. removal due to location of skid trails).
Exceptions 2 and 3 shall only be utilized in LAUs where standard VEG S1 is met.
Both action alternatives would reduce the amount of suitable lynx habitat with LAU 14511 as shown in
Table 3.104. The East Reservoir proposed treatment units within the LAU were reviewed (horizontal
cover measured) with respect to Vegetation Standard 6, which prohibits reduction of snowshoe hare
habitat within multi-story mature and late-successional forest. The purpose of this standard is to assist in
maintaining lynx winter foraging habitat considered by lynx biologists to be critical in perpetuating viable
lynx populations.
For Alternatives 2 and 3, each treatment unit was surveyed (Region 1 Horizontal Cover Guidance of June
5, 2008 and professional judgment) and photographed for the Project File and were categorized as either
contributing to lynx winter foraging habitat (mature multi-story) and should be dropped from treatment
activities, mature stem-exclusion stands in which timber harvesting would improve winter foraging in the
future (~15 years), non-lynx habitat within an LAU, or as simply general lynx (matrix) habitat where
treatments can occur when meeting Vegetation Standards 1 and 2.
After field review of the proposed treatment units, all of the units contributing to the final drafts for
Alternatives 2 and 3, within lynx habitat, were approved for implementation based on the rationales listed
previously and their compliance with the Lynx Amendment.
A list of the proposed treatment units located within the Cripple LAU, their associated photo
identification numbers, and their assigned management status related to lynx habitat standard Vegetation
Standard 6, is available in the Project File for this analysis. Lynx Analysis Unit 14511 meets VEG S1
(30%) also, as shown in Table 3.102.
Table 3.104 - Multi-Story Mature or Late Succession Forest Snowshoe Hare Habitat
Impact Summary
ALT
#

LAU
#

ACRES of MULTI-STORY
MATURE and LATE
SUCCESSIONAL FORESTS

ACRES of
VEGETATION
MANAGEMENT

EXCEPTION(S)
APPLIED

IS STANDARD
VEG S1 BEING MET
(Y/N)

1
2
3

14511
14511
14511

17,053
16,219
16,479

0
834
574

N/A
*
*

Y
Y
Y

*Note: Timber harvest is allowed in areas that have potential to improve winter snowshoe hare habitat but presently
have poorly developed under stories that lack dense horizontal cover (e.g. uneven-aged management systems could be used to create
openings where there is little under story so that new forage can grow).

Objectives VEG 01, 02, 03 and 04: Both action alternatives utilize timber harvest and prescribed fire in
general lynx habitat. Given the current condition of these stands having either poorly developed
understories or having been previously harvested and having little lodgepole pine component, managing
these stands would provide hundreds of acres for lynx foraging in approximately 10 to 15 years. The
mosaic designs of the proposed treatment units, as well as the size, would also assist in creating large
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 310 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

blocks (~40ac) of forest that would provide future interior habitat for connectivity and foraging.
Guidelines VEG G1, G4, G5, G10 and G11
Both action alternatives comply with VEG G1. Likewise, all action alternatives comply with VEG G4
because prescribed fire would only be used to reduce fuel loading and prepare the forest floor for planting
and natural regeneration. Alternatives 2 and 3 comply with VEG G5 because multiple acres (over 49%)
would remain in the LAU suitable for the alternative prey species, red squirrel. Both VEG G10 and 11 are
met in that fuel treatment projects in the WUI do not overlap with suitable lynx habitat and VEG 11
because there is no lack of lynx denning habitat within the LAU.
The COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included in the
PSU boundary but outside of LAU 14511 and suitable lynx habitat, therefore they will have no affects to
lynx.
Objectives and Guidelines Applicable to Livestock Management Projects in Lynx Habitat Within
LAUs
Objective GRAZ 01:
The project does not include any changes in current livestock management activities. This objective does
not apply.
Guidelines GRAZ G1, G4, G5, G10 and G11
The project does not include any changes in current livestock management activities. This objective does
not apply.
Objectives and Guidelines Applicable to Human Use Projects in Lynx Habitat Within LAUs
Objectives HU 01, 02, 03, 04, 05 and 06:
Objectives HU 1 thru 6 are not applicable to this project. While all action alternatives propose
improvements (ground disturbance, facility installation) in recreation facilities at the confluence of
Fivemile Creek and Koocanusa Reservoir as well as Yarnell camping area, both areas are outside of LAU
14511 and suitable lynx habitat.
Alternatives 2 and 3 would actually benefit the lynx by changing the acceptable use of 36 to 27 miles
(respectively) of trail from motorized to non-motorized and covert approximately 16 to 17.6 miles of
seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored status. Both of these actions would
benefit any lynx by lowering the risk of mortality, either accidental or malicious.
Contrarily, Alternatives 2 and 3 each propose to convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles (respectively) of
seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of undetermined roads to NFS roads which
allow legal use. However, these roads are located along Koocanusa Reservoir outside of LAU 14511 and
suitable lynx habitat.
Guidelines HU G1 through G12:

Guidelines HU G1 thru G12 are not applicable to this project. Alternatives 2 and 3 do propose to
construct 9.3 to 8.1 miles (respectively) of new permanent roads; however, the roads are either
outside of identified lynx habitat or would not impact habitat connectivity as designed. The
temporary roads (4.3 to 4.1 miles) would be expected to have short-term impacts on lynx by
possibly disrupting local movement patterns or use of a local area, however, HU G7 in only
applicable to permanent roads.
Objectives, Standards and Guidelines Applicable to ALL Projects in Linkage Areas,
Subject to Existing Rights
Objective LINK 01:
There are no known land purchase opportunities available within the LAU; therefore this objective does
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 311 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

not apply.
Standard LINK S1:
When highway or forest highway construction or reconstruction is proposed in linkage areas, identify
potential highway crossings.
The project does not involve construction or reconstruction of a highway or forest road; therefore this
standard does not apply.
Guidelines LINK G1 and G2:
The project does not involve the sale or exchange of NFS lands; therefore guideline LINK G1 does not
apply. Neither does it involve livestock grazing in shrub-steppe habitats, so guideline LINK G2 does not
apply.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
The existing condition of Canada lynx habitat has been cumulatively affected by past management actions
and natural occurrences similar to those effects on grizzly bear and wolf habitat. Vegetation altering
events, whether man-caused or naturally occurring, have been largely beneficial for lynx in that they have
provided cycles of foraging habitat scattered fairly evenly across the PSU and intermingled with other
habitat elements necessary for lynx survival. But, like with the grizzly bear and gray wolf, roads and trails
constructed to facilitate timber harvesting and other forest management activities have made it easier for
humans to access habitats that were once more remote. This increase in access can, in turn, result in an
increase in the risk of lynx mortality through vehicle collision, illegal taking or poaching, incidental
trapping and malicious killing. Outside of natural causes of death or habitat alteration, an increase in
human motorized access and associated events such as those listed previously, have likely had the greatest
cumulative impact on the Canada lynx. This situation is evident by the amount of secure habitat
demonstrated under MIS elk.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are four Forestwide Fuel units (FWF (265 ac), FWF 536 (195ac), FWF 52403 (450ac), FWF 589
(25ac)) that were initiated (slashed) under the corresponding EA. The subsequent burning for these units
would occur between 2012 and 2014 and may kill individual green trees within these units on the drier
end of the burning prescription. This loss however, should be minimal and not result in measurable
impacts to lynx because these burns are on ungulate winter range (non-habitat within an LAU) and or
outside of LAU 14511.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like lynx, wolves, and grizzly
bears are more likely to be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home
ranges. Lynx may temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are occurring. Because
one of the most critical periods for lynx is the denning period (approx. May – early July), these activities
may add to the cumulative effect due to temporal overlap with the denning period. Winter foraging is
another critical period for lynx, especially when kittens are present. Proposed activities would avoid
spatial overlap with winter foraging habitat because any winter treatments would occur on ungulate
winter range and outside of lynx habitat. There are however, approximately 26,000, well-distributed
acres, within the analysis area that are available for the species as secure habitat as calculated using the
Hillis (et al. 1991) method for secure habitat (see Elk MIS). Additionally, all adjacent LAUs to the
analysis area meet (or are better than) Vegetation Standard 1, as previously defined providing both secure
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 312 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

habitat and landscape connectivity between various lynx habitats.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable vegetation related
actions including tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, wreath bough collection,
character wood collection (log furniture), and blowdown salvaging would have minimal impacts on lynx
due to their limited spatial scope and minimal removal of vegetation. They may cause lynx to temporarily
(hours) avoid an area until the human activity has ceased.
Livestock Grazing
Although grazing allotments cover several thousand acres of the PSU, competition between cattle and the
snowshoe hare (primary prey species for lynx) for forage is not expected to be an issue. Domestic cattle
typically utilize forage areas readily available along roadsides and recently harvested areas that have more
gentle slopes whereas snowshoe hares are more widespread across the landscape and heavily within thick
stands of conifer regenerations.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Weed treatment activities would not lead to any adverse effects on lynx prey species or their habitat
because treatment of weeds would actually benefit forage species important to hares and other small
mammal species (USDA Forest Service 1997 p. 30). Typically, approximately 200 acres are treated
within the PSU on an annual basis.
Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
displacing lynx and their prey from site specific areas until the event is contained. Upon completion of
wildfire suppression activities, rehabilitation of these same areas can create micro-foraging areas because
these sites are seeded for soil stabilization. Wildfire suppression in areas lacking multi-story forest stands
would be beneficial to lynx by maintaining winter forage and denning habitat.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably contribute to the
cumulative impact on lynx/hare foraging habitat along road edges, due to their limited scope (time and
space). These activities would not impact winter foraging or lynx denning habitat by avoidance.
These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur in the summer or
fall of 2013. This action would not result in a loss of cover because the road already exists and is outside
of the LAU. Although water restoration projects may temporarily displace lynx and prey species from a
localized area, they typically benefit prey species in the long-term by increasing security, providing pulses
of foraging when seeded, or by simply stabilizing soils where certain habitat components can remain
available.
Recreation Maintenance
Actions such as road, trail, or campground maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to measurably affect lynx and
snowshoe hare. These species will typically simply avoid the disturbance area until human activities
terminate, which usually comprises of a few hours.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. The ground
disturbance on resources such as lynx foraging or denning habitat, where present, have been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts due to lack of expansion. Any
expansion of existing gravel pits, within LAU 14511 would be analyzed for potential impacts on lynx at
that time.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 313 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not impact lynx because they are outside of LAU 14511 and suitable habitat.
Public Use
Other public uses such as wildlife viewing, berry picking, firewood gathering, camping, snowmobiling,
etc. have negligible impacts on lynx and hares given their limited scope (time and space) and largely nonconsumptive nature. Infra-structure, such as roads and campgrounds, that facilitate these activities have
already been accounted for under the existing condition.
Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. However, these lands are low in elevation and outside of suitable lynx
habitat and would not affect this species.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles (3.4 ac) of
road in T31N, R29W, Section12. These activities are also outside of LAU 14511 and suitable lynx habitat
and will result in no effects on this species.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
Timber sales and other management projects, such as salvaging, road work and fuels reductions, may
have temporary effects on lynx and associated prey species. These effects may include avoidance of
activity areas and alteration of matrix (travel). Although these effects may occur, they are not expected to
result in lower prey populations due to the poorly developed habitat conditions currently existing where
vegetation treatments are proposed. Contrarily, vegetation management activities can have beneficial
effects, once management activities cease, by providing additional and or reconditioned areas lynx
foraging (hare habitat).
The temporal occurrence of forest uses such as summer activities (camping, hiking, berry picking) versus
fall (hunting, firewood cutting) or winter (skiing, snowmobiling) activities, and the scheduling of
management actions to avoid key time periods (denning) when lynx may be more sensitive to human
disturbances, allow for the avoidance of measurable cumulative impacts to lynx and primary prey species.
There may be some situations where isolated or localized cumulative effects may occur, due to an overlap
of forest activities, but these situations are typically short in duration, and do not persist through the
lifecycle of the species, either temporally or spatially.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• Alternatives 1, 2, and 3 comply with KNFP direction on T&E species that applies to the Lynx (FP II-1
#7 II-22) and the Lynx Amendment by meeting vegetation standards for habitat elements designated
critical for perpetuation of the species as disclosed in the analysis.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for
viable populations (FP II-1 #7) by maintaining appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in
order to maintain species viability based on best science. By meeting this KNFP direction, the project
maintains suitable habitat for primary prey species of the Canada lynx.
Endangered Species Act:
• The project is consistent with the Endangered Species Act as evidenced through consultation with the
FWS and receipt of concurrence (pending).
National Forest Management Act:
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan and the Northern Rocky Mountain
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 314 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Lynx Management Direction.

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Alternative 1, due to a lack of action, will have no effect (direct) on lynx. Known cumulative actions from
other agencies are outside of the lynx habitat (LAU 14511) and will have no effect on the lynx. With
continued fire suppression, however, Alternative 1 could indirectly reduce the amount of early
successional foraging habitat for snowshoe hares due to the lack of vegetation disturbance overtime.
Alternatives 2 and 3 may affect, are not likely to adversely affect the lynx. Likewise, Alternatives 2 and 3
may affect, are not likely to adversely affect designated critical lynx habitat. This determination is based
on the facts that: 1) these alternatives of the East Reservoir DEIS comply with all standards, guidelines,
and objectives of the Northern Rockies Lynx Management Direction Record of Decision and its activities
fall within the scope of those analyzed in the subsequent Biological Opinion (2007), more specifically,
the project would not result in habitat conditions that would cumulatively contribute to the low level of
species loss estimated by the 2007 BO; 2) these projects do not involve any activities that may result in
increased areas of snow compaction, nor permanent loss of lynx habitat; and 3) although this project
would temporarily affect the primary constituent sub-element, ‘matrix’ habitat and stem-exclusion stands,
it meets ALL S1 standards, therefore maintaining habitat connectivity within and between associated
LAUs. Additionally, the project would not remove or significantly alter any of the other primary
constituent sub-elements including: space; nutritional or physiological requirements; cover or shelter;
breeding or rearing sites; or habitats protected from disturbance that represent historic, geographical, and
ecological distribution of the species.

WOLVERINE
Data Sources, Methods, Assumptions, Bounds of Analysis
Wolverine population ecology, biology, habitat description and relationships identified by research are
described in Banci (1994) and Butts (1992). That information is incorporated by reference.
Generally, their habitat is described by the FWS as high elevation alpine and boreal forests that are cold
and receive sufficient winter precipitation to reliably maintain deep persistent snow into late spring and
early summer (http://montanafieldoffice.fws.gov).
On December 14, 2010, the FWS published their 12 month finding on a petition to list the wolverine as
endangered or threatened under ESA in the Federal Register (Vol. 75, No. 239, p. 78030). The FWS
determined that the listing of the wolverine was warranted but precluded due to higher priorities and
added the wolverine to its candidate species list. However, on February 1, 2013, FWS announced that the
agency proposes to list the species as “threatened” under ESA and that it will receive public comments for
90 days or May 6, 2013. A threatened species is defined as “any species that is likely to become an
endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range. The
listing would protect the wolverine as a threatened species in the contiguous (or lower 48) states as a
distinct population segment (DPS) under the ESA. A DPS is a portion of a vertebrate species that is
geographically discrete from the rest of its kind and also is significant to its survival.”
Wolverine occurrence data comes from recent District wildlife observation records and Forest historical
data (NRIS Wildlife) and other agencies (MFWP). Because wolverines are habitat generalist, except for
denning habitat, only wolverine denning habitat was modeled using TSMRS vegetation data and filtered
through various queries based on referenced literature (see process document-wildlife, Project File). The
analysis boundary for project impacts and cumulative effects to individuals and their habitat is the Cripple
PSU based on the resources needs (denning, foraging) of the species. The boundary for determining trend
or viability is the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) due to the mobility of the species and gene dispersal.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 315 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
Wolverine observation and monitoring data indicates that there have been a few documented occurrences
of wolverines within the Cripple PSU and Johnson (1999) shows wolverine presence confirmed in seven
of the eight planning units on the KNF. The latest documented occurrence from Libby District data is
dated 1994.
Reudiger (1994) shows the KNF as a primary habitat area for wolverine. Following the identification
process outlined in Reudiger (Ibid), the Koocanusa Planning Unit (major drainage) is assigned as a
secondary wolverine conservation area (Johnson 2004a). The Cripple PSU is considered to be minimal
quality wolverine habitat area (Ibid). While Johnson (1999) modeled (Heinz 1997) about 12,000 acres of
wolverine denning habitat on the Forest, this analysis focused on areas that typically carry snow cover
until May 15 as described in Copeland et al. (2010) where denning and rearing of wolverine kits would
occur. Modeling wolverine potential denning habitat, according to Copeland et al. (2010) identifies 9,546
acres of potential denning habitat (area of snow cover until May 15) in the Cripple PSU. These acres are
shown in Table 3.105.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Table 3.105 summarizes the cumulative changes in denning habitat acres due to each alternative.
Table 3.105 - Wolverine Potential Denning Habitat – Cumulative Changes

*Denning Habitat Acres – Cripple PSU
(acres/+/-% change)
Denning Habitat Acres - Forestwide
(acres/+/-% change)

EXISTING
CONDITION

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

9,546
0
467,738
0

9,546
0
467,738
0

8,716
(-612, -6.4%)
467,126
(-612, -0.13%)

9,420
(-263, -0.3%)
467,475
(-263, -0.06%)

* Data source: KNF TSMRS model; acres of habitat that may hold snow cover until May 15 based on findings of Copeland et al. 2010.

ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 would have no direct effects on the wolverine or its habitat based on the lack of action. Any
benefits to prey species, such as the marmot, would originate from natural disturbances.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Each of the action alternatives would alter anywhere from 263 to 612 acres of potential wolverine habitat,
as defined, depending upon the alternative (Table 3.105). These vegetative changes would result from a
combination of timber harvest, thinning and prescribed burns. Many papers (Joslin and Youmans 1999;
Witmer et al. 1998; Copeland 1996; Weaver et al. 1996; Thomas 1995; Butts 1992) show that the
wolverine is sensitive to human presence, which indicates that it is highly likely they would be displaced
during project activities. Displacement distances, due to human activity, vary but in general the biggest
impact for most species is shown to occur out to 0.25 to 0.33 miles or the nearest ridgeline (Christensen &
Madel 1982; Schirato 1989; Frederick 1991; Grant et al. 1998; Austin 1998). Distances can be farther
depending on type of disturbance (e.g. helicopter flying and use of explosives - USFS 1988, Interagency
Grizzly Bear Committee (IGBC) 1990; OHV in open country - Bury 1983, may displace animals up to
one mile). Displacement distance for the proposed burn units is estimated to be one mile. For Unit
FW51103, which represents a large prescribed fire unit surrounded by the most wolverine habitat,
implementation could result in displacement of wolverine from approximately 5,362 acres (given 1 mile
disturbance via helicopter). Similarly, Unit 319, which represents a modest timber harvest unit (17 ac),
would make 251 acres temporarily unavailable to wolverine given a 0.25 mile disturbance influence. It is
important to note that all of the proposed treatment units would not be active at the same time. The
calculations represent the worst case scenario from individual units, which, is typically the level of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 316 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

implementation. The most critical period for wolverine is denning (December 1-April 30). No project
activities are allowed within one-half mile of potential denning habitat during this time frame, however
this is typically not an issue because the high elevation snows of wolverine denning habitat prevents most
vegetation management during the denning period.
The proposed activities for both action alternatives do maintain or move the wolverine habitat toward the
desired secondary quality (as previously defined) condition in the Koocanusa drainage by providing
habitat for a variety of prey species. The Cripple PSU would continue to provide a modest or minimal
habitat quality condition. Wolverines are likely to continue using the available habitat. Areas of mapped
wolverine habitat that receive timber harvests (especially regeneration), thinning, burning and road
construction, may accumulate higher levels of snow during the winter due to less overstory. However,
these same areas would be more exposed and may lose their snow quicker in the spring. Other than this
type of affect, the proposed alternatives are not expected to have any other impacts on the snow element
of wolverine habitat.
The Cripple PSU adds a range of approximately 9.3 (Alt 2) to 8.1 (Alt 3) miles of new road construction
and approximately 4 miles of temporary road construction/reconstruction within the entire PSU,
depending upon the alternative. These roads would be available to both hikers and horse riders upon
completion of the activities. This increase in forest access may increase the risk of mortality via incidental
trapping for other furbearers because wolverines are known to be easily trapped. The increase in human
presence is unlikely to have measurable disturbance impacts outside of the denning season or in the
absence of mechanized transportation (ATVs, snowmobiles, motorcycles, helicopters, etc.)
Contrarily, both action alternatives propose motorized trail access changes in that they convert
approximately 36 (Alt 2) to 27 (Alt 3) miles of motorized trails to non-motorized and covert
approximately 16 to 17.6 miles of seasonally or yearlong restricted roads into an intermittent stored
status. Both of these actions are likely to result in beneficial effects for wolverine by reducing motorized
access (risk of mortality) which can facilitate trapping for furbearers. Alternatives 2 and 3 also propose to
convert approximately 1.8 to 1.6 miles of seasonally restricted roads and approximately 13.5 miles of
undetermined roads to NFS roads which allow legal use. Although this is a legal access change, additional
impacts to wolverine, their primary prey (marmot) or their habitat is unlikely because these roads are
along Koocanusa Reservoir and away from potential habitat.
No alternative proposes any changes to the current allowable over snow vehicle use areas and routes. The
current use of snowmobiles in the PSU is considered light (Jeresek 2011 email) and there are no proposed
activities of this project that would result in measurable impacts to wolverine or their habitat. Generally,
frequent use by snowmobiles in previously seldom used areas may cause wolverine to abandon a den and
leave the area. However, information on the effects of snowmobiles on species like the wolverine is
lacking and largely supported by similar data gathered for grizzly bears or from data related to wolverine
trapping. Other effects of snowmobiles on wolverines may include increased metabolism and heart rates
(stress) therefore affecting the overall health of the animal during adverse winter conditions when stored
energy is vital to survival.
Other recreation improvements proposed under this project are either in areas of existing high human use
such as along open road systems or at existing trailheads, or out of wolverine denning habitat, etc. None
of the action alternatives propose any new recreation facilities which may impact or reduce wolverine
habitat. These actions include ground disturbing activities, such as the proposed dispersed campground
improvements (Fivemile, Yarnell). The campground improvements are outside of potential habitat, as
previously defined, being in low elevation areas along Koocanusa Reservoir.
The Army COE is proposing to harvest and or slash/burn approximately 421 acres on COE lands included
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 317 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

in the PSU boundary. The treatment areas avoid Dunn Creek which provides only potential scavenging
habitat during the main part of winter as these lands are also along Koocanusa Reservoir. Therefore, the
actions on COE lands would not impact this species.
Cumulative Effects
Summary of the Existing Condition
Given the general nature of wolverine habitat outside of denning, past forest management practices are
thought to have contributed little to the cumulative impact on wolverine habitat with the exception of road
construction in the PSU. Road development has improved human access, especially motorized, into most
forest drainages which in turn tends to increase the risk of wolverine mortality via incidental trapping,
vehicle collision or illegal harvesting. However, methods and tools used to manage for the threatened
grizzly bear, since its listing in 1975, have had beneficial cumulative effects for wolverine by restricting
motorized access to many high elevation forests and habitats within the PSU.
Effects of Current and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
All activities identified to occur within the analysis area that have the potential to affect this species are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
Vegetation Management and Fuels Reduction Activities
There are 25 acres planned for underburning within the East Reservoir analysis area which initiated under
the treatment of FWF Unit 589. These 25 acres are within designated old growth and would alter the
understory as described under direct effects for action alternatives. However, this is dry type ponderosa
pine old growth which has limited suitability as wolverine habitat.
Neighboring Fortine Ranger District, to the east of the analysis area, has six vegetation projects that may
be active concurrently with treatments proposed under this project. These projects total 3360 acres and
include: Davis Be Good (124 ac); Trego (673 ac); S. Meadow Fuels (280 ac); N. Meadow Fuels (2095
ac); Little Feet (178 ac) and Elk Twins (10 ac). Large roaming species like wolverine are more likely to
be disturbed by these neighboring activities due to the typical sizes of their home ranges. Area wolverine
may temporarily avoid (hours to days) these areas while activities are occurring. Because the most critical
period for wolverine is the denning period (Dec. 1 – April 30), these activities are unlikely to add to the
cumulative effect due to lack of temporal overlap with the denning period. Additionally, there are
approximately 26,000 acres within the analysis area that are available for the species as secure habitat.
The action alternatives, in combination with other current and reasonably foreseeable actions including
tree planting, precommercial thinning, Christmas tree cutting, boughs, pine cone collecting would have
little impact on wolverine or its primary habitat due to human avoidance of high altitude alpine
environments and talus slopes during these activities.
Livestock Grazing
Cattle grazing (Fivemile and Warland Allotments) would not result in a change of old growth habitat and
riparian ecosystems, or down woody debris in the PSU that may facilitate wolverine use, as it does not
involve the harvest of trees, dead or alive. Grazing cattle predominantly move along road systems and
within past harvest units where an abundance of forage for livestock can be found. Primary wolverine
habitat would not be impacted utilized by grazing cattle due to elevation and access.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Noxious weed management would result in no loss or change in wolverine habitat, as defined, because
weed treatments primarily focus on the herbaceous layer along roads and in previously disturbed areas.
Riparian ecosystems are considered to be more sensitive to herbicides and are largely avoided by noxious
weed treatments. High-altitude alpine areas and talus slopes are largely inaccessible by weed treatment
crews therefore there would be no disturbance to wolverines in primary habitat. Typically, approximately
200 acres are treated within the PSU on an annual basis.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 318 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Fire Suppression
In the event of a wildfire, construction of firelines, helispots and safety zones could potentially result in
impacts to old growth habitats, including riparian environments which may be utilized by wolverines.
Conversely, wildfire suppression also serves to preserve existing old growth and riparian areas serving as
wolverine scavenging/foraging habitat. Suppression activities are typically subject to input from District
Resource Advisors, and protection of special habitats, including old growth, is considered. However, if
cumulative effects to old growth habitat result in the habitat no longer functioning as old growth,
additional old growth habitat would be designated.
Road Management/Use Activities
Road management actions such as road maintenance and administrative use associated with permit
administration, data collection and monitoring of NFS lands are not likely to affect old growth and other
specialized habitats (e.g. riparian corridors, down woody debris, talus slopes) , that may be utilized by
wolverine, because they generally do not result in vegetation removal. The down wood component would
only be affected if considered a hazard to road users or impedes passage. These activities would not result
in any change to primary high-altitude wolverine habitat by avoidance, thus no adverse cumulative effects
would be expected. These activities include the Koocanusa Marina re-paving project (0.9 miles) to occur
in the summer or fall of 2013. The standing tree and snag component would only be affected if considered
a hazard to road users. These activities would not result in any change to the quantity or suitability of
primary wolverine habitat by avoidance.
Recreation Maintenance
Routine maintenance of trails and developed and dispersed recreation sites would not contribute to the
cumulative impact on wolverine habitat because maintenance of these facilities do not typically involve
removal of habitat elements such as down wood, talus, snags unless deemed to be a safety hazard to forest
users. In this situation, the removal of down wood is considered negligible. Maintenance of trails and
dispersed sites in alpine areas may temporarily disturb resident wolverines and their prey (ex: marmots),
but this impact would be short in duration and would not measurably impact habitat components such as
talus.
Special Uses
There are areas previously impacted by special use permits such as mineral material sites (pits quarries,
borrow, roadsides), water developments, utility corridors, private land access routes, and outfitter/guide
trails/camps, COE monitoring stations, that would continue to be present and utilized. Ground disturbance
on vegetation resources that may facilitate wolverine movement across the landscape, have been included
under the existing condition and would have no additional impacts. Any expansion of existing gravel pits
would be analyzed for potential impacts on wolverine and their habitat at that time.
The Koocanusa Marina plans to expand its camping site system and increase its septic capabilities
beginning in 2012 through 2013. These expansions fall within the acreage for which it is already
permitted and would not involve the removal or alteration of designated old growth stands or riparian
areas serving as potential wolverine habitat. Additionally, this permitted area is on low elevation lands
along Koocanusa Reservoir and outside of primary habitat for this species.
Public Use
Firewood gathering would continue to remove some down wood from riparian areas and old growth along
open road corridors and these acres were previously accounted for as part of the existing condition. Other
forest use activities such as mushroom and berry picking, camping, hunting, Christmas tree cutting,
bough collection, etc. have little to no measurable impact on these specialized habitats because they are
largely non-consumptive or rapidly re-established and would not contribute to the cumulative effect on
this resource. With the exception of berry picking, camping and hunting, these activities would have little
impact on wolverine or its primary habitat due to human avoidance of high altitude alpine environments
and talus slopes during these activities.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 319 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

Private Property
Private activities such as land clearing, home construction, livestock grazing, etc. are likely to continue on
those private lands within the PSU. Therefore, there would likely be a decrease in dry-site old growth
within the PSU, but outside of NFS lands and primary wolverine habitat.
Other Lands
The state of Montana is proposing to regenerate 198 acres and build approximately 0.84 miles of road in
T31N, R29W, Section 12. However, these proposed actions are not adjacent to any mapped old growth
type on NFS lands and therefore would have no edge effect on old growth stands. This area does contain
one riparian zone which may facilitate movement. This riparian area would be subject to state stream
management zones and would be protected in accordance with its status as a perennial or intermittent
stream. Otherwise, this portion of state land is outside of primary, high-elevation wolverine habitat.
Summary of Cumulative Effects
As previously stated, fire suppression over the last century has altered stands historically maintained by
fire disturbance. The affected stands have developed fuel loading and ladder fuels that are uncharacteristic
for some sites. These conditions may contribute habitat for potential prey species of wolverines and
facilitate movement in areas of frequent human use.
Potential natural disturbances (wildfire, insect or disease epidemics, wind) could reduce forested stands or
completely void an area of cover under extreme conditions. Likewise, there is the potential for human
caused fires initiating on private lands to move on to adjacent NFS lands and remove old growth and
possibly riparian habitats that have not been, at least partially, managed either by prescribed burning
and/or removal of ladder fuels.
The most recent Forestwide old growth analysis concludes that at least 10% of the KNF below 5,500 feet
elevation is designated for old growth management, much of which is in riparian areas and available to
wolverines. The proposed activities would not affect the 10% standard for old growth at either the PSU or
Forest scale. Likewise, the proposed activities would have no measurable impact on primary high-altitude
habitat of the wolverine by avoidance. The prescribed burning on the upper elevations of the PSU would
have beneficial impacts on the foraging component for marmots, the wolverine’s primary prey.

REGULATORY CONSISTENCY
Kootenai National Forest Plan:
• All alternatives meet KNFP direction for sensitive species (FP Vol 1 II-1 #6) by maintaining
appropriate amounts and quality of suitable habitat in order to maintain species viability.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP direction to maintain a minimum of 10% old growth below
5,500 feet in elevation in each third order drainage or compartment, or a combination of compartments
(Kootenai Supplement No 85; supplement to FSM 2432.22).
• KNFP direction (Vol. I; II-1; Goal A. 7) is to “Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable
populations of all existing native, vertebrate, wildlife species,… in sufficient quality and quantity to
maintain viable populations”. This direction is met by developing a full range of alternatives which
consider both habitat quantity and quality for resident species.
• All alternatives are consistent with KNFP riparian standards and guidelines (FP Vol 1 II-28 thru 33) as
amended by INFS by creation of SMZs.
National Forest Management Act:
• The diversity requirement of NFMA is met by all alternatives as documented in the individual sensitive
species and MIS analyses by maintaining a full range of associated habitats and supported by the
statement of findings for each species.
• The project complies with the 2012 National Forest System Land and Resource Management Planning
rule of March 27, 2013, by meeting KNF Land Management Plan direction for this habitat resource.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 320 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

STATEMENT of FINDINGS
Implementation of Alternative 1 would have no direct impact on the wolverine due to the lack of action
within primary habitat. Indirectly, this alternative may impact prey species by the continued suppression
of wildfires. Harvest activities on State lands may contribute cumulative effects on movement cover,
however this area is outside of snow retention areas.
Alternatives 2 and 3 may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect the wolverine. This determination is
based on: 1) the low probability for wolverine displacement by human activities during the breeding and
rearing seasons in the PSU; 2) the wolverine is a habitat generalist and is unlikely to be adversely
impacted by incremental and temporary habitat alteration when undisturbed areas are linked throughout
the landscape; 3) the action alternatives would only have short-term impacts on a maximum of 612 acres
of potential denning habitat; 4) prescribed burning with helicopter is likely to only temporarily displace
any wolverines, if present, in the late summer, from approximately 5,362 acres and would have beneficial
effects on foraging habitat for marmots, a primary prey species of wolverine; and 5) the additional miles
of existing trails/roads proposed for access management changes under all action alternatives would have
beneficial affects to wolverine habitat security.

MIGRATORY BIRDS
INTRODUCTION
Executive Order #13186 (January 10, 2001): “Responsibilities of Federal Agencies to Protect Migratory
Birds” was issued by President Bill Clinton in furtherance of the purposes of the Migratory Bird Treaty
Act, the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Acts, the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act, the Endangered
Species Act, and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). This order requires including effects of
federal actions on migratory birds as part of the environmental analysis process. On January 17, 2001, the
USDA Forest Service and the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service signed a Memorandum of Understanding
to complement the Executive Order (rev. 2008).
The National Forest Management Act (NFMA) (36 CFR 219.27) requires that Forest Plans and
management prescriptions (where appropriate and to the extent practicable) shall “preserve and enhance
the diversity of plant and animal communities, including endemic and desirable naturalized plant and
animal species, so that it is at least as great as that which could be expected in a natural forest."
Furthermore, implementation regulations for NFMA specify that, "Fish and wildlife habitat shall be
managed to maintain viable populations of existing native and desired non-native vertebrate species in the
planning area."

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
Neotropical migratory birds are those bird species that migrate to more northerly latitudes to breed on the
KNF each summer. Come fall, these species migrate south to spend the winter months. Of the
approximately 205 bird species known to occur on the KNF as breeders, migrants, winter visitors or
transients, about 75 to 85 species could be classified as Neotropical migratory land birds (Al Bratkovich,
Libby District Wildlife Biologist and Forest Land Bird Monitoring Program Coordinator, pers. comm. in
November 2007).
Most of the habitats found on the Forest host one or more species of migratory birds. Generally speaking,
the birds arrive in the spring to set up territories for breeding purposes. Young are raised and fledged by
mid-summer. Most species leave the Forest by mid- to late summer.
A report issued by several organizations and Federal agencies summarized the general condition of birds
across the US (NABCI 2009, 2011). It painted a picture of declines in multiple species across a variety of
habitats. Climate change was one of the contributing factors to these declines, and is likely to continue
impacting birds into the future. As the climate warms, breeding seasons and migrations are being altered.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 321 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

These activities may become out of sync with prey abundance, and climate change may also impact
where and when those food items are available. This reinforces the need to have resilient habitat that is
better able to handle climate change.
Table 3.106 displays the dominant vegetation types in the analysis area. There is some overlap in
categories, and therefore some double-counting. For example, some acres counted as "riparian" would
also be counted under the other forested types. Additionally, specific tree species may be found in more
than one category, although for the purpose of display they were placed in only one category. Tree
species may also be found in several other forest types. For example, aspen is displayed as a separate
category, although aspen can be found in smaller quantities scattered throughout the other forested types.
Dominant vegetation type for the project area based on FIA subplots, VRU, vegetation mapping program
(VMP) organized to approximate the Partners-in-Flight (PIF) priority habitats. Percentages and acreages
do not tally to 100% due to rounding and overlap between some of the categories leading to doublecounting.
Table 3.106 - Migratory Bird Table
DOMINANT VEGETATION
TYPE

ESTIMATED % of
ANALYSIS AREA

ESTIMATED ACRES of
the ANALYSIS AREA

Dry forest (ponderosa pine/ Douglas-fir)
Lodgepole pine
Cedar / western hemlock
Subalpine fir (spruce/fir)
Moist grand fir
Aspen/birch/cottonwood
Misc. forest (alpine larch, mountain hemlock, western larch,
white pine, intolerant mix)
Whitebark pine
Waterbodies (lakes, ponds, reservoirs, marsh, swamp, river)
Grassland
Shrubland
Burned forest*
Non-vegetated

47.6%
17.0%
0.03%
3.8%
0.05%
0.01%

44,090 ac
15,692 ac
28 ac
4146 ac
46 ac
13 ac

30.2%
0
0.08%
0
0
0
0.6%

27,922 ac
0
77 ac
0
0
0
562 ac

* There are no areas of recently burned forest. Most recent burns date back to 1994. For species such as the black-backed woodpecker,
recently burned (< 5 years old) forests are the most suitable habitat.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Responses of migrant birds to timber harvest and burning (prescribed or wildfire) depends upon their
individual habitat preferences and needs. Regeneration harvest removes forest cover used by some species
(e.g. brown creeper, golden-crowned kinglet, hermit thrush) and at the same time creates grass, forbs and
shrub habitat used by other bird species (e.g. American kestrel, calliope hummingbird, chipping sparrow).
This activity also produces “edge” habitat that still other bird species use (e.g. dark-eyed junco, western
tananger, Townsend’s warbler). Edge habitat is often similar to forest stands created with intermediate
harvest (e.g. commercial thinning, shelterwood). Species using edge are often found in these stands, so
this management practice may provide additional habitat for these species (Hutto and Young 1999).
Effects Common to All Alternatives
Management indicator species (MIS) have been designated for the KNF (See MIS Section; Old Growth
Analysis; Pileated Woodpecker; forest cover discussion under the elk). These MIS species represent the
habitat needs for migratory birds. Because habitat for MIS species is being maintained, it is assumed that
sufficient habitat and populations of neo-tropical migratory land birds are also being maintained.
Effects related to the projects covered in this analysis include both direct and indirect. The direct affects
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 322 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
WILDLIFE RESOURCE

are:
• Destruction of ground nests caused by ground disturbing activities, such as logging and prescribed
fire.
• Displacement of individual birds from a specific location that is being used for reproduction or
rearing of young due to disturbance from human use.
• Direct mortality of adult or juvenile birds.
The indirect effects include:
• Loss of vegetation supporting prey items.
• Reduction or alteration of vegetative cover, structure or composition used for nesting or foraging as a
result of vegetation management and prescribed fire.
In the short-term, vegetation treatments would alter habitat for various species of neotropical migratory
birds, changing stand structure and composition. Some species would benefit from this alteration while
others would not. Some impacts may only be short-term. Overall, the long-term sustainability of the
habitat would be increased as stand density and fuels concerns are addressed by this project and historic
fire regimes are returned. Species such as white-headed woodpeckers, chipping sparrows, bluebirds and
others would potentially benefit from fuels reduction in ponderosa pine, while other species that prefer
denser stand conditions would lose habitat as a result of this project (Gaines et al. 2010, Gaines et al.
2007, George and Zack 2008, Hurteau et al. 2008, Saab et al. 2007) and could become more susceptible
to predation or parasitism. Large trees would remain, smaller trees would be thinned, canopies would be
opened, and therefore more sunlight would reach the forest floor within the treated dry forest stands.
These factors would aid in maintaining or improving habitat for species adapted to these conditions
(Lyons et al. 2008).
During the prescribed fires there may be additional negative impacts from smoke and disturbance, or even
mortality to nestlings if nests are located on the ground or in small trees or shrubs. In the long-term, the
herbaceous and shrub layer would return to pre-fire conditions or actually improve with more light
available to the forest floor and return habitats to a state nearer what would have been present historically
under natural disturbance regimes.
Cumulative Effects
Please refer to the discussions for various species or resources mentioned previously; specifically to the
cumulative effects on old growth, snags and general forest cover where habitat elements required by neotropical and resident birds has been altered, resulting in both beneficial and harmful effects.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK and CONSISTENCY
There are no specific goals or standards for migratory land birds in the KNFP. It does contain the goal to:
“Maintain diverse age classes of vegetation for viable populations of all existing native, vertebrate,
wildlife species,” (FP Vol 1 II-1 Goal #7). All alternatives are consistent with the KNFP, as a wide range
of successional habitats would be available (See Vegetation and MIS sections). The alternatives are in
compliance with the Executive Order titled “Responsibilities of Federal Agencies to Protect Migratory
Birds”. In addition, as habitat for MIS species is being maintained in the Cripple PSU, and across the
Kootenai National Forest, their habitat contributes to the maintenance of habitat and populations of neotropical migratory bird species.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 323 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

NOXIOUS WEEDS INTRODUCTION
Noxious weeds are: “Those plant species designated as noxious weeds by the Secretary of Agriculture
or by the responsible State official. Noxious weeds generally possess one or more of the following
characteristics: aggressive and difficult to manage, poisonous, toxic, parasitic, a carrier or host of
serious insects or disease and being native or new to or not common to the United States or parts
thereof.” (FSM 2080.5) Noxious weeds generally have the potential to adversely affect native flora
and fauna and their habitats. The Lincoln County Weed Control Act (MCA 7-22-2101) defines a
noxious weed as "any exotic plant species established or that may be introduced in the state which
may render land unfit for agriculture, forestry, livestock, wildlife, or other beneficial uses or that may
harm native plant communities and that is designated:
(i) as a statewide noxious weed by rule of the department; or
(ii) as a district noxious weed by a board, following public notice of intent and a public hearing."
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Federal
The objectives of National Forest Management Act (NFMA), 1976 include maintaining the diversity of
plants and animals existing in forest ecosystems.
(16 USC 1604(g)(3)(B). provide for diversity of plant and animal communities based on the
suitability and capability of the specific land area in order to meet overall multiple-use
objectives, and within the multiple-use objectives of a land management plan adopted pursuant
to this section, provide, where appropriate, to the degree practicable, for steps to be taken to
preserve the diversity of tree species similar to that existing in the region controlled by the plan.
Forest Service
Northern Region Overview, the Interior Columbia River Basin Ecosystem Management Project, and the
2004 USDA, National Strategy and Implementation Plan for Invasive Species Management all
highlighted noxious weeds as a serious ecological, environmental and economic threat. Invasive species
have been identified by the past Chief of USDA Forest Service (FS) as one of the four significant threats
to our forest and rangeland ecosystems. The National Strategy and Implementation Plan for Invasive
Species Management were developed to guide the FS in invasive species management. The national
strategy encompasses four program elements including:
(1) Prevention;
(2) Early detection and rapid response;
(3) Control and management;
(4) Rehabilitation and restoration (USDA 2004).
State
The Montana County Noxious Weed Control Law (MCA 7-2101 through -2153) was established in
1948 to protect Montana from destructive noxious weeds. This act, amended in 1991, has established a
set of criteria for the control and management of noxious weeds in Montana. The noxious weed control
law establishes weed management districts throughout the state. These management districts have the
responsibility to enforce the law and are defined by the boundaries of the county.
County
The Lincoln County Weed Control Act (MCA 7-22-2116) states that “it is unlawful for any person to
permit any noxious weed to propagate or go to seed on his land, except that any person who adheres to
the noxious weed management program of his district or who has entered into and is in compliance with a
noxious weed management agreement is considered to be in compliance with this section.” On July 26,
1991 the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) signed a memorandum of understanding with Lincoln County,
Montana regarding noxious weed management standards. The KNF agreed to assist and cooperate with
the Weed Board in fulfilling and enforcement of Montana State Weed Law (MCA 7-22).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 324 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) Volume 1, page II-2, 23
Attempt to stop the spread and suppress the existing levels of noxious weeds through land management
and weed suppression activities. An integrated pest management program including the use of herbicides
will be used.

ANALYSIS AREA
Analysis bounds for most noxious weed occurrence and impacts will be the Fivemile, Warland, Cripple
Horse, Canyon and Dunn Creek drainages and access routes within that drainage. For risk of new
invaders, the analysis bounds will include the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).
The analysis area for weed effects includes the Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse, Canyon and Dunn
Creek drainages which are located on the east side of the Koocanusa Reservoir. The analysis area 92,400
acres of which 78,546 are National Forest System (NFS) lands, 4,032 acres are Montana Department of
Natural Resource and Conservation Lands (DNRC), 7, 672 acres are owned by Plum Creek Timber
Company (PCTC), 802 acres of Corp of Engineer (COE) land and 1,355 are in other private ownership.
General historical or reference condition and the desired and existing condition information are described
in the Vegetation Response Units (VRUs) and within the analysis area in the Vegetation Section of this
document. The VRU groups will be used to describe some of the reference and desired conditions.
ANALYSIS METHODS

Information from field surveys conducted in the summer of 2002, herbicide treatment records in 2004,
2006, 2008 and 2009, and field reconnaissance conducted in 2009, are the basis for evaluation of current
infestation levels, species presence and risk. The Libby Ranger District weed files contain the survey
information for individual roads in the form of field forms. Weed density and infestation size were
mapped using the Montana Noxious Weed Survey and Mapping System. Refer to the Project File for the
Weed Surveys and the Herbicide Treatment Summary for weeds targeted.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT and INVASIVE SPECIES
Exotic Vegetation
Over the past 60-70 years, mixtures of non-native and native grasses and forbs have commonly been used
to accomplish erosion control and revegetation of exposed areas. Non-native grass and forb species such
as orchard grass (Dactylis glomerata), timothy (Phleum pratense), several bromes and various clovers
(Trifolium spp., Melilotus spp.) have been used to revegetate log landings, road cuts and fills, stream
crossings and heavily used recreation sites. Non-native seed used for revegetation is grown commercially
for agricultural purposes and is generally available in large quantities and are inexpensive compared to
native seed mixtures. Generally, the location and extent of non-native plants relates to human
development and use. Within the developed areas of the NFS, non-native species are widespread. Due to
the historic use of non-native seed to quickly stabilize disturbed sites, these areas often exhibit well
established populations of non-native species.
Although non-native species are common on disturbed sites across the forest, displacement of native
species is not known to be common. Many of the non-native plant species commonly used for
revegetation are generally adapted to areas of disturbed soil and are not highly successful in competing
with stable native plant communities. However, due to their aggressive competitiveness and adaptability,
some non-native species have spread from disturbed areas into undisturbed areas. Non-native species such
as Dutch white clover (Trifolium repens) and various varieties of blue grass are commonly found along
stream channels, moist areas and often in grass/forb communities. The long-term effect of these nonnative plants on native plant communities is not known.
Noxious Weeds
Noxious weeds are exotic vegetation that by definition are non-native, unwanted and detrimental to
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 325 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

desired conditions. Noxious weeds are a serious ecological and environmental threat to the natural
resources. Noxious weeds can displace native plant communities (including endangered species), alter
wildlife habitat, reduce forage for wildlife and livestock, and lower biodiversity. In some cases, noxious
weeds increase soil surface runoff and sedimentation into streams.
Most noxious weeds and non-native plants arrive on site as stowaways. Seeds are inadvertently brought
from one area to another on equipment, vehicles, off-highway vehicles (OHVs), and livestock or by wellintending people for gardens or to help control erosion. Some non-native plants minimally impact the
local ecosystem or do not thrive at all, while others take hold, prosper and change the local ecosystem
forever. Once established, weeds have a competitive edge over native plants because their natural enemies
that co-existed with these plants in their homeland did not migrate with the weeds or are not adapted to
the sites where the weeds established.
Weeds infest about 100 million acres in North America; they conquer more than 3 million acres each
year, invading an estimated 6 square miles of FS and BLM lands every day. As of the late 1990s, spotted
knapweed occupied five million acres in Montana (Stalling 1999). Previous road building, harvesting,
mining, homesteading, construction of the Koocanusa Reservoir, recreation and rural development in the
East Reservoir analysis area brought in weed seeds, which in some cases became established and
flourished. Ongoing resource management activities such as timber harvest, forest fires, prescribed fires
and recreational and administrative traffic have exacerbated the situation and weeds are established on
most roads, in some harvest and/or burn units, and most home sites in the East Reservoir analysis area.
A number of noxious weed species have been introduced throughout the Libby Ranger District. The east
side of the reservoir is accessed by several open roads and several recreation areas. Open road in the
Fivemile Creek area include roads #48, #4893 and #6278; open roads in the Warland Creek area include
#566, #566F and #4891; open roads in the Cripple Horse Creek area include #835, #4898, #4424, #6292,
#4925, #4904, #4905; open roads in Canyon creek area include #4912, #334 and #4913 and open roads in
the Dunn Creek area include #4911, #4916 and #525. Highway 37 cuts through the eastern edge of the
entire analysis area. There are 123 miles of year-long open roads and 29 miles of seasonally open roads in
the analysis area. These roads are used for numerous recreational activities. Areas along roads,
campgrounds and trails are at risk for spreading existing populations of noxious weeds, as well as
introduction of new species. The exact number of noxious weed species present in the analysis area is
unknown. Weed surveys and ground reconnaissance conducted in the analysis area showed the following
species to be present in the analysis area.
Spotted Knapweed (Centaurea maculosa)
Diffuse Knapweed (Centaurea diffusa)
Common St. John's-wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Orange Hawkweed (Hieracium aurantiacum)
Meadow Hawkweed (Hieracium pratense)
Sulfur Cinquefoil (Potentilla recta)
Rush Skeletonweed (Chondrilla juncea)
Cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum)

Oxeye Daisy (Chrysanthemum leucanthemum)
Dalmation Toadflax (Linaria dalmatica)
Canada Thistle (Cirsium arvense)
Yellow Hawkweed (Hieracium caespitosum)
Hound’s-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Tansy Ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Common Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare)

Based on proximity to other populations yellow toadflax and leafy spurge are also on the watch list for
this area.
Because of current establishment, spotted knapweed and cheatgrass are the most potentially threatening
noxious weeds in the dryer VRUs 2 and 3, and the hawkweeds are potentially the most environmentally
threatening noxious weeds in the analysis area in the moist VRUs 4, 7 and 9 (VRU Map in Map Section).
Descriptions of the VRU groups can be found in the Vegetation Section of this document.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 326 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Cheatgrass is on the State list as a Priority3 - Regulated Plants. These regulated plants have the potential
to have significant negative impacts. The plant may not be intentionally spread or sold other than as a
contaminant in agricultural products. The state recommends research, education and prevention to
minimize the spread of the regulated plant.
Because of this cheatgrass will be summarized within Category 1 – Established Weeds.
CATEGORY 1 – Established Weed Species
Spotted knapweed is a biennial or perennial forb that can produce up to 18,000 seeds per plant per year
under favorable conditions (Lacy et al. 1995). Spotted knapweed ranks as the number one weed
problem on rangeland in western Montana. It is adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions.
Spotted knapweed is most aggressive in the forest-grassland interface on well-drained soils, and in drier
sites (Sheley and Petroff 1999, pg. 350-351). Spotted knapweed plant density has been monitored over
many sites in Montana following biological control agent releases. Two sites in western Montana where
biological control agent, Cyphocleonus achates (insect that feed exclusively on host weed species),
were released showed that spotted knapweed density declined significantly over time at both sites, and
that Cyphocleonus achates numbers increased dramatically (Story 2006). Current distribution of spotted
knapweed plants is primary along road sides in the East Reservoir drainages, with limited expansion
into the dry forested environment. Recently, biological control agents, including Cyphocleonus achates,
have been released on the KNF to control spotted knapweed and other species. The result of the releases
are not yet conclusive on the KNF, but observations by weed managers suggests there is a declining
density of spotted knapweed in many areas on the KNF and within Lincoln County.
Cheatgrass is a winter annual that reproduces by seeds. It is widely distributed and is common along
roadsides within dry Douglas-fir habitats in VRUs 1 and 2S. It competes well with the native grasses
because of late winter and early spring growth habit and its successful competition for early moisture. It
also cures early, and after maturity, is highly flammable and can contribute to rapid fire spread.
Currently cheatgrass is common on some open VRU1 and VRU2 sites within this analysis area.
Hawkweeds reproduce from seed and stolons, which are the same structures that strawberry plants use to
spread. These extensive stolons allow hawkweeds to form a dense mat that crowds out all other
vegetation. Areas of risk include tree plantations, general forest lands, pastures, meadows, wetlands,
roadsides, and dispersed and developed recreation areas. These plants are successful on all but the driest
sites (USDA 2000), but are most successful on disturbed sites within VRUs 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9.
Hawkweeds are currently the most rapidly expanding noxious weed in Montana (Littlefield 2007). Biocontrol agents are being pursued, but as of this date there are no approved bio-control agents for
hawkweeds in the United States. The current distribution and infestation levels of hawkweed plants
range from light to moderate along road sides. Within the forested environment, there are generally
light infestations in older harvest units, mining claims and recreation sites within the forested
environment. Currently, the hawkweeds are considered to be the largest noxious weed threat to the
ecological integrity of the East Reservoir watersheds. Because of the threat of these species, the Animal
and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) recently approved field release of the hawkweed gall
wasp, Aulacidea subterminalis in 2010 for testing for the biological control of hawkweeds (Hieracium
pilosella, H. aurantiacum, H. floribundum and H flagellare). Jeff Littlefield (MSU Department of
Entomology) has released the gall wasp on several sites on Libby Ranger District. The parthenogentic
gall wasp (Aulacidea subterminalis) ovipositions into the stolons of orange and mouse-ear hawkweeds
in host range testing. The Hawkweed Biological Control Consortium is testing two additional insects; a
hover fly (Cheilosia urbana) that impacts the roots, and a stem gall wasps (Aulacidea pilosellae) that
reduces the number of flower heads and inhibit flowering of hawkweed plants.
(www.cals.uidaho.edu/hawkweed/research)

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 327 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Common St. John’s-wort is a perennial forb that reproduces from seed, rhizomes and stolons. With this
comprehensive reproduction scheme, spread can be rapid and intensive. In areas of high density,
common St. John’s-wort can successfully out-compete native vegetation. Common St. John’s-wort can
be successful on most sites within the East Reservoir analysis area. The distribution of plants varies
from very light to none within the forested environment to light along road sides and some winter range
sites. Roadside herbicide treatments have targeted this species. In 2006, the Klamath beetle (Coleoptera
chrysomelidae) was successfully feeding on this species, with almost complete defoliation of the plants.
The Klamath beetle was released in California in 1946, causing the St. John’s-wort population to be
removed from the noxious weed list. The Klamath beetle tends to be cyclic in Montana but does appear
to periodically reduce the infestation size of St. John’s-wort during the periodic high cycles.
Oxeye Daisy is a perennial herb that spreads by rhizomes, and is one of our most common roadside
weeds. It frequently invades fields and meadows where it competes aggressively, to form dense and
expansive populations. It is widespread in the Northern Rockies and Pacific Northwest states and
continues to expand its range (Taylor 1990). Establishment and expansion are limited by shading, and it
is more common on basic or neutral soils and less common on acid soils (Sheley and Petroff 1999). So
it typically does not spread under forested canopies but can invade meadows especially in moist areas.
It commonly occurs along roadsides, and recently opened forest lands within East Reservoir and is
frequently associated with the hawkweeds. Currently it is not considered a serious threat in this area
because it is most common along roadsides which can be actively treated.
Canada Thistle is an aggressive perennial weed that spreads from deep rhizomes to form dense and
persistent populations. It invades fields, pastures, waste areas and recently disturbed sites such as
harvest units (Taylor 1990). It is commonly found in disturbed areas as part of the initial postdisturbance community (Duncan and Clarke 2005). It is best adapted to open sunny sites, and does not
persist long in the forested environment. It is generally limited to the first 1-5 years following
disturbance, but does persist along roadsides, disturbed riparian areas and private pasture lands. It is not
considered a serious threat to this ecosystem.
Sulfur cinquefoil is a long-lived perennial that has become one of the most serious invaders of the
Northern Rockies. The earliest records of sulfur cinquefoil in Montana were in 1947. By 1996, sulfur
cinquefoil had spread to at least 30 counties in western Montana. This rapid spread over large
geographic areas is similar to the exponential spread pattern of spotted knapweed. Cinquefoil has wide
ecological amplitude, and is commonly associated with spotted knapweed. It is successful in invading
low-disturbance sites, and is common in natural grasslands, shrub areas and open canopy forests (VRUs
1 and 2). Establishment and expansion are limited by shading from dense overstory tree canopies
(Sheley and Petroff 1999, pg 282-285). Currently cinquefoil is not widespread within this analysis area.
Hound’s-tongue is a biennial herb that is common along roadsides and in disturbed areas (Taylor 1990).
Within the analysis area, it currently occurs along roads and private pasture lands, but is at risk for
spread due to the burr-like seeds making long distance transport possible. It tolerates shade, but is more
robust in full sun, and thrives in wetter grasslands. Hound’s-tongue is a poor competitor with native
plants, and requires disturbed or bare areas to establish (MSU 2003). Bio-control agents are not yet
approved for use in the United States, but have been released in British Columbia and Alberta Canada
in 1997 and 1998, and are expected to move across the borders into the United States. Hound’s-tongue
is not generally invasive in the forested landscape, and is not considered a serious threat to this
ecosystem.
Common Tansy is a perennial herb that spreads from short rhizomes to form dense clumps. It is common
along roadsides, pastures and riparian areas. It needs moist, disturbed soil for seedling establishment,
and prefers open sites for at least part of the growing seasons (USDA NRCS 2008). It is very aggressive
and persistent once established, particularly in riparian areas and along road ditches. The majority of the
infestation is at the end of the #4912D road in Canyon Creek. The patch is located near the creek on an
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 328 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

old landing that has been burned.
NEW INVADERS
Rush Skeletonweed has one known occurrence site within the analysis area, located in the Dunn Creek
Campground on the Corp of Engineers lands. This site has been treated for several years and is rechecked
several times each growing season.
Dalmation toadflax is also located in the analysis area along Highway 37. The FS, Lincoln County and
the Corp of Engineers have been treating the infestation since the early 1990s. There is a recently
identified population on Gopher Hill that was treated in 2012 and will be monitored.
Tansy Ragwort has one location in the Davis Mountain Area; three locations around the Weigel Mountain
area to the east of the analysis area; and three locations in Canyon Creek inside the analysis area on the
#4912U spur. These sites are monitored on an annual basis.
DESIRED CONDITIONS

Management Goals
The goal of noxious weed management on the KNF is to manage weeds in order to protect forests,
rangelands, wildlands, adjacent farmlands, and to cooperate with private individuals and county and state
agencies concerned with managing noxious weeds (USFS 1997).
The Purpose and Need identified in the KNF Invasive Plant Management FEIS (USDA FS 2007) is to:
• Prevent the introduction, establishment, and spread of new invader weed species;
• Prevent or limit the spread of established weeds;
• Restore native plant communities and improve forage on specific big game winter ranges;
• Treat weeds on NFS lands where adjacent to private landowners that are currently managing weeds;
• Limit the spread of weeds into and within the wilderness areas;
• Cooperate and educate the public regarding weed prevention, treatment, and control.
Preventing noxious weeds from invading new areas is the most economical and easiest way to control
them (prevention). Spraying of herbicides is currently the most effective method of control for smaller
populations once noxious weeds become established (early detection, rapid response, control, and
management). Roads are a common vector for weed introduction, establishment and spread. Other ground
disturbing activities such as timber harvest, mining and home sites are at risk for weed introduction and
establishment. Spraying roadsides and right-of-ways, treating disturbed sites containment boundaries and
satellite populations can be very effective in managing the spread of weeds.
Reducing the density and competition of noxious weeds before they have displaced the native vegetation
is the most effective means to rehabilitation and restoration.
The desired conditions are to maintain the natural diversity of plants and animals within the forested
ecosystem.
Management strategies should be applied to prevent introduction, establishment and spread of noxious
weeds, in conjunction with restoration of native plant communities to restore vegetative health and
increase ecological resilience and resistance to potential climate change.
Recent and Planned Weed Control Measures
Past weed control measures in the East Reservoir analysis area include herbicide treatment along road
systems, campgrounds and gravel pits. Table 3.107 displays a summary of herbicide treatment for the past
six years.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 329 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Table 3.107 - 2006-2011 Herbicide Treatment in East Reservoir Creek
DRAINAGE LOCATION
2006

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

ACRES

2.4
0
21.0
0
0
26.7

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

33.8
22.5
2
15
56.8
36.8

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

0
0
11.3
13.0
0
20.9

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

2007

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

ACRES

0
0
12.0
0
25.0
29.3

2010

2008

Fivemile Creek
Warland Creek
Cripple Horse Creek
Canyon Creek
Dunn Creek
Koocanusa Face

DRAINAGE LOCATION
2009

63.5
14.1
69.7
28.6
2.5
26.3

2011

30.5
19.5
33.5
10.5
0
23.6

Future weed activities in the East Reservoir analysis area include the following:
• Continued treatment of the seasonally open road systems by the Forest Service;
• Continued treatement of new invader sites;
• Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation Grant for weed control pre and post prescribed wildlife
enhancement burning. This is a multi-year grant that started Spring 2012.
• Requiring timber sale purchasers to spray up to 15’ of the proposed haul routes prior to sale closure
under timber sale clause R1-C(T) 6.27# - Noxious Weed Treatment, and to adhere to Weed Best
Management Practices (BMPs); roads would be pretreated proir to sale offering.
• Monitoring of disturbed sites such as landings and major skid trail and treatment if necessary to
control noxious weeds;
• Continue to release biocontrol agents as they become available to control noxious weeds;
• Apply weed management measures (Chapter 2) to all projects in the analysis area;
• Continue to survey and treat (if necessary) any new invader sites.
Since the late 1980s, biological control agents have been released on the KNF to control invasive plants.
Several biological control agents have been released for spotted knapweed starting in 1987 and
continuously since that time. The results on spotted knapweed are not scientifically conclusive on the
KNF but observations by weed managers suggest there is a declining density of spotted knapweed in
many areas on the KNF and within Lincoln County. Populations of spotted knapweed have crashed near
Montana State University/Western Agricultural Research Center at Corvallis, Montana, where spotted
knapweed biocontrol agents were released as early as 1974 (MSU News Service 2005; Story 2006).
Biological control agents were first released for tansy ragwort in 1999. The biological control agents on
tansy ragwort have been monitored using scientific protocol and peer review and are effectively
controlling the core population of this plant. Biological control agents were released for St John’s-wort as
early as 1996, Dalmatian toadflax in 1993, Canada thistle in 1998 and hawkweeds in 2011. While not
scientifically conclusive, weed managers are seeing positive results for biological control releases on St.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 330 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

John’s-wort, Dalmatian toadflax and Canada thistle. Literature and Kootenai National Forest Plan
(KNFP) monitoring on the KNF has shown that biological control agents require a number of years to
increase their populations to a level that will noticeably impact their weed hosts, but are considered to be
the best long-term solution to invasive plants that have high population density and have become well
established across the landscape. In this analysis area, biological control is the best long-term solution for
spotted knapweed and the hawkweeds.
Several release sites have been established for biological control agents within the East Reservoir analysis
area. The areas include: Cyphocleonus achates was released at the Cripple Horse junction with road #835
and 4925 in 1996, and Agapeta zoegana in 1997, and Cyphocleonus was released in Canyon Creek in
1997. More recent releases occurred in the Fivemile Creek dispersed recreation site in 2010; Canyon
Creek dispersed recreation site in 2010 and 2011; one reclaimed road in Warland Creek and one
reclaimed road in Cripple Horse Creek. On these sites, Cyphocleonus achates has been released to target
knapweed. Damage from this knapweed weevil has been observed on these sites.
Biocontrol is a viable strategy when conventional methods of weed control are not providing adequate
solutions to the control of a specific noxious weed. Biological control agents generally impact their host
weeds by reducing their vigor and/or seed production. Biological controls generally do not eliminate
weeds, and they may not completely prevent their spread since some weed seeds are usually still
produced. However, they can reduce the rate and extent of the spread of their particular host. Biological
controls have the greatest impact on their weed hosts when several different agents are attacking the same
plant host and are best used on weed species that are already well established in an area, that have sizable
populations, and that have little or no possibility of being eradicated. Herbicide use or hand pulling are
best used on new invaders that still may be eradicated and to treat spread vectors, high density sites,
containment boundaries, or on small or satellite populations of other well established weeds.
Herbicide use along key spread vectors such as roads, recreation sites, trails, treatment of high density
sites, containment boundaries and satellite populations are some of the most effective strategies to control
the spread and establishment of existing populations of species such as spotted knapweed, hawkweeds,
common St. John’s-wort and oxeye daisy due to the widespread populations.
In order to identify appropriate levels of management toward the control of noxious weeds within Lincoln
County, Montana, and the East Reservoir analysis area, noxious weed species have been grouped into
categories. The categories are unique to Lincoln County, Montana and the KNF and are not intended to
replace the State of Montana Noxious Weed list. Table 3.108 lists the weed classification and
management strategy for known noxious weeds within the East Reservoir analysis area.
Table 3.108 - Weed Classification and Management Strategy
WEED CATEGORY

Category 3:
Potential Invaders
Category 2:
New Invaders
Category 1:
Established Infestations

Species of
Undetermined Status

WEED SPECIES

No known populations
(not currently known in Lincoln County)
Rush skeletonweed
Dalmatian toadflax
Tansy Ragwort
spotted knapweed
sulfur cinquefoil
common St. John's-wort Canada thistle
orange hawkweed
oxeye daisy
houndstongue
common tansy
meadow hawkweed complex
No known populations in the analysis area

MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

Prevention; Eradication
Eradication; Contain main body;
Eradication of populations outside
main body.
Prioritize areas to be treated; Reduce
size of plant populations; Reduce rate
of spread.
Monitor known populations for trends.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 331 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
The direct, indirect and cumulative effects of invasive plants are limited to the affected environment
consisting of East Reservoir analysis area and access routes. The potential effects that will be described
represent the result of analysis, and professional judgment, and are based on research, experience and
monitoring.
The direct and cumulative effects on noxious weed introduction and spread of past activities are primarily
associated with disturbance from harvest, site preparation, permanent land clearing, road construction and
maintenance, road storage and prescribed fire, and the concurrent opening of the canopy.
Foreseeable actions would include additional commercial harvest on state lands, road maintenance and
storage, prescribed burning of fuels and wildlife units, precommercial thinning on NFS lands, mineral
activities, grazing, recreation and weed management activities as described previously.
The direct and indirect effects of all action alternatives would result mainly from the vegetation
management activities and associated site disturbance as described in the alternative descriptions for NFS
lands harvest and fuel reduction activities, road maintenance, culvert replacement, temporary road access,
road storage and road decommissioning, as described in Chapter 2 of this document.
The cumulative effects would result from the past activities, the proposed activities as described in
Chapter 2, and the foreseeable actions described in Chapter 3 of this document.
Effects associated with actions on NFS lands will be disclosed in terms of:
•Potential changes to existing noxious weed infestations;
•Risk of expansion or introduction of new invasive species.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
With Alternative 1, there are no additional management actions proposed through this project on NFS
lands. Road maintenance, recreational use and management activities on state and private lands would
continue. Ongoing weed management activities as approved through the KNF Invasive Plant
Management FEIS would continue as funding allows, and management activities on private lands would
proceed. Natural disturbance process such as wildfire, insect, disease and big game use would also
continue. Fires would be suppressed in accordance with KNFP direction.
The long-term health of these ecosystems is linked to our ability to manage or control noxious weeds.
Ongoing weed control measures across the analysis area would continue, but without programmed
activities, the focus of treatment would be limited to gravel pits, campgrounds, dispersed recreations sites,
powerline access roads, and on main yearlong open roads into each main drainage. Even with treatment,
the existing open roads may support low-level weed populations with some potential for seed spread by
road maintenance equipment, as well as administrative and recreational traffic.
Yearlong restricted roads would be a low priority for treatment for all but the potential invaders and new
invader species. Weed management activities associated with fuel treatment, timber removal, road
improvements, road storage or fisheries improvement activities would not be implemented. Closed roads
would continue to support weed populations because they would not be treated, and they could contribute
to spread of weeds off the road prism and into the forest, particularly with the dry-land species such as
knapweed and cheat grass, and the shade tolerant hawkweeds. The no-action alternative would not
increase vehicle traffic into the analysis area. It would not increase site disturbances, such as temporary
road construction, road storage, road decommissioning, recreation enhancement, timber harvest and fuel
treatment; therefore weed spread would not be accelerated or slowed as a result of actions from this
alternative.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 332 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Because current budgets only allow for treatment of the highest risk open roads and high use recreational
sites, the no-action alternative is expected to allow existing weed populations outside these areas to
cumulatively increase. If budgets do not allow for continued treatment, and present weed populations are
not managed, weed populations may continue to exceed KNFP standards (Table IV-1, pg. IV-10, KNFP
1987). With the current trend for appropriated budgets for noxious weed management, existing weeds are
expected to continue moving off closed roadways into previously disturbed areas, onto undisturbed
forested areas and into new or existing burned areas.
With current weed management emphasis of no increase in funding, and no project support for weed
control, most established noxious weed species may continue to maintain presence and spread along
closed and seasonal restricted road systems, 4-wheel trails, riparian areas and sites that are disturbed in
the future. Emphasis on survey eradication of new invader species would continue.
Spotted knapweed, cheat grass and St. John’s-wort, may expand off the closed road systems in the dryland areas (VRU 2and 3). Orange hawkweed (Hieracium aurantiacum) and the meadow hawkweed
complex (Hieracium pratense, H. floribundum, H. piloselloides) would continue to increase on all but the
driest sites, and Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) would continue to be a common component in disturbed
areas. New invaders would have the potential to establish and spread along open roads, but current weed
management activities should minimize this risk.
With the exception of the hawkweeds, weed species of concern are not persistent in forested vegetation
communities that have moderate to high canopy closure. As stands close and succession continues, the
spread of noxious weeds should slow. Without disturbance, many of the noxious weed species would not
have a competitive advantage. However, the driest sites with light forest canopy would be at risk for
spread of spotted knapweed, cheat grass and St. John’s-wort, even without management activities on NFS
lands.
The hawkweeds would continue to spread along closed roads and trails on all but the driest sites, and
would move into areas with heavier canopies, and riparian areas, particularly if they have experienced any
past duff reduction activities such as, mining, harvest or fire.
RESOURCE IMPACTS of NOXIOUS WEEDS
Impacts to Big Game Winter Range
Weeds impact native vegetation by competing for light, water and nutrients. Native vegetation provides
forage, cover or nesting habitat for micro- and macro-fauna. In comparison, noxious weed species
generally do not provide valuable forage or habitat for native animals (Trammell and Butler 1995). As
weeds invade the dry sites, the carrying capacity of big game winter range within the East Reservoir
analysis area may continue to be compromised. By altering the structure of plant communities, noxious
weeds alter the structure of animal communities (Sheley and Petroff 1999). Warm and dry (mesic) forest
types are most likely to be invaded by spotted knapweed, St John’s-wort, Dalmatian toadflax, sulfur
cinquefoil, rush skeletonweed and cheat grass. Of these species, spotted knapweed is the most prevalent,
followed by St. Johns-wort, cheat grass, and sulfur cinquefoil. Dalmatian toadflax has locations along
Highway 37 and has been treated since the early 1990s. These sites are closely monitored every year.
Rush skeletonweed has only one location in the Dunn Creek campground on the Army Corp of Engineers
lands. This site has had multiple treatments and is closely monitored every year. Tansy ragwort sites
within Canyon Creek have been treated and are also closely monitored every year. There have been no
new plants within these sites for several years.
Watson and Renney (1994) found that spotted knapweed infestations decreased bluebunch wheatgrass
forage yield by 88% (Sheley and Petroff 1999). Associated elk use, was reduced by 98% on spotted
knapweed-dominated range compared to bunchgrass-dominated sites (Sheley and Petroff 1999).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 333 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Established bio-control agents including seed head flies Urophoria spp, and Cyphocleonus achates may
help slow the spread of spotted knapweed on these important winter ranges.
St. John’s-wort seedlings may require several years to reach reproductive maturity, and are not strong
competitors with other vegetation until they mature. Once the plant is mature, the large crowns can
produce up to 30 stems and 15,000 to 33,000 seeds annually. Dense stands can displace native plants, and
can greatly depreciate wildlife carrying capacities, and endanger the biological diversity of these lands
(Sheley and Petroff 1999, pg. 374-376). The cyclic buildup of the Klamath beetle combined with ongoing
emphasis to treat small infestations may help reduce the potential spread of this species.
Cheatgrass can out-compete native bunchgrasses due to its rapid growth in the late winter or early spring
which occurs approximately six weeks earlier that native bunchgrasses such as bluebunch wheatgrass.
Soil water depletion by cheatgrass is one of the principal mechanisms for competing with perennial
grasses (Sheley and Petroff 1999, pg. 180). In southern Idaho, cheatgrass dominates many of the
grass/shrub ecosystems. Increasing fire frequency in cheat grass systems have eliminated native, perennial
species and encouraged invading annuals and the associated decline in species richness (Whisenant 1994).
Cheatgrass has little value as winter forage, therefore increasing density of cheat grass results in a
decrease in the carrying capacity of big game winter ranges.
Sulfur cinquefoil can establish and rapidly dominate range lands, dry land shrub communities and open
canopy dry lands. Disturbance can accelerate this dominance, but it is also successful in invading native
plant communities with little to no disturbance. It is commonly associated with spotted knapweed. It is
avoided by most grazing animals therefore an increase in sulfur cinquefoil, results in a decrease in big
game forage.
Impacts to Big Game Summer Range
Because of their competitive nature, and the ability to expand in forested conditions, the hawkweeds pose
the greatest risk to big game summer range habitat. Hawkweeds can choke out most herbs, grasses and
forbs with almost complete dominance of the understory vegetation.
Soil Effects of Noxious Weeds
Increases in noxious weeds have been shown to affect the structure of ecosystems by altering soil
properties. Soil in areas dominated by noxious weeds may have lower amounts of organic matter and
available nitrogen than areas supporting native grasslands. Noxious weeds may increase soil erosion, and
chemical compounds may hinder soil macro-fauna and micro-fauna. Weeds may deplete soil nutrient
reserves and alter soil temperatures (Sheley and Petroff 1999). As weed populations increase, the
associated soil effects would increase.
Watershed Effects of Noxious Weeds
Noxious weed populations can increase surface runoff and sediment yield by reducing native plant
community diversity and increasing exposed soil (Lacey et al. 1989). Where noxious weed canopies are
light but native plants are in decline, vegetative cover of soil may be reduced, thus exposing increased soil
surface and increasing evaporation thereby reducing soil moisture. Where canopies are dense, high
transpiration rates by noxious weeds may deplete soil water content. The effects of uncontained noxious
weed expansion in the analysis area would vary by site and species, but could change the watershed
characteristics particularly associated with hydrology on the drier sites.
Impacts to Native Plant Communities
Noxious weeds have been shown to affect the structure of ecosystems by altering the composition of plant
communities. In general, noxious weeds have invasive characteristics that allow them to be competitive
and often out-compete and displace native plant species. This can affect the species diversity and species
richness on a given site or area.
Impacts to Historic Fire Regimes
With ongoing expansion of invasive species such as spotted knapweed and St John’s-wort, in the dry land
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 334 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

types (VRUs 2 and 3), the fire frequency may decrease due to the reduced density of fine fuels from
native species. If cheatgrass were to increase, fire frequency may increase, resulting in accelerated decline
in native shrubs and bunchgrasses.
With no hazard fuel reduction treatments, there is a potential for wildfires in timbered stands with heavy
fuel loads to burn at higher intensities with a greater disturbance factor than they would with treatment.
Fire disturbances, fire suppression activities and fireline construction could enhance the introduction and
spread of noxious weeds.
Cumulative Effects
Past Harvest Activity
Harvest over the past 50 years has created variable levels of disturbance across NFS, state and private
lands. The majority of the past harvest activities have been concentrated in the dry land VRUs (VRU 2
and 3). Spotted knapweed and cheat grass are the most common noxious weed species on the dry land
VRUs, and have a presence on most of the road systems. The hawkweeds have infested most of the road
corridors and major skid trails within the moist VRUs. Because these species are established within the
East Reservoir analysis area, it is expected that hawkweeds would continue to increase without
management until biological control agents are available and established, and spotted knapweed would
retain presence but may decrease in density as currently established biological control agents expand.
Other species present in the area, as a result of past harvest activity, may decrease or remain stable as the
native vegetation recovers and shade out these invasive species.
Past Slashing and Underburning
Slashing and underburning have occurred throughout the analysis area. The effects of these habitat
improvement and fuel reduction burns have generally decreased the understory component of conifers,
and increased sunlight to the forest floor. The response of vegetation to fire is influenced by a variety of
fire parameters including intensity, severity, soil heating and season of burn. These variations can and will
cause differences in the response of individual species and the community as a whole, but generally
spring burns would initially decrease the density of the native bunchgrasses, and shrubs, and give noxious
weeds a temporary advantage. The shrubs respond very quickly to pre-burn density, but the bunchgrasses
may take several years to reach pre-burn coverage. Fire studies and unpublished data from western
Montana generally support the observation that where propagules are available, spotted knapweed is
likely to establish, persist and/or spread following fire (www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/forb/cenmac/).
Cheat grass response to fire does vary by season of burn and burn intensity. The most common reports are
that cheat grass densities decrease the first post-fire year and approximately equal pre-burn densities by
2nd and 3rd year post-fire. Cheat grass may also invade recently burned sites where it does not usually
dominate or did not previously occur. (www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/graminoid/brotec).
Past Road Construction and Access
Past road construction has served as the primary vector for introduction and spread of noxious weeds in
the East Reservoir analysis area. Severe site disturbances associated with construction, and the potential
for seed movement on equipment has been instrumental in establishing noxious weeds within this area.
Noxious weed management such as weed best management practices (BMPs) and pre-treatment with
herbicide were not incorporated into most of these past activities. Noxious weeds are concentrated along
these linear road features.
Past Road Storage and Decommissioning
Past road storage and decommissioning in the East Reservoir analysis area have decreased access for
noxious weed management, increased disturbance on the site and generally increased density of noxious
weeds following the disturbance. The areas where past road storage and decommissioning activities took
place were not treated with herbicide prior to the ground disturbance; however they were seeded with a
roadside seed mix to quickly establish a vegetation cover to compete with noxious weeds.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 335 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Past Road Closures
Road closures have reduced noxious weed introduction and spread by eliminating vehicle traffic; however
they have also reduced accessibility for noxious weed management. Closures have generally reduced the
spread rate of invasive plants, and as the road systems re-vegetate with native species (particularly
shrubs), generally the density of all species except the hawkweeds have declined.
Past Weed Management
Past weed control has consisted of herbicide treatment, education and prevention in this analysis area.
Weed educational posters have been posted at campgrounds, and weed-free seed certified hay is required
for all stock use on NFS lands. Herbicide treatment has been ongoing since the mid-1990s and has been
effective in containing and controlling noxious weeds on the main seasonally open roads and at the
campgrounds. Areas that have been treated repeatedly over the past decade have low composition of
noxious weeds. Weed density on closed road systems varies from low to moderate depending on the time
since treatment and the recovery stage of the native vegetation. Refer to the project file for herbicide
treatment since 2004.
Herbicide treatment generally has about a three year effect in reducing the density of noxious weeds, and
can slow spread for many years if vegetation recovery occurs during this time. Herbicides used in this
area have been Aminopyralid, Picloram, Clopyralid, Triclopyr and 2,4-D.
Clopyralid, Picloram, Triclopyr and 2,4-D, are synthetic plant growth hormones and have some structural
similarities to naturally occurring hormones called auxins. They disrupt plant growth by binding to
molecules that are normally used as receptors for the natural growth hormones. The binding causes
abnormal growth leading to plant death in a few days or weeks, depending on the species and the
herbicide. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has approved these herbicides for controlling
noxious weeds, and requires that any use restrictions be included in the product label. All of the
herbicides, except 2,4-D, are rated by the EPA as slightly toxic to humans; 2,4-D is the most commonly
used herbicide in the United States and is rated as moderately toxic. It degrades quickly with a half-life of
roughly one week. Clopyralid is a selective herbicide that affects members of only three families, making
it useful for killing knapweeds while protecting native plant species. It has a soil half-life of 20 days.
Picloram is a rate selective herbicide that has an average soil half-life of 90 days and Triclopyr has a halflife in the soil of 30 days (USDA FS 2007).
Reasonably Foreseeable Actions
Planned Harvest Activity on DNRC Lands
Approximately 198 acres of harvest activity and 0.84 miles of new road construction are proposed on
DNRC lands between 2013 and 2023. These activities would create additional disturbance and a receptive
seed bed for noxious weeds. The majority of the planned harvest activities are within the dryland VRUs
(VRU 2 and 3). Because spotted knapweed and common St. John’s-wort are generally established on the
road systems, it is likely the populations would expand within the harvested dryland types. The DNRC
does have an aggressive weed management program and do require many of the same weed BMPs that
the federal agencies require. These activities would substantially reduce the risk of new introductions, but
expansion of on-site noxious weed species is a risk that is associated with these activities.
Precommercial Thinning on FS Lands
Approximately 760 acres of precommercial thinning has been approved and let out on contracts in the
Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek drainages. This thinning would be on-going over the next five years.
Because this is not a ground disturbing activity, there should be no effects to the noxious weeds through
this activity.
Road Maintenance
Routine road maintenance is likely to occur on roads that are currently open to the public. These are on a
periodic herbicide treatment schedule, so while the increased disturbance would provide a receptive seed
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 336 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

bed for noxious weeds, the herbicide treatment should serve to maintain a low density of noxious weeds.
Fuels and Wildlife Units Projects
Planned spring underburning may increase the competitive advantage of some noxious weeds. Cheat
grass is an example, as it is a cool season grass and is often past its major growth cycle by the time the
burns are implemented. Generally the native bunchgrasses are actively growing and the prescribed fire in
the spring would set these species back and it may take several years for them to recover their pre-burn
density. Most studies show that fire initially reduces frequency and basal area of Idaho fescue, bluebunch
wheatgrass and rough fescue (www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/graminoid/). Current management
measures for these projects include a pre-treatment survey for noxious weeds. If infestations are located
off the roads within the forested environment, they would either be treated before or following the burn to
eliminate seed and reduce the potential for spread. These projects may also provide funding for biological
control release if the infestations are large enough.
If funding remains consistent with the past few years or greater, current monitoring and treatment
completed as authorized under the Kootenai National Forest Invasive Plant Management FEIS, combined
with bio-control agents, should prevent significant spread of these invasive species on big game winter
range sites within NFS lands in the analysis area.
Planned Weed Control
Future weed control would consist of herbicide treatment, education and prevention in this analysis area.
Weed educational posters would continue to be posted at campgrounds. Acres treated with herbicide
would vary depending on funding and the ability to acquire grants. Acres treated over the past six years
vary from 50 acres in 2005 to a high of 207 acres in 2010 in preparation for a potential project in this
area. The overall average is roughly 110 acres per year. If those funds are not available, it is estimated
that we would only treated an average of about 50 acres per year with herbicide. Refer to the project file
for herbicide treatment since 2005. Approximately 183 acres was sprayed in the Cripple Planning Unit
(Weeds Project File) in 2010.
As long as the KNF can continue treating the main spread vectors, the treatment should be effective at
containing and controlling noxious weeds on the seasonally open roads, campgrounds and at trailheads.
Weed density on closed roads would decline for species that are not tolerant of shade, but would continue
to increase for species that are tolerant of shade such as the hawkweeds. Survey and eradication of new
invader species would continue.
The effects of herbicides on humans and the environment are displayed in the USDA Forest Service KNF
Invasive Plant Management FEIS (2007).
Off-Road-Vehicles
Off-road-vehicles (OHV) would continue to use existing trails in the analysis area. Unless funding is
provided to treat these trails, weed seeds are expected to keep moving into un-infested areas as OHV use
continues.
Cattle Grazing
Cattle occasionally graze on weed species and pass seeds on as they graze across forest lands. All animals
are seed vectors for some species of weeds, cattle being no different. Seed beds may also be created in
areas where cattle congregate, although these areas appear to be limited within the analysis area. Effects
from grazing are difficult to quantify, they are dispersed, and generally recognized as occurring, but are
not a major concern at this time. Fivemile is the only drainage where current grazing is occurring and
would continue in the future. There is a chance that grazing may occur in the future in the Warland
drainage.
Potential Climate Change
Predictions for potential climate change within northwest Montana vary from warmer and drier to warmer
and moister, and most predict a longer growing season and less available moisture for plants during the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 337 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

active growing season. Global warming and other climate changes would affect the growth, phenology
and geographical distribution of weeds. Weed species currently restricted to the southern United States
may expand northward (Patterson 1995). Fire risk is strongly associated with increased spring and
summer temperatures and an earlier spring snowmelt (Westerling et al. 2006). A synthesis of literature
results indicates that noxious weeds on the whole have a larger than expected growth increase to both
recent and projected increases in atmospheric C~ relative to other plant species. There is also evidence
that rising carbon dioxide (CO2) may preferentially select for invasive, noxious species within plant
communities (Ziska 2004).
Most of the dry-land noxious weeds on the KNF appear to respond favorably to drought, so potential
climate change to a warmer environment with a longer growing season, the associated soil moisture
depletion and increased CO2 could cumulatively favor these species and could result in decreased plant
diversity and decreased big game forage. In the case of the cool season cheat-grass, earlier soil moisture
depletion, would strongly favor the cheat-grass over native bunchgrass, which could start a cycle similar
to the south and intermountain west where the fire frequency has been increased with the cured cheatgrass biomass, giving cheat-grass an additional competitive edge.
Resources managers will be challenged to integrate adaptation strategies in a time of potential climate
change. Adaptive strategies would include resistance options (forestall impacts and protect highly valued
resources), resilience options (improve the capacity of ecosystems to return to desired conditions after
disturbance) and response options (facilitate transition of ecosystems from current to new conditions)
(Millar 2007). Successful management of invasive weeds would require active inventory and
management to prevent new introductions and persistent efforts to reduce existing infestations. While the
no-action alternative allows for current weed management programs, it does not promote an increase in
integrated weed management strategy.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
The potential to spread noxious weeds is strongly correlated with site disturbance and seed introduction.
The planned activities are listed are listed from highest to lowest potential:
 Road construction;
 Road storage;
 Road maintenance and BMP work;
 Harvest utilizing ground based equipment;
 Road decommissioning;
 Motorized trail use
 Site preparation on regeneration harvest units through spot grapple scarification;
 Fuel reduction through spot grapple piling or spot mastication;
 Site preparation on regeneration harvest units through prescribed fire;
 Underburning for hazard reduction in intermediate harvests treatments;
 Harvest utilizing a skyline system;
 Winter harvest utilizing ground based equipment;
 Underburning for natural fuels reduction, and/or forage enhancement;
 Non-motorized trail construction
 Tree planting;
 Precommercial thinning
Existing Roads and Associated Effects
With the exception of the main access roads up the drainages and the tie through roads, the majority of the
access routes to NFS lands in East Reservoir analysis area are currently closed yearlong, so there is
limited additional opportunity to close roads to reduce weed spread. Options to reduce the current rate of
spread include herbicide treatments, bio-control and road storage.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 338 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

ACTIVITIES with HIGHEST RISK of SPREADING or INTRODUCING NOXIOUS WEEDS
Permanent Road Construction
Road construction has a high potential to spread noxious weeds through severe disturbance that creates a
receptive seedbed and allows noxious weeds to establish and flourish. This site disturbance can last
several years on dry land sites. Once established, travel along the new road can continue to spread weeds.
Alternative 2 include 9.25 miles of new permanent road construction and Alternatives 3 includes 8.06
miles of new permanent road construction.
Temporary Road Construction
Temporary road construction has a high potential to spread noxious weeds through severe disturbance that
creates a receptive seedbed and allows noxious weeds to establish and flourish. This site disturbance can
last several years on dry-land sites. Once established, travel along the new road can continue to spread
weeds. Temporary road construction is generally not proposed where a major amount of earthwork would
be required so this work may include minor earthwork, temporary culvert installations, installing surface
water drainage structures, removing all drainage structures and restoring the slope template following use.
If the temporary road would be utilized over more than one season, seeding and fertilization would be
required the first growing season following construction. If the temporary road would be utilized for only
one season, seeding and fertilizing would be required following restoration activity.
Alternative 2 includes 4.26 miles of temporary road construction and Alternative 3 has 4.05 miles of
temporary road construction. Of the miles of temporary road construction proposed, three different levels
of disturbances would occur. The temporary road construction is in all VRUs.
Because the proposed temporary road construction on NFS lands would be restored following harvest
activities, seeding would be required on the road immediately following construction if the road is going
to stay in place for more than a season, and also immediately following restoration.
Management measures include equipment washing, use of weed-free certified seed and straw, seeding
and fertilizing restored road template, use of materials from approved weed-free sources, monitoring and
future herbicide treatments. There is a small risk of introducing weed seeds on equipment associated with
the road construction and restoration, even with the required equipment washing. The greatest risk is
posed when equipment from outside the area is utilized for these activities, since they may bring new
invaders onto these sites.
Road Storage and Decommissioning
In the short-term, road storage/decommissioning may increase spread of on-site weed seed, and transport
off-site seed into the area on equipment. Disturbance associated with these activities can create a seedbed
that allows noxious weeds to re-establish and flourish. Management measures include equipment
washing, herbicide treatments prior to storage/decommissioning activities, use of weed-free certified seed
and straw, seeding and fertilizing on disturbed areas, post-treatment monitoring and herbicide treatment.
Monitoring has shown that herbicide treatments prior to storage/decommissioning work helps reduce
weed densities and population size, and that the long-term benefits of road storage/decommissioning are a
reduced rate of noxious weed spread, particularly for new invaders. There is a small risk of introducing
weed seeds on equipment associated with the storage/decommissioning even with the required equipment
washing. The greatest risk is posed when equipment from outside the area is utilized for these activities,
since they may bring new invaders onto these sites. The long-term effects of road decommissioning/
storage are a reduced rate of weed spread due to these areas not being accessible to vehicle use. Once revegetated, roads that are stored/decommissioned would be fairly resistant to spread of all but the species
that continue to flourish under a shaded environment, such as hawkweeds. The spread of hawkweeds may
be higher through storage than the yearlong closures due to the difficulty in treating these roads once
storage activities have occurred.
Alternative 2 proposes 16 miles and Alternatives 3 propose 17.62 miles of road storage. Alternative 2 and
3 both propose 5.93 miles of road decommissioning. Because the majority of these roads have current
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 339 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

infestations of hawkweeds, knapweed, common St. John’s-wort, daisy and Canada thistle, management
measures would require herbicide treatment prior to the storage/decommissioning activities. Once
stored/decommissioned, they would reduce the risk of spreading other existing weed species and
introducing new invaders due to the storage/decommission. Alternative 2 has the lowest risk of
contributing to long-term spread of weeds due to the lower disturbance and less future access reduction to
treat the template. For other species, the risk is the similar to all alternatives as these road segments are
not accessible for vehicle traffic now.
Table 3.109 shows road related impacts for all alternatives including the “no-action”. In general, the
higher the miles of restricted road access, and in the long-term, the higher the miles in decommission/
storage, the lower the rate of noxious weed spread. The exception to this rule is the hawkweed that would
continue to spread on stored/decommissioned roads due to the difficulty in treating these vectors once the
storage/decommission activities have taken place.
Road Reconstruction, Reconditioning and BMP Work
Road reconstruction can spread noxious weeds through disturbance that creates a receptive seedbed and
allows noxious weeds to re-establish and flourish. Once established, administrative and recreational travel
along the new road can spread weeds. Reconstruction work may include minor earthwork, motor grading,
seeding, brushing, ditch cleaning, ditch construction, ditch relief drainage, installing surface water
drainage structures, culvert replacement and new culvert installations, surface rock replacement, dust
abatement and sub-grade reinforcement.
All of the action alternatives would haul volume on roads in the East Reservoir analysis area. The project
proposes approximately 176.4 miles of reconditioning, reconstruction, BMP work and/or blading and
shaping for Alternative 2 and 167.8 miles for Alternative 3.
Management measures include equipment washing, use of weed-free certified seed and straw, seeding
and fertilizing areas with disturbance beyond blading and shaping the road template, use of materials from
approved weed-free sources, monitoring and future herbicide treatments. There is a small risk of
introducing weed seeds on equipment associated with the reconstruction maintenance work even with the
required equipment washing. The greatest risk is posed when equipment from outside the area is utilized
for these activities, since they may bring new invaders onto these sites. Table 3.109 displays the activities
with heavy disturbance and high risk of noxious weed invasion and spread by alternative.
Table 3.109 – Activities with Heavy Disturbance and High Risk of
Noxious Weed Invasion and Spread (miles)
ACTIVITY

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

New Road Construction
Temporary Road Construction & Restoration
Road Reconditioning, Reconstruction and BMP Work
Road Storage
Road Decommission
Total Miles

0
0
0
0
0
0

9.25
4.26
176.4
16
5.93
211.84

8.06
4.05
167.8
17.62
5.93
203.46

ACTIVITIES with MODERATE RISK of SPREADING or INTRODUCING NOXIOUS WEEDS
• Harvest utilizing ground based equipment;
• Site preparation on regeneration harvest units through grapple piling and scarification.
Timber Harvest Utilizing Ground Based Yarding
Timber harvest activities can spread noxious weeds by transporting seeds on personal vehicles and
harvest equipment. Ground disturbance associated with timber harvest creates a receptive seedbed on
landings and skid trails. Harvest activities can spread noxious weed seeds by transporting seeds from the
decking, landing and servicing areas to un-infested sites in harvest units on skidders, tractors or other
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 340 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

mechanized logging equipment. Management measures include equipment washing, seeding and
fertilizing landings and major skid trails, use of certified weed-free seed, limiting soil disturbance during
harvest activities, and post-harvest monitoring and treatment for any new invaders. The risk of noxious
weed spread is related to the amount of disturbance. Tables 3.110 and Table 3.111 display the amount of
acres harvested by system on NFS.
Winter logging reduces the chance of spreading existing weeds by generally reducing soil disturbance.
Specific units lower in the drainages have required winter logging to reduce impacts to soils, cultural
resource sites and also to reduce weed spread. The specific units are listed in Tables 2.0 and 2.15 in
Chapter 2 of this document.
Site Preparation and Fuel Reduction through Grapple Piling and Scarification
In the regeneration units that have grapple scarification planned, up to 25% of the unit may have the
majority of the duff removed, and up to 50% of the unit may be disturbed through the grapple
scarification activity. In units with grapple piling for fuel reduction, scarification is not an objective, but
up to 25% of the unit may have duff removal and up to 50% of the ground could be disturbed through this
activity. The impacts would be lower if the piling or mastication were accomplished over frozen ground
conditions. This ground disturbance creates a receptive seedbed for noxious weeds within the harvest unit.
In addition, equipment may transport some noxious weed seed into the unit even with the required
equipment washing. Management measures include equipment washing, limiting soil disturbance to the
minimum required for reforestation, minimizing the area treated and disturbance in the fuel reduction
units, and post-harvest monitoring and treatment of any new invaders. Treatments such as commercial
thinning and sanitation salvage would not require grapple piling and maximum disturbance would likely
be 25% of the ground. Table 3.110 displays the activities with moderate disturbance and moderate risk of
noxious weed invasion and spread by alternative. Display acres are total acres of the treatment units
although only a certain percentage of the acres would be disturbed as described previously.
Table 3.110 - Activities with Moderate Disturbance and Moderate Risk of
Noxious Weed Invasion and Spread (acres)
ACTIVITY

Non-Winter Ground Based (Tractor) Logging with Grapple Piling
Skyline Yarding with Grapple Piling

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0

1,463
204

1,625
0

ACTIVITIES with LOW to Moderate RISK of Noxious Weed Invasion and Spread
• Site preparation on regeneration harvest units through prescribed fire;
• Underburning for hazard reduction in intermediate harvests treatments;
• Harvest utilizing a skyline system;
• Winter harvest utilizing ground based equipment;
• Underburning for natural fuels reduction and/or forage enhancement;
• Allowing motorized use on a trail that is currently impassable.
Site Preparation on Regeneration Harvest Units through Prescribed Fire or Underburning in
Intermediate Harvests Treatments
Site preparation through prescribed fire and underburning in intermediate harvest treatments would have a
moderate to low potential to spread noxious weeds depending on the severity of the burn, and the amount
of duff reduction. Treatments involving harvest and burning were found to have more noxious weeds
post-treatment than less intense single-disturbance treatments (burn-only or harvest-only) (Dodson and
Fiedler 2006). Prescribed fire can increase the rate of spread of noxious weeds by creating a receptive
seedbed that allows noxious weeds to establish and flourish. The dry land areas would have spring burns
and the moist areas would generally have fall burns. While the severity and amount of disturbance may be
higher from fall burning, the dry land burns may be more susceptible to noxious weed increase due to the
more open conditions and lower existing duff levels. Burns that have adjacent road access would be preAFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 341 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

treated a minimum of one year prior to burning.
Harvest Utilizing a Skyline System or Winter Ground Based Harvest
Timber harvest activities can spread noxious weeds by transporting seeds on personal vehicles and
harvest equipment. Ground disturbance associated with timber harvest creates a receptive seedbed on
landings and skid trails. Cable logging systems similarly reduce soil disturbance and potential weed
spread as compared to tractor logging. Winter logging has a lower disturbance level, and therefore
reduces the chance of spreading weeds. All systems can spread noxious weed seeds by transporting seeds
from the decking, landing and servicing areas to un-infested sites in harvest units. Management measures
include equipment washing, seeding and fertilizing landings and major skid trails, use of certified weedfree seed, limiting soil disturbance during harvest activities, and post-harvest monitoring and treatment
for any new invaders. The risk of noxious weed spread is related to the amount of disturbance. Table
3.111 displays activities with moderate to low disturbance and moderate to low risk of noxious weed
invasion and spread by alternative.
Motorize Trail Use
Alternative 2 would make trail access changes to 36.56 miles of trails that are currently open to motorized
use. These trails would be closed to motorized use if Alternative 2 is chosen. This closure would reduce
the potential of weed spread by motorized recreational vehicles. Alternative 3 would allow 9.67 miles of
trail to continue to be accessed by motorized recreational vehicles. This would increase the chances of
weed spread on these trails. Currently, there is little motorized use on the 36.56 miles of motorized trails.
Prescribed Fire for Natural Fuels Reduction and/or Forage Enhancement
Prescribed fire can increase the rate of spread of noxious weeds by creating a receptive seedbed that
allows noxious weeds to establish and flourish. The potential is dependent on the severity of the burn and
the current level of weed infestation on site. The dry land areas would have spring burns and the moist
areas would generally have fall burns. While the severity and amount of disturbance may be higher from
fall burning, the dry land burns may be more susceptible to noxious weed increase due to the more open
conditions and lower existing duff levels. Burns that have adjacent road access would be pre-treated a
minimum of one year prior to burning.
There are over 11,000 acres of underburning for natural fuels reduction and/or forage enhancement
included in the action alternatives for this project. A decision matrix would be developed to address weed
concerns and to prioritize the units for burning based on desired objectives of the burning and whether
weeds were currently on site. This decision matrix would identify potential weed concerns and identify
target habitat enhancement or fuel reduction objectives. This way weed control efforts can focus on
particular species prior and post-burning.
Table 3.111 - Activities with Low to Moderate Disturbance and Risk of Noxious Weed
Invasion and Spread (acres)
ACTIVITY

Non-Winter Ground Based (Tractor) Logging with Site Prep and Fuels
Reduction Using Prescribed Fire
Skyline Yarding with Underburning
Winter Ground Based (tractor) Yarding (includes Winter GP and UB)
Underburning for Natural Fuels Reduction/Forage Enhancement
Winter Ground Based (Tractor) Whole Tree Yarding (CTs)
Non-Winter Ground Based (Tractor) Whole Tree Yarding (CTs)
Total Acres

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0

1,341

1,912

0
0
0
0
0
0

810
1,610
11,427
1,668
588
17,444

664
1,611
11,358
1,489
476
17,510

ACTIVITIES with VERY LOW RISK of NOXIOUS WEED INTRODUCTION and SPREAD
Because risk is generally associated with disturbance and equipment, the following activities have a very
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 342 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

low risk. The affected acreage will not be summarized because of this lower risk. Having these activities
occurring may increase the probability of locating and mapping noxious weed infestation by having
personnel on the ground. Management measures include monitoring and treatment of any new invaders.
 Tree planting;
 Precommercial thinning;
 Adding undetermined roads to the NF system roads.
ACTIVITIES with a POSITIVE IMPACT to WEED INTRODUCTION and SPREAD
Weed Treatment along Haul Routes
Alternative 2 would treat 176.4 miles of haul route and Alternative 3 would treat 167.8 mile of haul
route. The no-action alternative (1) would continue to treat some miles but not the full haul routes.
Weed Treatment Activities
• Continued treatment of the seasonally open road systems by the FS (acres and miles treated would be
similar to those displayed in Table 3.107 that displays average acres treated from 2006-2011);
• Continued treatement of new invader sites;
• Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation Grant for weed control pre and post prescribed wildlife
enhancement burning. This is a multi-year grant that started Spring 2012;
• Continue to release biocontrol agents as they become available to control noxious weeds.
Table 3.112 - Comparison of Disturbance Levels and Risk by Alternative
ACTIVITY

New Road Construction (miles)
Temporary Road Construction/Restoration (miles)
Road Storage (miles)
Road Decommissioning (miles)
Road Reconstruction & BMP Work (miles)
Non-Winter Ground Based Logging With Grapple Piling (acres)
Skyline Yarding With Grapple Piling (acres)
Skyline Yarding With Underburn (acres)
Non-Winter Ground Based Logging with Site Prep and Fuels
Reduction Using Prescribed Fire
Winter Ground Based Yarding (includes winter GP and UB)
Non-Winter Ground Based (Tractor) with WTY (PCT)
Winter Ground Based (Tractor) Whole Tree Yarding (CT)
Underburning for Natural Fuels Reduction/Forage Enhancement
Total Miles - High Risk
Total Acres - Moderate Risk
Total Acres - Low to Moderate Risk
Total Acres - Low Risk
Ground-based Logging = Tractor

PCT = Precommercial Thin

DISTURBANCE
and RISK

ALT
1

ALT
2

ALT
3

High
High
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Low to Mod

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

9.25
4.26
16.00
5.93
176.4
1,463
204
810

8.06
4.05
17.62
5.93
167.8
1,625
0
664

Low to Mod

0

1,341

1,912

Low to Mod
Low to Mod
Low
Low
High
Moderate
Low to Mod
Low

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1,610
588
1,668
11,427
211.84
1,667
3,539
13,095

1,611
476
1,489
11,358
203.46
1,625
4,187
12,847

CT = Commercial thin

The total number of acres treated does not indicate that all of these acres would be infested with noxious
weeds if the treatment were implemented; however, disturbance translates to higher risk of increased
noxious weed infestation.
The amount of acres with moderate and high levels of disturbance and the associated moderate and high
risk of having a receptive seedbed for noxious weeds can be used to compare the alternatives and the
relative risk for noxious weed introduction and spread.
Referring to Table 3.112, Alternative 2 has 8 more miles of road work than Alternative 3. Since road
activities have the highest risk for infestation, Alternative 2 would have a slightly higher risk than
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 343 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

Alternative 3. Alternative 3 also has fewer acres of low and moderate risk treatments but a slightly higher
low to moderate treatments. The difference between the alternatives is similar enough that the risk would
essentially be the same for types of treatments.
The no-action alternative also has a probability of noxious weed spread along travel routes such as roads
and trails. Even without management related disturbance, species that are tolerant of shade such as the
hawkweeds can continue to spread in the moister VRUs. Species such as spotted knapweed, common St.
John’s-wort, cheatgrass and sulfur cinquefoil can spread in the open VRU 2 and 3, especially along roads.
NOXIOUS WEEDS DESIGN CRITERIA (MANAGEMENT MEASURES)
The management measures identified in this document and incorporated in Chapter 2 of this document
(Table 2.34), and the specific weed control measures to be implemented in accordance with the 2007
KNF Invasive Plant Management EIS, were designed to help reduce the spread of weeds in the East
Reservoir analysis area and minimize the chance of introducing new species. Herbicide treatment of roads
in the analysis area would be completed in accordance with the KNF 2007 Invasive Plant Management
FEIS and ROD. Refer to the 2007 KNF Invasive Plant Management for further information.
The recommended management measures are focused on prevention as the most effective and least
expensive weed management strategy, and early detection and eradication as the best alternative once a
new species has been introduced. For established invaders, treating spread vectors and keeping these
species out of new locations is the main objective. It is well documented that roads are often the first
place to have weed infestations due to the efficiency of vehicles in seed transport and the receptive seed
bed available for seed germination and establishment. It is also well documented that roads serve as
sources for weed seed to be transported to other locations. Once the roadsides are colonized, the invasive
species move into adjacent vulnerable habitat. Because roads serve as a primary spread vector, much of
the recommended mitigation is road related. Specific project management measures would include all
weed BMPs identified in R-1 FSM 2080 Noxious Weed Management Handbook. The following design
criteria are intended to reduce spread of weeds:
• Winter Tractor Units to Avoid Noxious Weed Spread: Winter tractor operations for Units 2B, 2C,
2D, 3A, 9, 10, 11, 17, 28, 157, 158, 158A, 190, 194T, 196, 305, 306, 307, COE1 and COE3.
• Certified weed-free forage is required for use on all national forest lands in Montana (36 CFR 261.50)
• Treat existing noxious weeds on roads to be reconstructed or stored prior to that activity, (if possible
schedule spraying two or more seasons before activities are expected to occur to reduce the amount of
viable weed seed stored in the soil).
• Treat existing noxious weeds in gravel/rock pits, inspect these sources for weeds and treat before
material is transported.
• Survey and pre-treat existing noxious weeds on proposed trailhead construction site, and access sites
for in-stream work.
• Require weed free certified straw for all construction, reconstruction, and restoration activities.
• Seed and fertilize stored roads with certified weed free seed immediately following restoration
activities.
• Limit scarification objectives to the minimal required to meet reforestation objectives.
• Pressure-wash logging equipment, road maintenance and restoration equipment before entering the
analysis area.
• Require timber sale purchaser to treat existing noxious weeds along haul routes the first operational
season for weed spraying (spring or early summer)
• Seed newly constructed roads, trailheads, landings and major skid trails with certified weed-free seed.
• Prevent road maintenance machinery from blading or brushing through known populations of new
invaders. In areas where weeds are established, (and activities are opening and blading restricted or
closed roads with significantly lesser infestations); brush and blade road systems from un-infested
segments of road systems to infested areas. Limit brushing and mowing to the minimum distance and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 344 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

height necessary to meet safety objectives in areas of heavy weed infestations
• Minimize soil disturbance and mineral soil exposure during activities. Soil disturbance should be no
more than needed to meet project objectives. This includes not exceeding recommended mineral soil
exposure for site preparation in regeneration harvest units; and utilizing timing and designated skid
trails to minimize mineral soil exposure in harvest units.
• Survey proposed burn units for noxious weeds. Determine the risk of weed spread with prescribed
fire. If there is a risk of spread beyond the road corridor, defer burning until the weeds can be treated
or ensure post treatment funding for weed control.
• Survey proposed access for mechanized in stream for noxious weeds. Determine the risk of spread
with the associated activity. If there is risk of spread, pre-treat the area before activity.
• Continue to monitor/survey the analysis area for new invader weed species. Monitor weed population
levels in treated areas, with particular emphasis on haul routes, stored and decommissioned roads, and
landings. Retreat as funding allows.
• Treat and sign sites if new invaders are located and defer ground disturbing activities within those
sites until the weed specialist determines the site is no longer a threat, and approves those activities.
• Site-specific guidelines will be followed for weed treatments within or adjacent to known sensitive
plant populations. All future treatment sites would be evaluated for sensitive plan habitat suitability;
suitable habitats would be surveyed as necessary prior to treatment.
• All noxious weed control activities would comply with state and local laws and agency guidelines.
• As per the 2007 KNF Invasive Plant Management EIS and ROD, all herbicides used in the analysis
area would be applied according to the labeled rates and recommendations to ensure the protection of
surface water, ecological integrity and public health and safety. Herbicide selection will be based on
target species on the site, site factors (such as soil types, distance to water, etc), and with the objective
to minimize impacts to non-target species.
• Design road storage to allow passage of a 4-wheeler to continue treatment of hawkweeds and
common tansy in the future. Hawkweed and common tansy populations will continue to expand even
after the template has re-vegetated.
• Keep administrative traffic on closed roads to a minimum. Whenever possible, time activities prior to
seed set of the primary weed species or emphasis weeds on a given road.
• Release bio-control agents on applicable sites, as they become available, and funding allows.
• Plan follow up noxious weed treatment the spring or early summer, following final purchaser blading
of all haul roads if funds allow (this would be funded with appropriated or KV dollars).
• Burning and Noxious Weed Spread: A decision matrix will be developed to address weed
concerns and to prioritize the units for burning based on desired objectives of the burning. This
decision matrix will identify potential weed concerns and identify target habitat enhancement or fuel
reduction objectives. This way weed control efforts can focus on particular species prior and postburning.
Cumulative Effects
Past soil-disturbing activity such as road construction, harvest, mining and vehicle traffic have helped
introduce and spread noxious weeds into the analysis area. Much of this past activity did not have
concurrent weed treatment and management measures.
Because roads are a primary spread vector, spraying of yearlong open roads in the analysis area is
expected to continue to be a priority for the district and the county due the amount of recreation use in the
area. Herbicide treatment is also required for all activities that have been recently approved through other
analysis processes, such as the State timber and fuels projects that would use cost-share roads.
Approximately 167-176 miles of road treatment (BMPs) is proposed within the range of alternatives.
Because roads are such a key introduction and spread vector, this amount of treatment would be highly
effective in reducing noxious weed introduction and spread.
Roads would be treated primarily with Milestone (active ingredient is aminopyralid) where appropriate,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 345 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

under label restrictions, at a rate of 7 oz. per acre. This treatment should have a three to four year effect in
reducing the density of noxious weeds, primarily spotted knapweed, St. John’s-wort, sulfur cinquefoil and
hawkweeds. This treatment in conjunction with other establishment of native species (such as seeding
after disturbance) could have a much longer affect.
In addition to the road associated activities, other management actions proposed in this project in
conjunction with past and reasonably foreseeable actions have the potential to increase noxious weed
infestation in the analysis area due to the additional disturbance. This disturbance would be mitigated
through herbicide treatments along the haul routes associated with harvest activities, along roads to be
stored, on harvest landings, on access routes for other activities such as mining, power lines, on access to
and within recreational sites, and along trails. In addition, spot treatments for isolated populations of
noxious weeds that are located through monitoring may be treated. Follow up monitoring surveys and
treatment are proposed for all activities as described in this report, disturbance level and risk by
management activity, in the design criteria and management measures in Chapter 2. It should be noted
that the existing infestation of noxious weeds in the analysis area is strongly correlated with past
management actions such as roads, mining and harvest activities, that until recently, did not have weed
management measures associated with them. The District has noted a reduction in noxious weed
introduction and spread during such activities as a result of the current weed management programs and
weed best management practices.
In the case of species that do well in shaded and forested environments, such as the hawkweeds, periodic
herbicide treatment that is funded through project activities is critical to management of this species and
keeping it out of special areas. Because dry land species such as knapweed, cheatgrass and common St.
John’s-wort are already established, monitoring and treatment through proposed activities such as harvest
and burns may be critical to helping curb the spread of these species in high value big game ranges. Past
prescribed fire and the associated weed survey and treatments that were funded through the Rocky
Mountain Elk Foundation and Forestwide Fuels projects have been instrumental to the location and
treatment of small isolated knapweed and common St. John’s-wort populations. While the Klamath
Beetle has not been released in this area, the Klamath Beetle was noted on the isolated common St.
John’s-wort populations in the analysis area. Monitoring on Cyphocleonus root weevil has indicated
establishment and damage to roots in knapweed. The seed head flies have been shown to be well
established throughout the area and Cyphocleonus combined with the seed head flies appear to be
reducing density and plant vigor in spotted knapweed in other areas on the KNF. Management activities
may help fund additional release of these bio-control agents in analysis area.
Resources managers will be challenged to integrate adaptation strategies in a time of potential climate
change. Successful management of invasive weeds would require active inventory and management to
prevent new introductions, and persistent efforts to reduce existing infestations. While the action
alternatives contribute to site disturbance and provide a favorable seed bed for noxious weeds, they also
promote an active management strategy associated with proposed activities.
While the no-action alternative allows for current weed management programs, it does not promote an
integrated active weed management strategy. The no-action alternative has the potential to contribute to
an overall increase in noxious weed infested area some unknown time in the future, because only open
roads that are currently on a treatment schedule and roads associated with power lines would be treated.
It is unlikely that roads that are not open to the public would be treated with current budgets and
programs.

CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN and OTHER MANAGEMENT DIRECTION
Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2901.03 Executive Order 13122 directs Federal agencies to: (1) identify
actions that may affect status of invasive species; (2)(a) prevent introduction of such species; (b) detect
and control such species; (c) monitor population of such species; (d) provide for restoration of native
species; (e) conduct research on invasive species and develop technologies to prevent introduction of such
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 346 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
NOXIOUS WEEDS

species: (f) promote public education of such species; and (3) not authorize, fund or carry out actions
likely to cause the introduction or spread of invasive species in the United States or elsewhere unless the
benefits of the action clearly outweigh the harm and the agencies take steps to minimize the harm.
The Lincoln County Weed Control Act (MCA 7-22-2116) indicates that "it is unlawful for any person to
permit any noxious weed to propagate or go to seed on his land, except that any person who adheres to
the noxious weed management program of his district or who has entered into and is in compliance with a
noxious weed management agreement is considered to be in compliance with this section."
The KNF has entered into a weed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Lincoln County, which is
a management agreement under this law. Because the management measures identified and described in
Chapter 2 (Table 2.34) would be followed, this project is in compliance with the MOU and the Federal
Noxious Weed Act.
These actions would also help to meet the goal for noxious weed management as stated in the KNFP and
with the identified noxious weed management measures, all alternatives are consistent with FSM
direction, Lincoln County Weed Control act and the KNFP direction.
It is recommended that post-harvest weed management treatments be a high priority for any available KV
funding.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 347 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

AIR QUALITY INTRODUCTION
This analysis discloses the potential effects to air quality from implementing the “action” alternatives and
the potential effects of the “no action” alternative to provide the decision maker with a means of
comparing these alternatives. The analysis of the “action” alternatives and “no-action” alternative include
the effects of prescribed fire smoke, fugitive dust and some discussion on smoke from wildfires.
Wildland fires are a natural combustion process that consumes both living and dead vegetative material
and produces smoke that can have adverse impacts on air quality. The occurrence, intensity and size of
wildland fires depends directly on variables such as meteorological conditions, the type of vegetation
present, the moisture content of both live and dead fuel, topography and the total weight of consumable
material available. Small fuel, such as dead grass and conifer needles, supports fire spread. Larger dead
fuel consumption varies depending on its moisture content. Environmental conditions that reduce the
moisture content of live fuels, such as drought and extreme heat, allow these live fuels to become
available to burn. Slope effects fire in much the same way wind does; the steeper the slope the greater the
effect. The aspect of a slope influences the moisture content of fuels with north aspects generally being
more moist than south aspects. Under the extreme condition of heavy fuel, drought, and hot, dry weather
nearly all forest fuels are available for consumption. The impacts to air quality are relative to the amount
of smoke produced, which varies with burning conditions and duration. Large amounts of smoke are
produced under extreme burning conditions and for extended periods with little or no control by fire
managers under a large wildfire scenario.
Smoke produced from the prescribed burning of timber harvest residue and natural fuels can have an
adverse effect on air quality. The amount of smoke produced is influenced by the same factors that
influence the amount of smoke produced by wildfires. Increasing the utilization of sub-merchantable
material can reduce the amount of fuel remaining after timber harvest which reduces the amount of smoke
produced. The type and timing of burning, as well as weather conditions, also influences the amount of
smoke produced. Unlike a wildfire, fire managers have more control over how much and when smoke is
produced with prescribed burning.
Air quality is also affected by fugitive dust produced by vehicular traffic, especially on native surface
roads. The silt content of the road surface layer, the distance traveled, the weight and speed of the vehicle
as well as weather conditions, influence the amount of dust produced. Paved roads produce significantly
less dust than do native surface roads, especially during dry weather. Management measures, that reduce
the availability of fine silt particles, such as watering or dust suppressants, are effective. Reducing the
speed of vehicles can reduce localized impacts.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Federal Clean Air Act
The framework for controlling air pollutants in the United States is mandated by the 1970 Clean Air Act
(CAA), which was amended in 1977 and again in 1990. The CAA was designed to “protect and enhance”
air quality. Section 160 of the CAA requires measures “to preserve, protect, and enhance the air quality in
national parks, national wilderness areas, national monuments, national seashores, and other areas of
special national or regional natural, recreation, scenic, or historic value.” Stringent requirements are
therefore established for areas designated as “Class I” areas. Class I areas include Forest Service (FS) and
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) wilderness areas over 5,000 acres that were in existence before August
1977 and National Parks in excess of 6,000 acres as of August 1977. Designation as a Class I area allows
only very small increments of new pollution above already existing air pollution levels. Examples of
Class I areas include the Cabinet Mountains Wilderness, Glacier National Park and Bob Marshall
Wilderness. Class II areas are currently all other areas of the country that are not Class I.
National and State Ambient Air Quality Standards
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has established National Ambient Air Quality Standards
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 348 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

(NAAQS) for specific pollutants emitted in significant quantities that may be a danger to public health
and welfare. These pollutants are called criteria pollutants. The criteria pollutants and the National and
State standards are included in the Table 3.113. The NAAQS are designed to protect human health and
the public welfare.
Table 3.113 - National and State Ambient Air Quality Standards
POLLUTANT

Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Lead (Pb)
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)
Ozone
PM10
PM2.5

TIME PERIOD AVERAGE

FEDERAL

MONTANA

One hour
8-hour
Quarterly
Rolling 3-Month
Annual Average
Hourly Average
Annual Average
24-hour
3-hour
Hourly Average
8-hour
Hourly Average
Annual Average
24-hour
Annual Average
24-hour

35 ppm
9 ppm
1.5 μg/m3
.15 μg/m3
0.053 ppm
------------0.03 ppm
0.14 ppm
0.50 ppm
------------0.075 ppm
0.12 ppm
-----------150 μg/m3
12 μg/m3
35 μg/m3

23 ppm
9 ppm
1.5 μg/m3
----------0.30 ppm
0.05 ppm
0.02 ppm
0.10 ppm
-----------0.50 ppm
----------0.10 ppm
50 μg/m3
150 μg/m3
-------------

PM - Particulate Matter
ppm = parts per million
μg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter
Standards and violation rules can be found at http://www.deq.state.mt.us/AirMonitoring

If a community or area regularly exceeds the standards, it becomes a non-attainment area and must
demonstrate to the public and EPA how it will meet standards in the future. This demonstration is done
through the State Implementation Plan (SIP).
Wildfire and natural resource management activities such as timber harvest, road construction, site
preparation, mining and fire-use can generate ozone, carbon monoxide and particulate matter. While
ozone is a byproduct of fire, potential ozone exposures are infrequent (Sandberg and Dost 1990). Carbon
monoxide is rapidly diluted at short distances from a burning area; therefore, it poses little or no risk to
public health (Sandberg and Dost 1990). Particulate matter (PM) is the pollutant of most concern from
smoke. It is a concern to public health and visibility within the immediate area and downwind. Because of
its smaller size, PM2.5 poses greater health risks than PM10. Large volumes of particulate matter can be
produced from fire and, depending on meteorological conditions, may affect large areas for extended
periods of time.
Airshed Monitoring
The majority of the legal entities in Montana and Idaho (including the FS) which create particulates as a
result of their burning activities have formed the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group. This group has
established a smoke monitoring system that provides air quality predictions and restrictions to its
members. In Montana, the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) issues an annual burn permit to
the FS. Issuance of this permit is based on participation and compliance with burning restrictions set by
the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group.
All prescribed burning implemented within the analysis area would comply with the State requirements of
the SIP and the Smoke Management Plan. Prescribed burning is reported to the Airshed Coordinator on a
daily basis. If ventilation problems are forecasted by the monitoring unit, prescribed burning is either
restricted by elevation or postponed until good ventilation exists.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 349 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

Regional Haze Rule (1990 Clean Air Act Amendments), 40 CFR Part 51
In 1999, EPA announced the Regional Haze Rule (40 CFR 51.308-309), which calls for states to establish
goals for improving visibility in mandatory Class I areas and to develop long-term strategies for reducing
the emissions of air pollutants that cause visibility impairment. The Regional Haze Rule requires states to
demonstrate “reasonable progress” toward improving visibility in each Class I area over a 60-year period
(to 2064), during which visibility should be returned to natural conditions.
The Regional Haze Rule also requires states to address visibility impairment in mandatory Class I areas
due to emissions from fire activities. The preamble to the rule emphasizes the “implementation of smoke
management programs to minimize effects of all fire activities on visibility.” The Rule requires states to
address visibility effects from all fire sources contributing to visibility impairment in mandatory Class I
areas (Dzomba 2005).
Interim Air Quality Policy on Wildland and Prescribed Fire
On May 15, 1998, the EPA issued this policy to address impacts to public health and welfare. This policy
was prepared in response to anticipated increases in fire use that were expected to occur as a result of
implementing the 1995 Fire Management and Policy Review, which outlined a need to restore fire as an
ecosystem process. The Interim Policy reconciles the competing needs to use fire while still considering
the protection of public health.
Forest Plan Direction
Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) (Volume 1, Chapter 2, p.26) directs activities on the Forest to
meet State Air Quality Standards. The Forest cooperates and complies with the State in meeting the
requirements of the SIP and the Smoke Management Plan. The KNFP also directs managers to prevent
long-term deterioration of air quality for the Cabinet Mountains Wilderness a Class I airshed.
All Management Areas (MAs) would comply with the State Smoke Management Plan and SIP.

ANALYSIS AREA
The analysis area for air quality includes Montana Airshed 1, which includes all of Lincoln County (a
map of the Montana Airsheds is included in the project file). Various forms of prescribed burning are
proposed in all action alternatives to meet the purpose and need of reducing hazardous fuels adjacent to
private property and across the landscape while re-introducing fire to the ecosystem.

ANALYSIS METHODS
First Order Fire Effects Model (FOFEM) version 5.9 was used to calculate emissions from prescribed
burning as proposed in the action alternatives and to derive the total fuels (litter, wood, duff, herbaceous,
crown) available for combustion during prescribed burning. FOFEM is a computer program used in
predicting and planning for fire effects. Currently, FOFEM provides quantitative fire effects information
for tree mortality, fuel consumption, mineral soil exposure, smoke production and soil heating. FOFEM
models smoke production, not visibility or dispersion. More information on FOFEM and its assumptions
can be found at http://www.fire.org.
Windrose data was derived from FireFamily Plus version 4.0. Windrose for the months of MarchNovember (typical months for prescribed burning) were utilized from the Libby Remote Automated
Weather Station (RAWS) for the period 1992-2011 to assess the percent of the time a wind will blow
from a certain direction. This provides a reasonable estimate of the direction the smoke from prescribed
burning or a wildfire will travel.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
Airshed Characteristics and Existing Condition
Montana is divided into ten airsheds by the Montana DEQ. The East Reservoir analysis area lies entirely
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 350 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

within Airshed 1. Smoke produced at any location within the analysis area would most likely be carried in
an easterly direction by the predominantly westerly windflow pattern that influences western Montana.
Smoke dispersal is usually best during the spring and early summer because daytime heating and general
wind flows help smoke rise above ridge tops and into the free air winds where it is diluted and dispersed.
Stable high-pressure systems that often occur during late summer and fall hamper the vertical motion of
air and reduce the smoke dispersion potential. Infrequent, low-pressure systems also move through the
area during this period and improve smoke dispersal until high pressure re-establishes. As the heat of
summer passes and nighttime temperatures begin to drop, air quality begins to deteriorate as nighttime
inversions become more prevalent. Weather patterns begin to change during the fall months with periodic
cold front passages being interspersed with periods of stable high pressure. These cold fronts are often dry
but can bring substantial moisture. Wind associated with these cold fronts provide good ventilation but
also increase the risk that a prescribed burn may escape control. The late fall often marks the return of
wet, foggy and cloudy weather to the analysis area. During this time, periods of good ventilation occur
during fontal passages but valley inversions often hamper the dispersion of smoke. Winter weather is very
similar, with smoke dispersion being poor.
The mountainous topography of the analysis area also influences the dispersion of smoke. Smoke
produced at higher elevations is closer to the free-air winds that occur at and above ridge tops, so
dispersion is usually better than at lower elevation. Conversely, smoke produced at lower elevations is
more likely to be effected by valley inversions and must rise farther to enter the free air wind. Burns on
south exposures are more likely to be affected by local thermal winds than those on north slopes. Burns
on slopes exposed to the prevailing wind would have better smoke dispersion than those located on the
lee slope.
Smoke dispersal is best when the daytime heating is greatest. This usually coincides with the period of
greatest atmospheric instability for the day. Free air winds penetrate into lower elevation at this time
resulting in good vertical motion and smoke dilution. Smoke dispersal is usually poor for night-time
burning due to the increase in atmospheric stability as cool air pools in valleys. This process also results
in the development of valley inversions.
Quantitative air quality data is not available for the period prior to settlement of the analysis area late in
the 19th century. However, it is known that fire played a major role in the development of vegetative
patterns throughout western Montana. Journals from early day explorers and newspaper articles from the
late 1800s often mention the smoky conditions from summer fires burning in western Montana and
northern Idaho. Leenhouts (1998) compared historical data to modern records and concluded that ten
times more acres burned annually in the United States 200-400 years ago than we see in modern times.
The annual amount of smoke generated from forest fires has generally decreased since the early 1900s,
even with today's use of prescribed fire. Prior to the advent of effective fire suppression, variously
reported as the 1930s or 1940s, fires that started in the area now known as the Libby Ranger District,
generally burned unchecked from the time of ignition until weather changes stopped their spread. Smoke
production varied as environmental factors changed. Smoke could have been produced for just a few
hours or for as long as several months. During severe fire seasons, especially when stagnant high-pressure
systems persisted, regional air quality was likely poor. The number of acres burned by wildland fires
decreased as effective fire suppression became common and as a result, air quality improved. During the
last two decades, natural fuels resulting from decades of fire suppression and changing climatic
conditions have reached a level where larger, more intense fires are becoming common. Degradation of
air quality can be a direct result of these wildfires.
Airshed 1 air quality is influenced predominantly by smoke and dust originating from areas located to the
west. This includes grass burning on the Rathdrum and Palouse Prairies, located between Sandpoint and
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 351 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

Lewiston, Idaho, as well as other agricultural areas in Washington and northern Oregon. Industrial
emissions as well as those from internal combustion engines add to the level of regional haze and air
pollution load. Prescribed burning of logging residue by private and other government entities adds wood
smoke to the air mass. The use of woodstoves for home heating is likely the most significant contributor
to poor air quality during the winter months. Wildfires burning in other states can also contribute to air
quality degradation. Dust, originating from tilled farmland, during dry windy weather, can add to local
haze and reduce air quality.
The Need for Prescribed Burning
In order to meet the purpose and need of the project, the selection of a fuel management technique
depends on several factors including silvicultural system, timber harvest method, timber harvest type,
treatment economics, wildlife habitat, soil, water, cultural resource protection and air quality. The
Interdisciplinary Team (IDT) selected fuel treatment options that best balance resource objectives and
economic concerns. The options chosen include the following types of prescribed burning and fuel
reduction methods:
Underburning: Underburning is utilized when there is an objective to retain a live, overstory tree
component. This type of burning would be utilized in the East Reservoir Project for fuel treatments
in the intermediate harvest units and the proposed fuels treatment units. It would also be utilized to
reduce fuels and improve wildlife habitat and browse in the Fuels and Wildlife units. These burns
would be accomplished prior to the growing season in the spring, or in the fall after the growing
season. Generally, south aspects are burned in the spring and north aspects are burned in the fall
due to fuel moistures or access issues.
Broadcast Burning: Broadcast burning is usually associated with regeneration harvest. Generally,
the objective is to reduce activity fuels and prepare the area for site preparation for tree planting. In
order to accomplish the resource objectives, broadcast burning is usually a hotter burn with more
complete consumption of the surface fuels than an underburn. Because there are less live overstory
trees to be concerned about, this type of burn can be done to generate enough heat causing a smoke
column to rise higher into the transport winds and allow for more dispersion of smoke over greater
distances than an underburn.
Excavator Piling followed by Pile Burning: This treatment method is used to accomplish a range
of resource objectives in treatment areas where the resulting stand density is low, slopes are
generally 35% or less and site preparation objectives can be met. Piled slash would generally be
burned in late fall after receiving adequate moisture to reduce the threat of the fire spreading and
escaping. Pile burning in the spring is usually too risky due to the potential for piles to come back
to life when fuels dry out. Since pile burning occurs late in the fall season when smoke dispersion
is often poor, it is possible that piles burned on a good ventilation day would smolder long enough
to cause some impacts on air quality during poor ventilation days. Well compacted, dirt free piles
can reduce the smoldering time. Smoke is more diffuse and does not rise into the upper transport
winds. By burning during conditions that do not allow for the fire to spread, it is possible to halt the
ignition at any point to limit smoke impacts.
Handpiling followed by Handpile Burning: This treatment is usually used in small areas, on steep
slopes, in sensitive areas or landtypes, and/or areas without good access. Handpiling is kept to a
minimum due to the high cost associated with this treatment. The handpiles are usually smaller and
less compact than excavator piling so they do not burn as easily. Handpile burning would occur in
the spring or fall. Because of their small size they are less likely to pose a risk of escape after a
drying trend so spring burning is an option. Smoke is more diffuse and does not rise into the upper
transport winds. Handpiling is common next to private property where aesthetics can be a
significant concern.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 352 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

Yard Tops to Landing: This treatment method would be required in all proposed harvest units. It
requires the logging contractor to process the tree at the landing. Under this method, some of the
activity fuels are brought in to and concentrated at the landing. Yarding tops would be the only
fuels treatment proposed for the commercial thin units identified in all the action alternatives. In
some of the units with the highest fuel load, the contractor may be required to yard unmerchantable
material (YUM) to reduce natural fuel loads.
Natural Abatement: Natural abatement uses the process of decomposition and compaction (e.g.
the weight of snow and gravity over time causes fuels to compact down) to lower the fuel bed depth
and slowly reduce fuel loads. The smaller the fuel the quicker it compacts and decomposes. For
example, needles and small branch material will breakdown in about 2-5 years; whereas, fire-killed
trees take years to fall to the ground and then decades to decompose. This treatment would be
applied when it is determined that the cost of fuel treatment would be excessive when considered in
the context of the risk of loss to a wildfire or when prescribed burning would cause unacceptable
levels of tree mortality. Specific instances where this treatment would be used includes:
precommercial thinning where the cost of fuel treatment would equal or exceed the cost of the
thinning and the risk of loss to wildfire is low; commercially thinned units where most unwanted
fuel would be removed by whole tree yarding; and in areas isolated by surrounding fuel reduction
treatments that would limit the spread of fire outside the untreated area.
Because of the need to reintroduce fire back into the ecosystem and to reduce natural and activity fuels,
prescribed fire would be used the greatest extent possible under the East Reservoir Project.
Timing
The proposed burning associated with each action alternative would occur throughout the analysis area.
For each of the action alternatives in this analysis, areas identified for burning would receive only one
burn treatment under this document.
After a timber sale is sold, it may be harvested over the course of several years. The sale may qualify for a
contract extension that could extend sale completion well past the end of the original contract period.
Due to the uncertainty about when harvest would occur, it is not possible to accurately predict the exact
timing of burning, but generally one to five years after harvest.
Burning associated with this project would occur annually, during the spring or fall burning periods, until
all burning is completed. The spring burning period usually runs from late March through June. The fall
burning period usually occurs in September through the end of November. Pile burning would occur
during the late fall burn period which would generally start in October and end before December.
Montana DEQ restricts open burning in western Montana during December, January and February.
The criteria used to select timing of burn projects would include fuel moistures, risk of escape, general
weather patterns, smoke dispersion, live fuel moistures, resource objectives and air quality approval.
Fugitive Dust from Vehicle Traffic on Unpaved Roads
Fugitive road dust is a result of motorized vehicle use when road surfaces are dry. When a motorized
vehicle travels on an unpaved road, the force of the wheels moving across the road surface causes
pulverization of surface material. Dust is lofted by the rolling wheels as well as by the turbulence caused
by the vehicle itself. This air turbulence can persist for a period of time after the vehicle passes.
The quantity of dust emissions from a given segment of unpaved road varies linearly with the volume of
traffic. Variables that influence the amount of dust produced include the average vehicle speed, the
average vehicle weight, the average number of wheels per vehicle, the road surface texture, the fraction of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 353 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

road surface material which is classified as silt (particles less than 75 microns in diameter) and the
moisture content of the road surface.
The moisture content of the road surface has the greatest influence on the amount of fugitive dust
produced. Within the analysis area, unpaved roads are generally impassable or closed during the winter
months from snow or for wildlife habitat security. July, August and September are generally dry so most
dust production would occur during this period. Precipitation during these months is usually limited, so it
would only reduce dust production for short periods.
Management measures that may be used to reduce fugitive road dust emissions within the analysis area
include: the application of chemicals that increase the moisture retention of road surfaces, specifically
magnesium chloride, watering during high use periods or during road maintenance operations, and speed
restrictions in sensitive areas. While some or all of these measures would likely be used, it is not possible,
at this time, to specify the actual management measures that would be needed.
Potential Management Measures Taken to Reduce Pile Burning Emissions
The amount of smoke emissions, resulting from prescribed burning of natural and activity fuels would be
managed by these general methods: fuel loading reduction, reduction in the amount of fuel consumed,
flaming combustion optimization, and impact avoidance. Refer to Table 2.34 for the design features and
management measures that would be applied to this project to protect resources in all action alternatives.
Trained and Qualified Prescribed Fire Practitioners
Individual burn bosses are trained in smoke management techniques prior to being qualified as burn
bosses. Part of a burn boss’ responsibility is to evaluate smoke dispersion and halt burning operations in
the event the actual smoke dispersion is not as forecasted and would cause significant impacts. Prescribed
fire burn plans require analysis of smoke concerns and mitigations measures if needed. Burn Bosses are
required to follow the burn plan, which requires tracking and monitoring of weather conditions and
documenting smoke dispersal during the burn.
Public Notification
At the beginning of each burn season the Libby Ranger District places an advertisement in the local
newspaper alerting the public to prescribed burning that may affect local air quality. On days when
burning is expected to occur, residents near the burn may be contacted to make them aware of potential
air quality impacts.
Monitoring
The FS is a member of the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group, which monitors air quality on a daily basis
during burning season. The Monitoring Unit is activated when prescribed fire activity begins in the spring
and continues until the end of November when the open burn season closes. The amount of burning
allowed for any given day is based on this monitoring as well as forecast weather conditions. Air quality
monitoring is performed daily at several locations within the area covered by this group. The amount of
burning allowed within each airshed is tied directly to the daily monitoring of ambient air quality. The
process of monitoring and forecasting has been effective at achieving the Airshed Group’s objectives,
which are listed in the Montana/Idaho Smoke Management Agreement.
One objective is to minimize or prevent accumulation of smoke during the fall prescribed burning season
when burning is necessary for conducting accepted forest management practices such as hazard fuel
reduction, site preparation and wildlife habitat improvement. This is done by prohibiting or restricting
burning at times and places where stagnant weather conditions result in poor smoke dispersion, and by
conducting prescribed burns when ventilation and air quality conditions are good.
A second objective is to develop a smoke management plan for reporting and coordinating burning
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 354 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

operations on all forest and rangelands within Montana and Idaho. Guidelines in the plan would be based
upon technical information currently available on smoke dispersion and on State and Federal air quality
regulations.
The third objective is to improve the smoke management program through regular review and evaluation.
One or two general meetings of members are held annually to exchange ideas, review operations and
offer suggestions for improving the program.
In addition, each burn plan (required for every FS burn) includes the provision for a test fire. The purpose
of this test fire is to allow the burn boss to determine if burn objectives would be met as well as
determining if smoke dispersal would be adequate.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
There would be no direct effects from Alternative 1 (no-action) since there would be no additional
planned understory burns, ecosystem burning, pile burning or logging traffic to increase fugitive dust.
An indirect effect is that the potential for a high-severity wildfire to occur in the analysis area is greatest
with the no-action alternative (Alternative 1). This would likely have greater impacts on air quality than
any proposed action. Smoke from wildfires is unmanageable and would likely produce greater quantities
of particulates, last longer in duration, and likely impact a larger area (e.g. Class 1 Airsheds and other
communities downwind) than planned ignitions from prescribed fire. This was evident in the Northern
Rockies in 1988, 1994, 2000, 2001 and 2003. Air quality impacts from a wildfire would normally occur
during the summer months when visitor and outdoor use is highest.
Table 3.114 is used to compare prescribed fire pile burning and broadcast burning to reasonably expected
emissions from a wildfire. As is evident in the table, a wildfire could produce 1.5 to three times the
particulates per ton of fuels consumed as compared to pile burning or broadcast burning. A large wildfire
would also consume significantly more tons of fuel than prescribed burning due to the size of the fire and
amount of consumption. Within the analysis area, the north aspects and sites with a high component of
grand fir or lodgepole pine generally have coarse woody fuel loadings of 20-60 tons/acre. By utilizing
typical loading from FOFEM v5.9, a grand fir forest type would have an additional 15-30 tons/acre of
forest litter and duff available to burn during a wildfire. The drier sites in the analysis area, which tend to
occur on the south aspects or at lower elevations, are dominated by Douglas-fir and ponderosa pine.
These sites have much lighter woody fuel loadings of 5-30 tons to the acre and 8-12 tons/acre of forest
litter and duff.
Table 3.114 - Comparison of Smoke Emissions*
FUEL CONFIGURATION

Pile and Burn Slash:
Mixed conifer
Broadcast Burning Slash:
Mixed conifer
Wildfire (Forests)

COMBUSTION PHASE

Flaming
Smoldering
Average
Flaming
Smoldering
Average
Fire Average

PM10**

7.4
15.9
12.4
11.7
25.3
20.5
30.0

PM2.5**

6.6
14.0
10.8
9.6
23.6
18.8
27.0

*From 2001 Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed Fire
** Pounds of emissions per ton of fuel consumed

Cumulative Effects
Air resources are somewhat unique in that the past impacts to air quality are not usually evident or
cumulative because they tend to be episodic in nature. Since no new management activities would occur
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 355 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

in the analysis area with Alternative 1, there would not be any cumulative effects unless a wildfire were to
occur. As the analysis area begins to experience even more tree mortality from insects, disease, wind
throw and snow breakage, fuel loading would increase as would the fire hazard. Eventually, a large
wildfire, such as the 1988 Dry Fork Fire, would occur in the analysis area, and when this does happen
there would likely be significant impacts to areas downwind of the fire event combined with cumulative
impacts from other fires occurring in the Northern Rockies and/or the Pacific Northwest.
ALTERNATIVE 2 and 3
The direct, indirect and cumulative effects for all action alternatives will be compared together since the
only difference between them, when it comes to effects on air quality, is the number of acres under each
type of prescribed burning that would occur. This would directly affect the amount of PM10 and PM2.5
produced by prescribed burning.
Particulate matter (PM) air pollution refers to microscopic airborne particles made up of dust, dirt, soot,
smoke, sulfates, nitrates and liquid droplets. PM can vary in size, but according to the EPA, particles less
than 2.5 micrometers in diameter (PM2.5) are believed to pose the greatest risks to human health. Due to
the small size of PM2.5, it can travel longer distances and has a longer life than coarse particulate matter.
To a lesser extent, PM10 can also be a health concern. Both reduced visibility and add to regional haze.
Smoke particles from the combustion of woody biomass are small, with about 80-90% of smoke
particulates being less than 2.5 microns. Health problems can be caused by PM2.5 especially for people
suffering from cardiopulmonary illnesses. Federal Ambient Air Quality Standards are set at conservative
levels intended to protect public health for even the most sensitive groups.
Direct and Indirect Effects
Table 3.115 shows the PM10 and PM2.5 produced by the different types of prescribed burning by
alternative. The variation in quantities produced is due to the following factors: fuel loading, fuel
moistures and season of burn. The fuel loading and the amount consumed in all the units include forest
litter, woody material, duff, herbaceous material, shrubs, crown foliage and crown branch-wood. Fuel
moistures vary by season of burn and the environmental prescription parameters needed to meet burn
objectives. The season of burn is generally in the spring or fall. Fall burns usually exhibit higher fuel
consumption rates due to lower fuel moistures. The Fuels and Wildlife burns assume that some slashing
of ladder fuels has occurred prior to burning. The Corps of Engineers land is also included in the total
acres by alternative.
Table 3.115 - Particulate Emissions by Burn Type and Alternative
ALTERNATIVE

UNDERBURN TIMBER
HARVEST UNITS
PM10=1052-2774 LBS/AC
PM2.5=892-2351 LBS/AC

UNDERBURN FUELS
& WILDLIFE UNITS
PM10=617-833 LBS/AC
PM2.5=523-706 LBS/AC

HAND and GRAPPLE
PILE BURN
PM10=846-1611 LBS/AC
PM2.5=717-1366 LBS/AC

1
2
3

0
3,005 acres
3,651 acres

765
11,064 acres
11,120 acres

0
4,361 acres
2,820 acres

Fuel treatment by prescribed fire and the associated smoke emissions in the East Reservoir analysis area
would occur over a period of time. PM10 and PM2.5 produced from each unit varies by the burn unit size
and environmental conditions at the time of implementation. For example, a 40 acre underburn in a dry
site, light fuel load timber harvest unit would produce about 42,080-46,920 pounds of PM10 and 35,68039,760 pounds of PM2.5 emissions, primarily during the day of ignition, and be significantly less each day
until the burn goes out. Coordination with the Montana/Idaho Airshed Group is vital to successful smoke
dispersion and reduced smoke impacts. The District expects to implement from 300-2,000 acres of
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 356 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY

prescribed burning per year under the action alternatives of this project.
As is evident in the windrose graph below, the majority of the wind in the analysis area comes from the
west, southwest and south (41% of the time when the wind is actually blowing) from March-November
when prescribed burning or wildfires would occur. The windrose graph was derived from the Libby
RAWS. The Fisher River RAWS is actually closer to the analysis area but due to its location at the
junction of two major river drainages (Kootenai and Fisher), the wind directions were not representative
of the general wind pattern for the analysis area.

The windrose previously described, were used to show the percent probability of a wind blowing towards
an area of concern during the months of March-November. As is evident in Table 3.116, the likelihood of
a wind blowing towards areas of concern is low. This is further reduced by the distance to the locations of
concern which would allow for greater mixing and dilution of particulates. None of the burning in the
action alternatives is expected to produce any pollutants of concern that would exceed the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards for the areas of concern. However, there are scattered homes in the
analysis area and recreational visitors that would likely be temporarily impacted by prescribed burning
smoke. They would likely experience higher concentrations of particulate matter during the course of the
prescribed burning operation. Impacts generally last from one day to one week depending on the number
of acres burned with the day of ignition generating the most smoke.
Table 3.116 - Wind Direction and Areas of Concern
WIND DIRECTION
from PROJECT to
AREA of CONCERN

DISTANCE from
PROJECT to
AREA of CONCERN

% PROBABILITY of
WIND DIRECTION
OCCURRENCE

Libby, MT; non-attainment PM 10, 2.5

NE

15 Miles

3%

Whitefish, MT; non-attainment PM10

W

42 Miles

4%

Columbia Falls, MT; non-attainment PM10

W

47 Miles

4%

AREAS of CONCERN

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 357 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
AIR QUALITY
AREAS of CONCERN

Kalispell, MT; non-attainment PM10
Thompson Falls, MT; non-attainment PM10

WIND DIRECTION
from PROJECT to
AREA of CONCERN

DISTANCE from
PROJECT to
AREA of CONCERN

% PROBABILITY of
WIND DIRECTION
OCCURRENCE

NW

57 Miles

2%

N

60 Miles

4%

Cabinet Mt. Wilderness Class I Airshed

NE

20 Miles

3%

Glacier National Park Class I Airshed

W

57 Miles

4%

NW

70 miles

2%

Bob Marshall Wilderness Class I Airshed

Cumulative Effects
Cumulative effects on air quality from prescribed burning under the action alternatives would result in an
incremental decrease in air quality as PM10 and PM2.5 particles from this project combined with other
particles produced by other local and regional sources located upwind. Prescribed burning of logging
slash, on other federal, state or private lands, would also contribute particulates, as would agricultural
burning and fugitive dust from tilled ground. Particulates from industrial and automotive sources also
contribute to regional particulate loading. It is not possible to predict the amount of particulates
contributed by these other sources due to the tremendous variation at any given time.
There may be days when regional air quality does not meet the established standards. Because of the
Montana/ Idaho Airshed Group’s effectiveness at limiting the amount of burning in any given day, it is
unlikely that any source associated with this project or any other present or reasonably foreseeable future
burning project, would be a significant contributor. This would not be the case in a large wildfire
situation.
The production of air pollutants associated with the implementation of this project would vary over time
and would not be continuous. Impacts would be episodic in nature and the potential for occurrence would
end when the implementation of this project is completed.

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
All alternatives would be consistent with State and Federal regulations and KNFP standards. The KNFP
objectives for air quality are to “Maintain the excellent air quality on the Forest,” “Protect local and
regional air quality by cooperating with the Air Resources Management Bureau in the Prevention of
Significant Deterioration (PSD) program and State Implementation Plan (SIP),” and “Prevent long-term
deterioration of the air quality, classified as Class I for the Cabinet Mountains Wilderness, and Class II
for the rest of the Forest” (USDA Forest Service 1987a II-6).

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 358 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RANGE RESOURCE

RANGE RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
The East Reservoir Planning Area contains four range allotments, the Fivemile, Warland, Cripple Horse
and Canyon Creek. The latter two allotments (Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek) have been closed
through the administrative closure process due to declining transitory range, lack of demand and riparian
area concerns. Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek have been vacant for over ten years. All four allotments
were included in the Reservoir Range Environmental Analysis completed in 1997/1998. The Reservoir
Range EA permitted grazing on all four allotments from 1998-2008. Fivemile is the only active allotment.
The Fivemile Permit was renewed for another ten year period beginning in 2008. The Warland Creek
Allotment has been vacant for six years; the permit was waived back to the Forest Service (FS) in 2010. It
will be maintained as a vacant allotment with potential for grazing in the foreseeable future.
The Fivemile Allotment supports 17 cow/calf pair with a grazing season of June 1 - October 15. Much of
the grazing is on private land owned by the permit holder along Fivemile Creek and upland areas adjacent
to Blue Sky Road #6271 and in the Upper Fivemile drainage along Road #4893. A Designated
Monitoring Area (DMA) was established during the 2010 grazing season on Fivemile Creek immediately
below the permit holder's private land boundary. Monitoring of the DMA and accompanying fish habitat
monitoring will establish trend information for the riparian and stream channel conditions on the Fivemile
Allotment.
The analysis area for effects to the range resource will be the Fivemile Allotment. A map of the allotment
in relation to the East Reservoir Planning Area is located in the Project File.
The Fivemile Allotment has been active since the 1950s or before. This 8,400-acre allotment straddles the
mainstem of Fivemile Creek. The topography consists of steep hillsides surrounding a narrow riparian
stream bottom. Elevations range from 2,700 to 4,800 feet.
Historically, cattle forage mainly consisted of grasses along roadsides, in a few scattered, harvest-created
openings with gentler slopes, and in the private land in the stream bottom.

EXISTING CONDITIONS and TRENDS
Most of the allotment is covered by mixed conifer forests in various successional stages. Suitable range
occurs on roadsides, open coniferous stands and early successional stands up to 30 years old generally on
slopes less than 30%. Acres of suitable range were figured using data calculated in the Pinkham Ridge
Range Allotment (USDA 1997) and the South End Allotments (USDA 1995). Calculations are based on
the premise that each different range type produces different amounts of forage. In cutting units 0-15
years old it is estimated 6.25 acres are needed to support one cow/calf pair for one month. In cutting units
16-30 years old, it is estimated 12.5 acres are needed. These types of units are called primary transitory
range. In secondary transitory range, which includes cutting units older than 30 years or units with slopes
greater than 30%, it is estimated 33 acres are needed to support a cow/calf pair for one month. Available
roadside acres are figured by multiplying all road miles in the allotment by the average roadside use
widths (12 feet) and the conversion factor of 0.95 acres (amount needed for a cow/calf pair for one
month).
Currently, on the Fivemile Allotment, seven acres of forage are in the 0-15 year age class with less than
30% slope which provides 1 AUM (an Animal Unit Month provides one month’s forage for one cow/calf
pair); 125 acres of forage are in the 16-30 year age class with less than 30% slope which provides 10
AUMs; and 1,285 acres of forage openings are over 30 years in age or on slopes greater than 30%
providing 39 AUMs; and 30 miles of roadsides provide approximately 87 acres of forage and 83 AUMs.
The currently available forage equates to 133 AUMs. A downward trend in forage availability over the
past decade has resulted from forest growth in previously harvested units equating to about 40 AUMs.
Grazing utilization on the Fivemile Allotment is low along roadsides and moderate along the riparian
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 359 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RANGE RESOURCE

bottom. Much of the National Forest portion of the riparian bottom is not attractive to grazing because of
a dense forest overstory with very little grass understory. Overall condition of the range remains good.
Monitoring of the riparian bottom will continue.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 would not propose any management activity at this time. On the Fivemile Allotment,
roadside forage would continue to be available to cattle on about 87 acres. Over time, the younger more
open harvest units would decrease in forage production as trees shade out the grasses. The estimated
seven acres that are currently 0-15 years old would decrease slightly in forage production; the 125 acres
that are currently 16-30 years old would have a moderate to high decrease in forage production over the
next 10 years. Without “replacement” forage created by management activities, forage availability would
trend downwards on approximately 130 acres of forage openings equating to an estimated 6 AUM
decrease over the next 10 years. The current available forage is likely to support the permitted number of
cattle over the next 10-year period. However, eventually, the loss of a regular influx of newly created
openings that provide forage would result in long-term decreased carrying capacity and subsequent
reduction of permitted cattle or a reduced grazing season.
EFFECTS COMMON to ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Vegetation management activities proposed in the action alternatives would create new forage
opportunities at varying levels. Regeneration-type treatments such as seedtree and shelterwood methods
would open up stands the most and provide the highest increase in forage production (about 6.25 acres
would provide 1 AUM). Intermediate harvest treatments such as understory thinning, prescribed burning,
and improvement harvests would provide moderate to high increases in forage production (ranging from
6.25 to 12.5 acres providing 1 AUM).
Even though forage may increase after harvest and burning activities, the ability of cattle to utilize new
forage would be tempered by other site-specific factors such as slope, access and proximity to water. The
majority of treatments proposed in the Fivemile Allotment are on slopes greater than 30% which greatly
limits the access for livestock grazing. The prescribed burns being proposed under Alternatives 2 and 3
are also mainly on the steeper south-facing slopes of the allotment.
Road management changes proposed within the Fivemile Allotment under Alternatives 2 and 3 would not
affect management activities within the allotment. No new road construction or temporary construction is
proposed within the allotment.
No recreation developments are proposed within the Fivemile Allotment.
ALTERNATIVE 2
Direct and Indirect Effects
Based on access, treatment type and slope, Alternative 2 is expected to improve forage on about 649 acres
over the next 10 years; only 110 acres of the proposed treatment are on slopes less than 30%. This
includes about 274 acres (41 acres on slopes <30%) of commercial thinning and fuels treatment which
would create a moderate to high forage increase, and about 375 acres (31 acres on slopes <30%) of
seedtree harvest which would create a high increase in forage (refer to the Project File for specific unit
information). The same decreases in 130 acres of existing forage described under Alternative 1 (noaction) would still occur as stands matured, however, unlike the no-action alternative, Alternative 2 would
“replace” that decline with new forage equating to approximately 28 AUMs. Range resources would
benefit most under this action alternative.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 360 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RANGE RESOURCE

ALTERNATIVE 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 3 is expected to improve forage on about 410 acres over the next 10 years; only 55 acres of
the proposed treatment are on slopes less than 30%. This includes about 206 acres (27 acres on slopes
<30%) of understory fuels treatment creating a moderate to high forage increase and about 205 acres (28
acres on slopes <30%) of regeneration harvest creating a high increase in forage (refer to the Project File
for specific unit information). The same decreases in 130 acres of existing forage described under
Alternative 1 (no-action) would still occur as stands matured. Alternative 3 is similar to Alternative 2 in
effects to forage availability, but to a lesser degree. Forage production increases would provide 17
additional AUMs over the next 10 years.
Cumulative Effects
The list of past, current and reasonably foreseeable actions identified in Chapter 3 (pg. 3-1 to 3-7) of this
DEIS were considered for cumulative effects. Past and current vegetation and fuel management actions
such as timber sales that opened forests or created new openings were used to determine the existing
condition of forage availability for range resources, including the age of forage openings and when the
declining forage would be expected. No adverse cumulative effects of vegetation management, fuels
reduction or prescribed fires with this project were identified for the range resource.
Noxious weed treatments generally occur along roads and in some management units. Removal of
noxious weeds would allow suppressed native and introduced forage grasses to grow more vigorously,
thereby improving roadside forage availability. This would result in cumulatively beneficial effects to
range resources.
Road maintenance activities such as blading or road reconditioning can temporarily reduce forage
availability. There can be a direct but short-term reduction of forage due to maintenance, but cumulatively
with this project there would be no adverse effects to range resources because of the low level of
maintenance activities that would occur and the short-term effects these activities would have. The road
systems and forage areas provide more than adequate forage to offset a short-term reduction.
Activities unrelated to vegetation changes such as recreational use, site improvements, administrative use,
special uses, public use, etc., generally do not have adverse effects to cattle use of the allotment. There is
a potential for human disturbance such as harassment or even mortality, however, this is a result of the
presence of humans unrelated to the cumulative effects surrounding this project.
No other cumulative effects to range resources with this project were identified.

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The Kootenai National Forest Plan has a goal to “provide forage to meet all anticipated demand for
domestic livestock grazing (USDA Forest Service 1987, II-2). Over time, the no-action - Alternative 1 would not be consistent with this goal. Alternatives 2 and 3 would all contribute to this goal by providing
a continued influx of forage-producing treatments to meet grazing needs through time.
There are no other laws or regulations applicable to range resources.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 361 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

SCENIC RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
In 1998, Chief of the Forest Service Michael Dombeck re-affirmed the Agency's commitment to scenic
resource management. At that time he displayed a "natural resource agenda" to chart future resource
management (FS-630, A Nation's Natural Resource Legacy). Of the four resource areas emphasized in
this publication, recreation had as its highest priority, "Improving the settings for outdoor recreation and
enhancing visitor experiences".
Effects analysis for scenic resources is performed using the Forest Service Scenery Management System
(USDA Forest Service 1995). This system compares the visual appearance of a proposed action to the
landscape character and existing condition of the surrounding area. As part of this analysis, Scenic
Integrity Levels (SILs) are inventoried and mapped for the activity areas. The SIL defines the acceptable
level of alteration of the landscape character. The degree of alteration is measured in terms of the
noticeability of scenic contrast with the surrounding natural landscape.
This system of analysis is used to estimate the effects of human caused changes to the scenic resource; it
is not used to estimate the effects of natural change (disease, fire, insects, wind, etc.). Natural change is
considered an integral part of the natural landscape character of an area - neither good or bad, nor pretty
or ugly.
Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs) are developed in an interdisciplinary setting by a team during project
planning. The SIOs for an area does not change even though human-caused changes may alter the scenic
integrity levels.
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) prescribes Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) for each
Management Area (MA). These VQOs may be more or less restrictive than what would be inventoried
based on the Scenery Management System (SMS). This analysis describes what the effects to the scenic
resource are and whether or not the alternatives meet KNFP VQO standards and Scenic Integrity Levels.
MODERATE (Mod) Scenic Integrity equates to a PARTIAL RETENTION (PR) Visual Quality
Objective. Moderate scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character
"appears slightly altered". Noticeable deviations must remain visually subordinate to the landscape
character being viewed.
LOW (L) Scenic Integrity equates to a MODIFICATION (Mod) Visual Quality Objective. Low
scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the natural-appearing landscape character "appears
moderately altered". Deviations from the natural-appearing character begin to dominate the viewing
area, and they may incorporate valued landscape character attributes from outside the viewing area
such as size, shape, edge effect, and pattern of natural openings, or vegetative type changes. However,
these deviations must also be compatible or complimentary to the natural landscape character within
the viewing area.
VERY LOW (VL) Scenic Integrity equates to a MAXIMUM MODIFICATION (MM) Visual
Quality Objective. Very low scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the natural-appearing
landscape character "appears heavily altered". Deviations from the natural-appearing character may
strongly dominate the viewing area, and they may not incorporate valued landscape character
attributes such as size, shape, edge effect, and pattern of natural openings, or vegetative type changes
from within or outside the viewing area. However, these deviations must be shaped and blended with
the natural terrain (landforms) so that elements such as unnatural edges, roads, landings, and
structures do not dominate the composition.
UNACCEPTABLY LOW (UL) scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the natural-appearing
landscape character appears extremely altered. Deviations are extremely dominant and incorporate
little if any form, line, color, texture or scale from the natural-appearing landscape character of the
viewing area. Landscapes at this level of integrity need rehabilitation. This level should only be used
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 362 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

to inventory existing integrity. It must not be used as a management objective.

NATURAL LANDSCAPE CHARACTER
The East Reservoir analysis area consists of the following drainages: Fivemile Creek, Warland Creek,
Cripple Horse Creek, Canyon Creek and Dunn Creek. These drainages flow from east to west. Scenic
analysis is focused on activity areas for this project, so the headwaters of drainages in the area will not be
discussed. These drainages are deeply incised by their streams and the ridgelines have fairly gentle slopes.
Side slopes between these two features are generally steep. Prominent features are Stenerson Mountain
(5,828 feet), Mineral Mountain (5,588 feet), Sheep Mountain (5,761 feet), Davis Mountain (6,051 feet),
Warland Peak (5,950 feet), Boundary Mountain (5,955 feet), Cripple Horse Mountain (5,422 feet),
Richards Mountain (6,005 feet), Dunn Peak (5,762 feet) and Hornet Ridge. Numerous spur ridges come
off the main ridges and trend north and south to lower elevations. The south and west aspects of the
analysis area have numerous small natural openings in a ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir canopy. The
north and east aspects have a nearly continuous canopy of Douglas-fir, larch and lodgepole pine. This tree
canopy is broken sharply by drainages. Montana State Highway (MSH) 37 is a favored drive by
recreationists at all seasons, and is designated as a National and State Scenic Byway. Seasonal color
variation is most pronounced in late September when cottonwoods in the creek bottoms turn a brilliant
yellow and mid-October when western larch on northerly aspects turn a brilliant gold. The Cripple Horse
- Canyon Loop drive on Forest Roads #835/4912 is favored by the public for its fall color displays due to
the high percentage of western larch in the forest canopy. There are several major rock forms visible in
this analysis area, especially along Lake Koocanusa, from on the ground views.

EXISTING SCENIC CONDITION
The sensitivity of the East Reservoir area viewshed is determined by the high percentage/acres of Forest
Service (FS) ownership and seen area as viewed from Sensitivity Level (SL) 1 or 2 travel routes. SL1
travel routes are primary travel routes, use areas, or water bodies where at least ¼ of users have major
concern for scenic qualities. SL2 travel routes are primary travel routes, use areas, or water bodies where
less than ¼ of users have major concern for scenic qualities. SL3 are secondary travel routes, use areas
and water bodies where less than ¼ of users have major concerns for scenic qualities. Land management
activities (road construction, tree harvest) through time have incorporated scenery mitigation techniques.
Large geometric shaped tree harvest units (seed tree, clearcut) are found predominantly in the headwaters
of the drainages on north/east aspects and are viewed mostly from local roads. These have
uncharacteristic form/line and do not mimic the natural openings present. The SIL for this area is
moderate to low. A small percentage of the analysis area is viewed from Montana Highway 37 (National
Scenic Byway) and Koocanusa Reservoir (SL1). There are no SL2 travel routes inventoried for this
analysis area. A high percentage of the area is viewed from SL3 travel routes at a middle ground distance.
Middle-ground views are significant to the public because these are the most noticeable in their travels
to/through the Kootenai National Forest (KNF).

DESIRED FUTURE LANDSCAPE CHARACTER
Vegetative diversity is especially desirable to introduce on the north and east aspects of the watersheds
where homogenous canopies currently dominate. Vegetation manipulations must avoid large geometric
shapes that result in uncharacteristic form or harsh lines. Western larch should be a key species to retain
or perpetuate for its fall color displays. On south and west aspects, vegetative manipulation should mimic
the numerous small openings present. Mature Ponderosa pine is the key species to retain, especially along
roads and trails. No road cut/fill slopes should be visible from any SL1 travel route (MSH 37 Scenic
Byway) or use area (Lake Koocanusa).
VIEWING AREAS
Montana State Highway (MSH) 37 and Lake Koocanusa are the major north-south travel route and
use area near the west side of the analysis area. They are inventoried as SL1 (high sensitivity) travel
route due to its yearlong access link between Libby and Eureka, and the recreation access and use
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 363 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

afforded the public. That portion of MSH 37 through the analysis area is part of a designated Scenic
Byway. Along MSH 37 there are scenic turnouts with signs and parking areas. These are located at
milepost 18.7, 21.2, 26.1, 28.1 and 30.1. Views from these turnouts focus’ on Lake Koocanusa and NFS
lands on the west side of the eservoir. All views of the analysis area in the vicinity of proposed actions
from this travel route and use area are at foreground (0-1/2 mile) and middle-ground (1/2-4 miles)
distances. Visibility of the analysis area is determined by landform without vegetation considered. MSH
37 and Lake Koocanusa is positioned near the toe of the slope, thereby providing inferior viewer
positions of the analysis area. Views of management activities during the snow cover months
(November-April) are most sensitive as form (size/shape) and line are well defined. Views of
significant portions of the analysis area are screened from the MSH 37 corridor by topography. VQOs
for areas seen from this road range from partial retention to modification. The SMS SIO for areas
viewed from this roads range from moderate to low scenic integrity.
Fivemile Creek, Warland Creek, Cripple Horse Creek, Canyon Creek, and Dunn Creek Roads These west-east access roads are open to public motorized use yearlong through the drainages. These
roads link MSH 37and residential areas with trailheads located near the headwaters, and are classified
as a SL3 (low sensitivity) travel route. Views of proposed actions are at foreground, and middle-ground
distances from these roads. KNFP VQOs for areas seen from these roads range from modification to
maximum modification. Scenic integrity levels (SILs) for areas seen from this road ranges from low to
very low scenic integrity.
The remaining parts of the analysis area are difficult to view from these travel routes due to topographic
screening. However, they may be viewed from FS and Plum Creek Timber Company "local" roads at
foreground and middle-ground distances. Such areas have a KNFP VQO of maximum modification.
SILs for areas seen from local roads range have a very low scenic integrity.
Richards Mountain 97, Warland Ridge 279, Warland Peak LO 280, Cripple Horse 281, Canyon
Divide 420, Hornet Ridge 500 – These trails traverse the main ridges through the analysis area. Views
from these trails are generally screened by trees, except where the trails cross open grassy parks near
prominent mountain summits. In this area, proposed treatment areas are viewed from a superior view
angle. Other hiking trails in the analysis area are positioned near the valley floor or within incised
drainages where views of the analysis area are limited.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
No-action would leave the area in the same condition in the short-term. The middle-ground views from
MSH 37 and Lake Koocanusa would change over time with the growth of trees in previously harvested
areas. The views of management activities seen from these routes/use areas would be obscured as tree
growth approached 15 feet high. This is estimated to take 15-20 years or more.
Cumulative Effects
Alternative 1 is not envisioned to cumulatively affect the scenic resources of the analysis area.
CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN
This alternative is consistent with the Kootenai National Forest Plan.
ALTERNATIVE 2 – Proposed Action
The proposed action consists of 312 tree harvest areas for 6,589 acres (Tables 2.0, 2.2, 2.3), 27
commercial thinning areas for 2,256 acres, 18 fuel treatment areas for 1,378 acres (Table 2.4), 238
precommercial thinning areas for 5,563 acres (Table 2.1) and 33 Fuel and Wildlife treatment areas for
10,049 acres (Table 2.5). The purpose of these treatments is to regenerate decadent stands, improve forest
health by reducing tree density, and reduce fuel loadings to more natural historic levels. To facilitate
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 364 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

access to treatment areas, 21 segments of new road totaling 9.25 miles (Table 2.6) would be constructed,
and 15 segments of temporary road totaling 4.26 miles (Table 2.7) would be constructed. Following
treatment, all temporary roads would be recontoured to slope and revegetated.
Direct and Indirect Effects
Table 3.117 displays, by unit, the scenic resource effects of Alternative 2.
Table 3.117 – Scenic Resource Effects and Rationale for Alternative 2
UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

1A

11

16

PR/Mod

SW

PR

2

14

16

PR/Mod

ST

PR

3

27

16

PR/Mod

ST

Mod

3c

13

11

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

6

11

17

PR/Mod

ST

Mod

7

19

17

PR/Mod

ST

Mod

RATIONALE

Proposed shelterwood treatment is located north of Fivemile Creek and
west of MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle
terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at
a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this
treatment would not attract viewer attention. Marking guides would
focus on irregular spacing/clumping of leave trees and the proposed
treatment would achieve an enhancement objective.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Fivemile Creek near
MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain on a
south aspect with screening to MSH 37. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
MSH 37 at a foreground distance by south bound traffic. Due to gentle
terrain and screening to MSH 37, the proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Fivemile Creek
adjacent to MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle
terrain with a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at
a foreground distance. A minimum of 15 trees/acre in clumps and
leave islands of smaller trees for vertical structure would be left to
meet VQOs. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Fivemile Creek near
private land. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain
with a south aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre
for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Fivemile Creek Road
48 at a foreground distance. Due to gentle terrain and viewing distance
from a SL3 road, the proposed treatment would not attract attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek
adjacent to MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at
a foreground distance. A minimum of 15 trees/acre in clumps and
leave islands of smaller trees for vertical structure would be left to
meet VQOs. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek near
MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain on
a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95%
of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at a foreground
distance. A minimum of 15 trees/acre in clumps would be left to
meet VQOs. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 365 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

8

13

16

PR/Mod

ST

Mod

13

22

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

14

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

14A

26

15

MM/VL

SW

Mod

16

29

17

PR/Mod

SW

PR

18

40

17

PR/Mod

SW

PR

36

41

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

RATIONALE

Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek near
MSH 37. It is positioned on the lower 1/3 of the slope with face terrain
on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre
for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at a
foreground distance by south bound traffic. A minimum of 15
trees/acre in clumps would be left to meet VQOs. Due to leave
trees, low slope position and gentle terrain, this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near
private property. It is positioned low on the slope with face terrain on
a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95%
of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Warland Creek Road 566
at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, low slope position and
view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near
private property. It is positioned low on the slope with face terrain on
a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95%
of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Warland Creek Road 566
at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, low slope position and
view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Warland Creek
and adjacent to private land. It is positioned low on the slope on face
terrain with a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from
Warland Creek Road 566 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees
and low slope position, this treatment would not attract viewer
attention. Marking guides would focus on irregular spacing/
clumping of leave trees and the proposed treatment would achieve
a partial retention objective.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Warland Creek
and adjacent to MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle
terrain with a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from
MSH 37 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and gentle
terrain, this treatment would not attract viewer attention. Marking
guides would focus on irregular spacing/clumping of leave trees
and the proposed treatment would achieve an enhancement
objective.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located north of Cripple Horse
Creek and adjacent to MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the
slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be
viewed from MSH 37 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and
gentle terrain, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Marking guides would focus on irregular spacing/clumping of
leave trees and the proposed treatment would achieve an
enhancement objective.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
and two miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the
slope on gentle terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 366 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

39

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

40

156

15

MM/VL

ST

UM

41

40

15

MM/VL

CC

MM

44

28

11

Mod/Low

SW

PR

45B

39

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

46

37

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

47

40

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

RATIONALE

viewed from Cripple Horse Creek Road 835 at a foreground distance.
Due to leave trees, low slope position and view from a SL3 road, this
proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Canyon Creek and
high on Hornet Ridge. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Canyon-Dunn road
4913 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, irregular unit
boundaries, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would
not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Canyon Creek and
high on Hornet Ridge. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Canyon-Dunn Road
4913 at a foreground distance. Due to large unit size, face terrain,
leave trees, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment
would NOT meet KNFP standards for scenic resources.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located south of Canyon Creek on
Hornet Ridge. It is positioned near mid-slope on gentle terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of
the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment
would be viewed from the Canyon-Dunn Road 4913 at a foreground
distance. Due to gentle terrain, irregular unit boundaries, and view
from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer
attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located north of Dunn Creek and
adjacent to Dunn Creek Road 525. It is positioned low on the slope on
gentle terrain with a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand
by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from the
Dunn Creek Road 525 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and
gentle terrain, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Marking guides would focus on irregular spacing/clumping of
leave trees and the proposed treatment would achieve an
enhancement objective.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Dunn Creek and south
of the BPA power line. It is positioned near the top of the slope on
steep terrain on a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
Canyon-Dunn Road 4913 at a middle-ground distance. Due to leave
trees, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Dunn Creek and south
of the BPA power line. It is positioned near the top of the slope on
gentle terrain on a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
Canyon-Dunn Road 4913 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees,
gentle terrain, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Dunn Creek and
south/adjacent to the BPA power line. It is positioned near the top of
the slope on gentle terrain on a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be
viewed from the BPA Powerline Road at a foreground distance. Due
to leave trees, gentle terrain, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 367 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

51

7

12

MM/VL

ST

Mod

52A

24

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

53

40

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

54

9

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

59

39

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

61

19

15

MM/VL

CC

MM

62

77

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

64

8

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

RATIONALE

treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near its
headwaters. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Warland Creek Road 566
at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, low slope position, unit
size and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near its
headwaters. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Warland Creek Road
4891 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, low slope position,
gentle terrain, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near its
headwaters. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain
on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre
for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Warland Creek
Road 4891 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, gentle terrain,
and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek near
the ridge line. It is positioned high on the slope on gentle terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Warland Creek Road
4891 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit size and
view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located northwest of Davis Mountain
and east of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned at mid-slope on
gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
the Lake Creek road at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees,
gentle terrain and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Davis Mountain and
east of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned at the top of the
slope on gentle terrain with a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate
a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for
wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the Lake Creek
Road at a middle ground distance. Due to irregular unit shape, gentle
terrain and viewing from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located northwest of Davis Mountain
and east of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned at mid-slope on
gentle terrain with a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand
by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
Lake Creek Road at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees,
irregular unit boundaries, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located near the headwaters of
Fivemile Creek and west of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is
positioned at the toe of the slope on steep terrain with a west aspect.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 368 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

64A

28

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

64B

10

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

68

25

16

MM/VL

CC

MM

69

16

16

Mod/L

ST

Mod

70

14

16

Mod/L

ST

Mod

70T

9

16

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

71

18

16

Mod/L

ST

Mod

RATIONALE

Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy
and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the Lake Creek Road at a
foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit size and viewing
from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract viewer attention
Proposed seedtree treatment is located near the headwaters of
Fivemile Creek and east of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned
near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain with a northwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy
and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the Lake Creek Road at a
foreground distance. Due to leave trees, gentle terrain and viewing
from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located near the headwaters of
Fivemile Creek and east of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned
at the toe of the slope on gentle terrain with a west aspect. Such
treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and
leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the Lake Creek Road at a
foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit size and viewing
from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located south of the Fivemile Creek and
adjacent to private land. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on
gentle terrain with a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand
by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife
habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the Fivemile Creek Road 48
at a foreground distance. Due to gentle terrain and viewing from a SL3
road, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
1.5 miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on steep
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Fivemile
Creek Road 48 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit
size and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
1.25 miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on steep
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Fivemile
Creek Road 48 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit
size and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
adjacent to private land. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Fivemile
Creek Road 48 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit
size and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
one mile east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Fivemile
Creek Road 48 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and view
from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer
attention.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 369 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

72

12

16

Mod/L

ST

Mod

73T

31

16

Mod/L

ST

Mod

75

36

15

MM/VL

SW

PR

80

110

16

Mod/L

ST

MM

81

36

16

Mod/L

ST

MM

82

25

16

Mod/L

ST

MM

141

24

16

Mod/Low

SW

PR

RATIONALE

Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
one mile east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at
a middle-ground distance. Due to leave trees, small unit size and
oblique view angle from MSH 37, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of the South Fork of
Cripple Horse Creek. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain on
a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95%
of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Boundary Mountain
Road 4904 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees and view from
a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of the South Fork of
Cripple Horse Creek. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on steep
terrain with a northeast aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from
Boundary Mountain Road 4904 at a foreground distance. Due to leave
trees and viewing from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract
viewer attention. Marking guides would focus on irregular
spacing/clumping of leave trees and the proposed treatment would
achieve an enhancement objective.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
above the confluence with the South Fork. It is positioned at midslope on face terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
the MSH 37 south bound traffic at a middle ground distance. A
minimum of 10-15 trees/acre in clumps and leave islands of
smaller trees for vertical diversity would be left to meet VQOs.
Additionally, the straight line west unit boundary would be made
to be irregular with grapple piling proposed. Due to leave
trees/islands and gentle terrain, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
adjacent to the Cripple Horse Trail #281. It is positioned at mid-slope
on face terrain on a west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the MSH 37
at a middle ground distance. A minimum of 10-15 trees/acre in
clumps would be left to meet VQOs. The Cripple Horse trail #281
goes through this unit and it would be protected during all phases
of activity. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek.
It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a north aspect. Such
treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and
leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the MSH 37 at a middle ground
distance. A minimum of 15 trees/acre in clumps would be left to
meet VQOs. Due to leave trees and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek
within two miles of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on face
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from the

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 370 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

142

9

16

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

143A

18

16

Mod/Low

SW

PR

144S

22

16

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

144T

18

16

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

147

93

15

MM/VL

ST

UM

148

77

15

MM/VL

ST

UM

149

65

15

MM/VL

ST

UM

150

103

15

MM/VL

ST

UM

RATIONALE

MSH 37 at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees and oblique
view angle from MSH 37, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek within
two miles of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the MSH 37 at a middle
ground distance. Due small unit size, oblique view angle and leave
trees, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek
within two miles of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on face
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed from the
MSH 37 at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees and oblique
view angle from MSH37, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek within
two miles of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Fivemile Road 48 at a
foreground distance. Due to leave trees and view from a SL3 road, this
proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek within
two miles of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the Fivemile Road 48 at a
foreground distance. Due to leave trees and view from a SL3 road, this
proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek, one
mile above private property. It is positioned at mid slope on face
terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
Fivemile Road 4893 at a foreground distance. Due to large unit size,
geometric shape, face terrain, leave trees, and view from a SL3
road, this proposed treatment would NOT meet KNFP standards
for scenic resources.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek, 1.5
miles above private property. It is positioned near the toe of the slope
on face terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
the Fivemile Road 4893 at a foreground distance. Due to large unit
size, geometric shape, face terrain, straight unit boundaries, leave
trees, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would
NOT meet KNFP standards for scenic resources.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek, two
miles above private property. It is positioned near the toe of the slope
on face terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
the Fivemile Road 4893 at a foreground distance. Due to large unit
size, geometric shape, face terrain, straight unit boundaries, leave
trees, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would
NOT meet KNFP standards for scenic resources.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek, two

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 371 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

151

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

159A

18

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

170

97

15

MM/VL

SW

MM

185

27

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

185N

22

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

187

5

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

188

40

16

MM/VL

ST

MM

RATIONALE

miles above private property. It is positioned near mid slope on face
terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
Fivemile Road 4893 at a foreground distance. Due to large unit size,
geometric shape, face terrain, straight unit boundaries, leave
trees, and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would
NOT meet KNFP standards for scenic resources.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located east of the forks of Fivemile
Creek and northwest of the Lake Creek Road 4424. It is positioned
near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain with a northwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy
and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the Lake Creek Road 4424 at a
foreground distance. Due to Leave trees, gentle terrain and viewing
from a SL3 road, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave trees would be left in
this proposed unit. Effort should be made to modify the geometric
(square) shape of this proposed unit.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek and
private property. It is positioned at mid-slope on face terrain on a
north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of
the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for
reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at a middle
ground distance. Due to leave trees, and oblique view from MSH 37,
this proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Warland Creek,
one mile above private property. It is positioned at mid-slope to the
ridgeline on steep face terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be
viewed from the Fivemile Road 4893 at a middle ground distance.
Due to leave trees and view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
and Montana State Section 12. It is positioned at mid slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from MSH 37 at
a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees, irregular unit boundaries
and gentle terrain, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer
attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
and adjacent to Montana State section 12. It is positioned at mid slope
on gentle terrain on a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
MSH 37 at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees, irregular unit
boundaries and gentle terrain, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek at
the South Fork confluence. It is positioned at the toe of the slope on
gentle terrain on a northeast aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand
by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
Cripple Horse Creek Road 835 at a middle ground distance. Due to
leave trees, low slope position and gentle terrain, this proposed
treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek at
the South Fork confluence. It is positioned at the toe of the slope on

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 372 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

193

17

11

Mod/Low

SW

PR

207

40

15

MM/VL

SW

Mod

208

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

214

6

12

MM/VL

ST

Mod

219

38

12

MM/VL

ST

MM

362

192

12

MM/VL

CC

UM

RATIONALE

steep terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Cripple
Horse Creek Road 835 at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees
and low slope position, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention Concern should arise when this proposed treatment is
viewed in the context of another adjoining large seedtree proposal
(Unit 73T).
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located along the southeast
boundary of Montana State Section 14 between Canyon Creek and
Cripple Horse Creek. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on
gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed
from Canyon-Cripple Horse Road 4925 at a foreground distance. Due
to leave trees, gentle terrain and viewing from SL3 road, this treatment
would not attract viewer attention. Marking guides would focus on
irregular spacing/clumping of leave trees and the proposed
treatment would achieve an enhancement objective.
Proposed shelterwood treatment is located south of Canyon Creek and
1.25 miles from MSH 37. It is positioned near the toe of the slope on
gentle terrain with a northeast aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would be viewed
from Canyon Creek Road 4912 at a foreground distance. Due to leave
trees, gentle terrain and viewing from SL3 road, this treatment would
not attract viewer attention. Marking guides would focus on
irregular spacing/clumping of leave trees and the proposed
treatment would achieve a partial retention objective.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Canyon Creek 1.5
miles from MSH. It is positioned at the toe of the slope on gentle
terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from Canyon
Creek Road 4912 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees, gentle
terrain and viewing from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would
not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located along the north side of the BPA
powerline on Hornet Ridge. It is positioned at mid-slope on Hornet
Ridge on a southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be difficult to view from
any public travel route due to location. Due to difficulty in viewing,
leave trees and unit size, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located north of Dunn Creek and
northwest of Wyoma Creek. It is positioned at mid-slope in a deeply
incised tributary to Dunn Creek on a west aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be
difficult to view from any public travel route due to location. Due to
difficulty in viewing and leave trees, this proposed treatment would
not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Wyoma
Creek near the BPA powerline. It is positioned near the top of Hornet
Ridge on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3
trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the
closed Hornet Ridge Powerline Road #2364 at a foreground distance.
Due to lack of leave trees, large geometric shape and straight unit

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 373 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

363

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

364

33

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

365

25

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

366

6

12

MM/VL

CC

Mod

367

38

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

367A

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

368A

11

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

368B

6

12

MM/VL

CC

Mod

RATIONALE

boundaries, this proposed treatment would NOT meet KNFP
standards for scenic resources.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Snag
Gulch near the BPA powerline. It is positioned near the top of Hornet
Ridge on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3
trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the
closed Hornet Ridge Powerline Road #2364 at a foreground distance.
Due to remote location and gentle terrain this treatment would not
attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Snag
Gulch near the BPA powerline. It is positioned near Hornet Ridge on
gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for
wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the closed Hornet
Ridge Powerline Road #2364 at a foreground distance. Due to remote
location, irregular unit shape and gentle terrain this treatment would
not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Snag
Gulch. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a southwest
aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the
canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would
be viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground
distance. Due to remote location, irregular unit shape and gentle
terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Snag
Gulch. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a south
aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the
canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would
be viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground
distance. Due to remote location, small unit size, and gentle terrain
this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek. It is
positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy
and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be
viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground
distance. Due to remote location, and gentle terrain this treatment
would not attract viewer attention. Effort should be made to modify
the straight line east boundary.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek. It is
positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a south aspect. Such
treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and
leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed
from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground distance. Due
to remote location, and gentle terrain this treatment would not attract
viewer attention. Effort should be made to modify the straight line
west boundary.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek marsh. It
is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a south aspect. Such
treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and
leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed
from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground distance. Due
to remote location , irregular shape, and gentle terrain this treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek marsh. It
is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy
and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be
viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 374 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

368C

7

12

MM/VL

CC

Mod

369

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

RATIONALE

distance. Due to remote location, small unit size, irregular shape, and
gentle terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek marsh. It
is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy
and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be
viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground
distance. Due to remote location, small unit size, irregular shape, and
gentle terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located near the west end of Hornet
Ridge adjacent to the BPA powerline. It is positioned high on the
slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy and leave 2-3
trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be viewed from the
closed Hornet Ridge Powerline Road #2364 at a foreground distance.
Due to remote location and gentle terrain, this treatment would not
attract viewer attention. Effort should be made to modify the
straight line west boundary

Alternative 2 proposes 72 regeneration harvest treatments (shelterwood, seedtree, clearcut). Sixteen (16)
of these treatments are forecasted to positively exceed the KNFP VQO (i.e. a VQO of partial retention is
achieved where a VQO of modification is prescribed). Fifty proposed treatments are forecasted to meet
the prescribed KNFP VQO. Six (6) proposed treatments are forecasted to not meet the KNFP VQO.
Intermediate Stand Treatments are being proposed to modify existing forest conditions in order to
enhance growth, quality, vigor and composition. Such treatments occur prior to stand maturity and are not
intended to promote regeneration. The following descriptions are examples of intermediate treatments
proposed with this project:
Improvement Harvest is being proposed to improve forest resiliency, composition and quality by
reducing tree density. This treatment would retain 50-70% of the existing forest canopy and promote a
more open stand structure. The largest, healthiest and best quality trees of desired species are retained.
The proposed action proposes 53 improvement harvest treatments totaling 3,565 acres. All of these
proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due to leave tree quality
and density.
Sanitation-Salvage is being proposed to remove diseased trees prior to re-infection and to capture
mortality prior to loss of product marketability. Dead and down merchantable trees are harvested.
Western larch with high levels of dwarf mistletoe infection are removed. This proposed treatment often
mimics the group selection discussed previously. The proposed action proposes six sanitation-salvage
treatments totaling 332 acres. All of these proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively
exceed KNFP VQOs due to leave tree density and small opening size.
Commercial Thinning is being proposed to improve tree growth and enhance forest health by reducing
stand density. Thinning normally removes suppressed trees from below the dominant tree canopy. The
largest, best quality trees are retained in a fully stocked stand following treatment. The proposed action
proposes 27 commercial thinning treatments totaling 2,256 acres (Table 2.2). All of these proposed
treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due leave tree quality and density.
Precommercial Thinning is being proposed to reduce tree density and improve growing conditions of
the retained trees by reducing the competition for light and nutrients. The largest, best quality trees of the
desired species are retained in a fully stocked stand following treatment. The proposed action proposes
5,775 acres of precommercial thinning in overstocked, sapling sized trees that were established 15-25
years prior. All of these proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due
to leave tree quality and density.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 375 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

Fuel Treatment is being proposed to reduce hazardous fuels by utilizing a combination of prescribed fire
and/or mechanical treatments. These treatments are located adjacent to private property and are intended
to reduce hazardous fuels in the wild land–urban interface. Such treatments would promote a more open
stand structure resistant to crown fire. Small diameter forest products may be removed to enhance burning
conditions. The proposed action proposes 18 fuel treatments totaling 1,378 acres (Table 2.4). All of these
proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed the KNFP VQOs due to leave tree density
and slash disposal.
Fuel and Wildlife Treatment is being proposed to reduce hazardous fuels and enhance wildlife habitat
by utilizing prescribed fire and mechanical slashing. Some of the proposed treatments may have small
diameter forest product removal from gentle slopes. The proposed action proposes 33 fuel treatments on
wildlife ranges totaling 10,049 acres (Table 2.5). All of these proposed treatments are forecasted to meet
or positively exceed the KNFP VQOs due leave trees, slash disposal and irregular treatment patterns.
New Road Construction is being proposed to access nine proposed harvest units, one fuels unit and to
allow Montana Department of State Lands to access their lands. This proposed construction would result
in 9.25 miles (Table 2.6) of new permanent roads in the analysis area. Road constructions in this area
typically results in the exposure of light colored sub soils on cut and fill slopes. Such construction can be
visually obtrusive unless cut and fill slopes are successfully revegetated. Revegetation would be required
of any permanent road construction. However, post-treatment monitoring is the only way to assess
revegetation success.
Temporary Road Construction is being proposed to access treatment proposals. This proposed
construction would result in 15 segments totaling approximately4.26 miles (Table 2.7) of temporary
roads. All temporary road construction would be pulled back to the slope contour and revegetated. The
key to revegetation success is the storing of topsoil and organic material as a growth medium on the
recontoured slope. Visually obtrusive elements of temporary road construction should be short-term with
successful recontouring and revegetation.
Cumulative Effects
Alternative 2 would change the visual condition of the East Reservoir area. Drier habitats found on south
and west aspects of the analysis area would have subtle texture changes as tree densities were reduced
following tree harvest and hazard fuel reduction. Minimal new line and form would be introduced with
shelterwood and intermediate stand treatments. All but six (6) regeneration (seedtree, clearcut for 686
acres) harvest treatments would meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs. This is due to leave tree
densities, vegetative screening, blending with natural openings and topographic positioning. Within 15-25
years of the proposed treatments, intermediate/tall shrubs and tree regeneration would be noticeable in the
treated areas. Scenic resource effects associated with temporary road construction (approx. 4 miles) to
access tree harvest areas would be short-term. Temporary road segments would be pulled back to natural
slope contours and revegetated. The effects of permanent road construction would depend upon
successful revegetation of cut and fill slopes.
Scenic Quality Management Measures
All of the intermediate stand treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP Visual Quality
Objectives. Sixty-six (66) of the 72 regeneration treatment areas would meet or positively exceed the
KNFP VQOs. Six (6) regeneration units (clearcut, seedtree) would require modification to meet KNFP
VQOs or seek an exemption from KNFP standards. Unit layout could utilize smaller areas, irregular
shapes/edges, leave tree islands and gentle slope angles. Units could be marked to leave residual trees
with the largest/best formed crowns. Units could be positioned to take advantage of inferior viewer
positions, oblique view angles, topographic/vegetative screening, natural openings and revegetated tree
harvest areas. The use of these techniques singularly or in combination would yield positive results
related to VQOs/SIOs.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 376 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

Slash disposal adjacent to the Lake Koocanusa Scenic Byway (MSH 37) and Lake Koocanusa is critical
to meeting KNFP VQOs.

CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN
All of Alternative 2 proposals meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs except six (6) proposed
regeneration (seedtree, clearcut) harvests totaling 686 acres (Table 3.117). These six units would need to
be modified satisfactorily or dropped from Alternative 2 to be consistent with the Forest Plan.
ALTERNATIVE 3
Alternative 3 consists of 124 tree harvest areas for 5,817 acres (Tables 2.15, 2.17), 13 fuel treatment areas
for 1,309 acres (Table 2.18), 33 fuels and wildlife treatment areas for 10,049 acres (Table 2.5),
precommercial thinning for 5,563 acres (Table 2.16) and 25 commercial thinning areas for 1,965 acres
(Table 2.17). The purpose of these treatments is to regenerate decadent stands, improve forest health by
reducing tree density, and reduce fuel loadings to more natural historic levels. To facilitate access to
treatment areas, nineteen segments of new permanent specified road totaling 8.06 miles (Table 2.19A)
would be constructed, and 14 segments of temporary road totaling 4.05 (Table 2.20) miles would be
constructed. Following treatment, all temporary roads would be recontoured to slope and revegetated.
Direct and Indirect Effects
Table 3.118 displays, by unit, the scenic resource effects of Alternative 3. Only those units that are a
change from Alternative 2 are displayed in Table 3.118.
Table 3.118 - Scenic Resource Effects and Rationale for Alternative 3
UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

18

32

17

PR/Mod

ISW

PR

40

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

62

40

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

80

40

16

Mod/lOW

ST

PR

RATIONALE

Proposed irregular shelterwood treatment is located north of Cripple
Horse Creek and adjacent to MSH 37. It is positioned low on the
slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 85% of the canopy and leave 15-20
of the largest, best quality trees/acre for restocking. Treatment would
be viewed from MSH 37 at a foreground distance. Due to leave trees
and gentle terrain, this treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Marking guides would focus on irregular spacing/clumping of
leave trees and the proposed treatment would achieve an
enhancement objective. A high level of slash disposal along MSH
37 would be required to meet KNFP scenic resource objectives.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Canyon Creek near
its headwaters. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a
northeast aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality
trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the open
Canyon Creek Road #4912 at a middle-ground distance. Due to leave
trees, and gentle terrain, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located northwest of Davis Mountain.
It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a west aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy
and leave 5-10 of the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding.
Treatment would be viewed from the open Lake Creek Road #4424
at a middle ground distance. Due to leave trees, gentle terrain and
view from a SL3 road, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention. The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave trees
would be left in this proposed unit to achieve KNFP scenic
resource objectives.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
and 1.5 miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 377 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

143A

9

16

Mod/Low

ST

Mod

147

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

148

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

149

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

150

40

15

MM/VL

ST

Mod

170

40

15

MM/VL

ST

MM

RATIONALE

steep terrain with a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a
stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed
from MSH 37 south bound at a middle-ground distance. Due to leave
trees and leave islands, this proposed treatment would not attract
viewer attention. The upper level (10-15 trees/acre) of leave trees
would be left in this proposed unit to achieve KNFP scenic
resource objectives.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
two miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle
terrain with a northeast aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
open Fivemile Creek Road #48 at a middle ground distance. Due to
leave trees, unit shape, and small unit size this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
just below the South Fork headwaters. It is positioned low on the
slope on steep terrain with a northwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be
viewed from the open Fivemile Creek Road #4893 at a foreground
distance. Due to leave trees, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention. The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave
trees would be left in this proposed unit to achieve KNFP scenic
resource objectives.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
just below the South Fork headwaters. It is positioned low on the
slope on steep terrain with a northwest aspect. Such treatments
regenerate a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of
the largest, best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be
viewed from the open Fivemile Creek Road #4893 at a foreground
distance. Due to leave trees, this proposed treatment would not
attract viewer attention. The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave
trees would be left in this proposed unit. Effort should be made
to modify the geometric shape (square) of this proposed unit.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek and
just below the South Fork headwaters. It is positioned low on the
slope on steep terrain with a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate
a stand by removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest,
best quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed
from the open Fivemile Creek Road #4893 at a foreground distance.
Due to leave trees, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer
attention. The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave trees would
be left in this proposed unit. Effort should be made to modify the
geometric (square) shape of this proposed unit.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Fivemile Creek in the
South Fork headwaters. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain
with a northwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from the
open Fivemile Creek Road #4893 at a foreground distance. Due to
leave trees, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer
attention. The upper level (10-12 trees/acre) of leave trees would
be left in this proposed unit. Effort should be made to modify the
geometric (square) shape of this proposed unit.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Warland Creek and
three miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned at mid-slope on gentle
terrain with a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 378 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

UNIT #

ACRES

MA

VQO/SI.

Rx

VQO
ACHIEVED

188S

10

16

Mod/lOW

ST

Mod

220

35

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

362A

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

362B

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

362C

39

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

368

40

12

MM/VL

CC

MM

RATIONALE

quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
Warland Creek Road 566 at a middle ground distance. Due to leave
trees, this proposed treatment would not attract viewer attention.
Effort would be made to modify the straight line west boundary
of this proposed unit.
Proposed seedtree treatment is located south of Cripple Horse Creek
and two miles east of MSH 37. It is positioned low on the slope on
steep terrain on a north aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by
removing 95% of the canopy and leave 5-10 of the largest, best
quality trees/acre for reseeding. Treatment would be viewed from
Cripple Horse Creek Road #835 at a middle-ground distance. Due to
leave trees and view from a SL 3 route this proposed treatment
would not attract viewer attention. Proposed unit adjoins 73T, a 31
acre seedtree unit.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located at the end of the Dunn Creek
Road 525 just upslope of the Dunn Creek trailhead. It is positioned
near the toe of the slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy
and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be
viewed from the open Dunn Creek Road #525 and Trail #25 at a
foreground distance. Due to remote location and gentle terrain this
treatment would not attract viewer attention. The Dunn Creek Trail
#25 must be protected during all proposed activities.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Wyoma
Creek. It is positioned near the ridge line on gentle terrain with a
southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
98% of the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat.
Treatment would be viewed from the closed Hornet Ridge Powerline
Road #2364 at a foreground distance. Due to remote location and
gentle terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention. Effort
should be made to modify the straight line east boundary.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Wyoma
Creek. It is positioned near the ridge line on gentle terrain with a
southwest aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing
98% of the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat.
Treatment would be viewed from the closed Hornet Ridge Powerline
Road #2364 at a foreground distance. Due to remote location and
gentle terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention. Effort
should be made to modify the straight line west and south
boundaries.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located in the headwaters of Wyoma
Creek. It is positioned near the ridge line on gentle terrain with a
west aspect. Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of
the canopy and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment
would be viewed from the closed Hornet Ridge Powerline Road
#2364 at a foreground distance. Due to remote location and gentle
terrain this treatment would not attract viewer attention. Effort
should be made to modify the straight line north boundary.
Proposed clearcut treatment is located north of Dunn Creek. It is
positioned at mid-slope on gentle terrain with a southwest aspect.
Such treatments regenerate a stand by removing 98% of the canopy
and leave 2-3 trees/acre for wildlife habitat. Treatment would be
viewed from the closed Snag Gulch Road #4922 at a foreground
distance. Due to remote location, and gentle terrain this treatment
would not attract viewer attention. Effort should be made to modify
the straight line east boundary.

Alternative 3 proposes 69 regeneration harvest treatments (shelterwood, seedtree, and clearcut). Twentysix of these treatments are forecasted to positively exceed the KNFP Visual Quality Objectives (VQO).
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 379 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

Example: a VQO of partial retention is achieved where a VQO of modification is prescribed. Forty-three
proposed treatments are forecasted to meet the prescribed KNFP VQO.
Intermediate Stand Treatments are being proposed to modify existing forest conditions in order to
enhance growth, quality, vigor and composition. Such treatments occur prior to stand maturity and are not
intended to promote regeneration. The following descriptions are examples of intermediate treatments
proposed with this project:
Improvement Harvest is being proposed to improve forest resiliency, composition and quality by
reducing tree density. This treatment would retain 50-70% of the existing forest canopy and promote a
more open stand structure. The largest, healthiest and best quality trees of desired species would be
retained. Alternative 3 proposes 51 improvement harvest treatments totaling 3,738 acres. All of these
proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due to leave tree quality
and density.
Sanitation-Salvage is being proposed to remove diseased trees prior to re-infection and to capture
mortality prior to loss of product marketability. Dead and down merchantable trees would be harvested.
Western larch, with high levels of dwarf mistletoe infection, would be removed. This proposed
treatment often results in very small openings (1-2 acres) in the forest canopy. Alternative 3 proposes
four (4) sanitation-salvage treatments totaling 345 acres. All of these proposed treatments are forecasted
to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due to leave tree density and small opening size.
Commercial Thinning is being proposed to improve tree growth and enhance forest health by reducing
stand density. Thinning normally removes suppressed trees from below the dominant tree canopy. The
largest, best quality trees are retained in a fully stocked stand following treatment. Alternative 3 proposes
25 commercial thinning treatments totaling 1,965 acres (Table 2.17). All of these proposed treatments are
forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due leave tree quality and density.
Precommercial Thinning is being proposed to reduce tree density and improve growing conditions of
the retained trees by reducing the competition for light and nutrients. The largest, best quality trees of the
desired species are retained in a fully stocked stand following treatment. Alternative 3 proposes 5,563
acres of precommercial thinning in overstocked, sapling sized trees that were established 15-25 years
prior. All of these proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs due to
leave tree quality and density.
Fuel Treatment is being proposed to reduce hazardous fuels by utilizing a combination of prescribed fire
and/or mechanical treatments. These treatments are located adjacent to private property and are intended
to reduce hazardous fuels in the wild land-urban interface. Such treatments would promote a more open
stand structure resistant to crown fire. Small diameter forest products may be removed to enhance burning
conditions. Alternative 3 proposes 13 fuel treatments totaling 1,309 acres (Table 2.18). All of these
proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed the KNFP VQO due to leave tree density
and slash disposal.
Fuel and Wildlife Treatment is being proposed to reduce hazardous fuels and enhance wildlife habitat
by utilizing prescribed fire and mechanical slashing. Some of the proposed treatments may have small
diameter forest product removal from gentle slopes. Alternative 3 proposes 33 fuel treatments on wildlife
ranges totaling 10,049 acres (Table 2.19). All of these proposed treatments are forecasted to meet or
positively exceed the KNFP VQO due leave trees, slash disposal and irregular treatment patterns.
New Road Construction is being proposed to access nine treatment proposals and to allow DNRC to
access their lands. This proposed construction would result 19 new roads and 8.06 miles (Table 2.19A) of
new permanent roads in the analysis area. Road construction in this area typically results in the exposure
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 380 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
SCENIC RESOURCE

of light colored sub-soils on cut and fill slopes. Such construction can be visually obtrusive unless cut and
fill slopes are successfully revegetated. Revegetation would be required of any permanent road
construction. However, post-treatment monitoring is the only way to assess revegetation success.
Temporary Road Construction is being proposed to access tree treatment proposals. This proposed
construction would result in14 segments totaling 4.05 miles (Table 2.20) of temporary roads. All
temporary road construction would be pulled back to the slope contour and revegetated. The key to
revegetation success is the storing of topsoil and organic material as a growth medium on the recontoured
slope. Visually obtrusive elements of temporary road construction should be short-term with successful
recontouring and revegetation.
Cumulative Effects
Alternative 3 would change the visual condition of the East Reservoir area. Drier habitats found on south
and west aspects of the analysis area would have subtle texture changes as tree densities were reduced
following tree harvest and hazard fuel reduction. Minimal new line and form would be introduced with
shelterwood and intermediate stand treatments. All regeneration (seedtree, clearcut) harvest treatments
would meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs. This is due to leave tree densities, vegetative screening,
blending with natural openings, and topographic positioning. Within 15-25 years of the proposed
treatments, intermediate/tall shrubs and tree regeneration would be noticeable in the treated areas. Scenic
resource effects associated with temporary road construction (approx. 4 miles) to access tree harvest areas
would be short-term. Temporary road segments would be pulled back to natural slope contours and
revegetated. The effects of temporary road construction would depend upon successful revegetation of cut
and fill slopes.
Scenic Quality Management Measures
All of the intermediate stand treatments are forecasted to meet or positively exceed KNFP VQOs. All of
the 66 regeneration treatment areas would meet or positively exceed the KNFP VQOs. Regeneration units
may require modification to meet KNFP VQOs. These specific management measures are displayed in
the unit descriptions (Table 3.118). Unit layout would utilize smaller areas, irregular shapes or edge, leave
tree islands and gentle slope angles. Units would be marked to leave residual trees with the largest/best
formed crowns. Units would be positioned to take advantage of inferior viewer positions, oblique view
angles, topographic/vegetative screening, natural openings and revegetated tree harvest areas. The use of
these techniques singularly or in combination would yield positive results related to Visual Quality
Objectives/Scenic Integrity Objectives.
Slash disposal adjacent to the Lake Koocanusa Scenic Byway (MSH 37) and Lake Koocanusa is critical
to meeting KNFP VQOs.
CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN
All of Alternative 3 proposed activities meet or positively exceed KNFP Visual Quality Objectives.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 381 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCES

CULTURAL RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
The activities proposed under the East Reservoir project have the potential to affect Cultural Resources.
These activities are described in detail in Chapter 2 of the DEIS.
The purpose of this analysis is to determine if any of the alternatives will directly or indirectly affect
cultural resources through complying with Federal laws and policies that manage Cultural Resources.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK and AGENCY DIRECTION
Federal and State Agencies are required to follow the guidelines of the National Historic Preservation Act
which is the Federal law governing preservation of historic and archaeological resources of national,
regional, state, and local significance for all proposed ground disturbing activities. Forest Service (FS)
Manual 2300 provides the laws and guidelines for employees to follow when managing any site. In
addition, the laws and policies that govern Cultural Resource protection on Federal and State lands are
coordinated with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) of Montana, who serves in an advisory
capacity.
Field inventories are conducted in accordance with the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) 2009 Heritage
Guidelines for Site Survey Strategy (Timmons et al, 2009), Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA), and the Programmatic Agreement between the USDA, FS Northern Region
(Montana), the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and the Montana State Historic Preservation
Office (MTSHPO) Regarding Cultural Resource Management on National Forests in the State of
Montana.

ANALYSIS METHODS
Field inventories include a review of all high and medium probability areas for the occurrence of cultural
resources as well as, locating known site leads. The definitions for high and medium probability areas are
contained in the KNF 2009 Heritage Guidelines for Site Survey Strategy (Timmons et al, 2009). The field
inventories are documented and forwarded to the MTSHPO. Inventory reports include management
recommendations for any cultural resource sites located. For the East Reservoir analysis area,
archaeologists worked directly with foresters to design alternative actions that either excluded or have
minimal effects on cultural resources.
Cultural resource inventory and site reports are housed in the Heritage Resource shop in the Supervisor's
Office and at the Canoe Gulch Ranger Station. Specific site location information is confidential and not
subject to public disclosure as per Public Law 94-456, [16U.S.C. 470 Sec. 9 (a) (1) (2)].

ANALYSIS AREA
The analysis area for Heritage resources is the same the Cripple Planning Subunit. This analysis area
includes 802 acres of U. S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE) lands. The COE is collaborating with the
Forest to complete cultural resource surveys on COE lands.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT/EXISTING CONDITION
The analysis area contains benches, hills, and mountain slopes adjacent to permanent flowing water. It has
a low-to-high probability of containing cultural resources. Level lands adjacent to permanent water have a
high probability while steep mountain slopes have a low probability of containing sites.
District and Forest records provide an understanding of all expected heritage resources within the
Analysis Area. On KNF lands, a total of 34 cultural resource inventories have occurred in the past within
the analysis area. A total of 24 sites and one historic railroad logging district eligible to the National
Register of Historic Places lie within the analysis area.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 382 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCE

The COE manages 802 acres adjacent to Libby Dam that is included in the analysis area. Archaeologists
surveyed most of these lands in preparation for construction of Libby Dam in the late 1970s. They located
a total of nine sites that are eligible to the National Register of Historic Places. COE and FS
Archaeologists conducted a field inventory of the remainder of COE land within the analysis area during
the summer 2011. No new cultural resources were located.
Information concerning the nature and location of heritage resources is confidential, and is not subject to
public disclosure per Public Law 94-456 (16 U.S.C.470 sec. 9 (a) (1) (2)) in order to protect sites from
vandalism, and to retain the confidentiality of site locations.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternative 1 has no ground-disturbing activities. If no ground disturbing activities take place, then
cultural resource sites would continue to naturally deteriorate. However, the increased risk of standreplacing wildfire associated with this alternative could result in indirect effects. Wildfire may destroy or
damage above-ground cultural resources. Burning tree roots or suppression efforts may expose and
impact subsurface cultural resources.
ALTERNATIVES 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2 and 3 propose ground-disturbing activities and increase access to areas that have the
potential to affect historic and prehistoric sites. Ground-disturbing activities could result in direct impact
to the sites, while increased access can lead to vandalism, theft and other indirect impacts. All areas
proposed for ground-disturbing activities have been inventoried prior to the implementation of any
activity that has the potential to impact cultural resource sites.
Although management’s intent is to identify all cultural resource sites, and avoid or mitigate prior to
proposed ground-disturbing activities, there is the potential for unidentified sites to be located during
project implementation. If this occurs, a Timber Sale Contract Provision for - Protection of Cultural
Resources provides the FS the opportunity to modify or cancel the contract to protect cultural resources,
regardless of when identified. The discovery of any cultural resource sites during the implementation of
the proposed project could result in implementation delays (USDA Forest Service 1987b Appendix 19.)
Forest archaeologists would notify and consult with the SHPO, as required by law, to determine the
significance of the discovery and the effects of the project upon them. The Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes and the Kootenai Tribe of Idaho would be included in discussions where Native
American sites are involved.
Cumulative Effects
All cumulative effects to cultural resources will be the same under any of the alternatives.
Actions on Private Lands:
Private: The government has no jurisdiction over private lands. Actions or projects by private individuals
would occur regardless of which alternative is selected for implementation. Impacts to any potential
historic property located on private property would not be addressed unless affected by a federally
permitted or funded undertaking. There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
State of Montana Department of Natural Resources: (DNRC): The actions or projects by the DNRC
would have no cumulative effects to cultural resources unless a cultural resource extends onto Montana
Land. In those cases, the FS would inform the State about the cultural resource. In the case that the State
of Montana would need to construct a road across FS land to access their land then, a FS archaeologist
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 383 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCE

would conduct a field inventory to determine if a cultural resource exists. If a cultural resource does exist
then the FS would work directly with the DNRC to either avoid or mitigate the road prior to its
construction. There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
U.S. Corps of Engineers: COE archaeologists know the location of cultural resources along the length of
Dunn Creek on COE land. They are responsible for writing the report, working directly with the project
coordinators to avoid or mitigate sites affected by the project, and consulting with the MTSHPO.
Currently, the project is designed to protect eligible cultural resources and would have no cumulative
effects to cultural resources on Forest Service land.
Vegetation Management: The activities for management of vegetation include timber harvest, timber
sales and precommercial thinning. The units associated with the East Reservoir analysis area have
received a cultural resource survey prior to project implementation. Project implementation would avoid
sites whenever possible. If avoidance is not possible then sites would be protected or mitigated. There
would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
Fuels Reduction Activities: All areas proposed for ground-disturbing activities have been inventoried
prior to implementation. Sites eligible to the National Register of Historic Places will be avoided,
mitigated or protected. There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
Outfitter and Guide Activities: Each proposal would be reviewed by a FS archaeologist to determine if
the project has the potential to effect cultural resources. Those proposals that may affect cultural resources
have been field inventoried. Known or newly identified sites would be avoided, mitigated or protected.
There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
Data Gathering Activities: Field surveys are likely to occur. There would be no cumulative effects to
cultural resources.
Road Activities: Road maintenance and use associated with permit administration, data collection,
monitoring and administration of National Forest Service (NFS) lands does not involve the use of heavy
equipment other than on existing road surfaces. Based on the types and extent of these uses in the analysis
area, there would be no impacts to cultural resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places.
There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
Fire Suppression: Fire suppression and rehabilitation activities may affect cultural resource sites. An
archeologist would be available to provide information regarding known sites. When avoidance during a
wildland fire is not possible, management would follow measures outlined in the Region 1 Programmatic
Agreement to minimize effects to cultural resources.
Weed Control: Most noxious weed treatment is along roadways. This activity does not include any
ground disturbing activities, and would not involve the use of heavy equipment other than on existing
road surfaces. There would be no effects to cultural resources.
Mineral Activities: Each proposal would be reviewed by a FS archaeologist to determine if the project
has the potential to effect cultural resources. Those proposals that may affect cultural resources would be
field inventoried. Known or newly identified sites would be avoided, mitigated or protected. There would
be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.
Special Use Permits: Each proposal would be reviewed by a FS archaeologist to determine if the project
has the potential to effect cultural resources. Those proposals that may affect cultural resources would be
field inventoried. Known or newly identified sites would be avoided, mitigated or protected. There would
be no cumulative effects to cultural resources
Grazing: Any livestock grazing within the analysis area may have impacts (lightly worn trails and
trampling) to cultural resources. Currently, archaeologists located no impacts. There would be no
cumulative effects to cultural resources.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 384 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCE

Public Activities Likely to Occur: Recreational use including hiking, dispersed camping, fishing,
photography, berry picking and driving for pleasure occurs mainly off existing road surfaces and are
small in scale. Based on the types and extent of these uses, there would be no cumulative effects to
cultural resources. Forest product gathering (Christmas trees, boughs, mushrooms, cones) and firewood
cutting would be expected to continue. There would be no cumulative effects to cultural resources.

CONSISTENCY with the FOREST PLAN and other MANAGEMENT DIRECTION
Forest Plan
The Forest Plan provides goals, objectives and standards for cultural resource management in order to
satisfy federal guidelines, laws and FS policy concerning cultural resource sites (USDA Forest Service
1987a II-2 5 25-26.) The Forest Service Manual Chapter 2360 and the Code of Federal Regulations (36
CFR 800) provide directives to accomplish this. The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) requires
integration of cultural resource management into the overall multiple resource management effort. In
addition, the Forest must work closely with the appropriate scientific communities and American Indian
tribes concerning this resource.
To meet these objectives and standards, all areas would receive a cultural resource inventory prior to the
implementation of any proposed project that has the potential to impact cultural resource sites. All
associated cultural sites would be recorded, and either avoided or mitigated. The KNFP provides direction
to manage sites, whether discovered during the inventory or implementation of proposed activities. In
addition, consultation, with the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, is ongoing to ensure their
known interests. Therefore, all action alternatives would be consistent with KNFP direction.
Other Laws and Regulations
Antiquities Act of 1906
The Antiquities Act provides for the protection of historic or prehistoric remains, or any object of
antiquity, on Federal lands.
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA, as amended 16 USC 470-470 t, 110)
The NHPA is the Federal law governing the preservation of historic and archeological resources of
national, regional, state, and local significance on all proposed ground disturbing activities. Section 106
of the NHPA requires that the head of a Federal agency having any jurisdiction over an undertaking, or
authority to license any undertaking, shall take into account the effect of the undertaking on any site,
district, building, structure, or object that is included in, or eligible to, the National Register of Historic
Places. This is the standard review process described in federal regulations issued by the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation. Entitled, "Protection of Historic Properties," the regulations also appear
in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at 36 CFR Part 800.
In addition, the laws and policies that govern cultural resource protection on Federal and State lands are
coordinated with the SHPO of Montana, who serves in an advisory capacity. The policies of the FS and
SHPO are consistent. The implementation of all alternatives would be in compliance with the appropriate
cultural resource guidelines.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 385 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

RECREATION RESOURCE INTRODUCTION
This section discusses the existing condition and the effects of the alternatives on the recreation resource.

ANALYSIS AREA
The analysis area for the East Reservoir Project is bounded on the east by the Fivemile, Warland, Cripple
Horse, Canyon and Dunn Creek hydrologic boundaries, on the west by Koocanusa Reservoir, on the north
by the Libby Ranger District boundary with Rexford Ranger District, and on the south by the Richards
Mountain/Dunn Peak Divide. The analysis area can be geographically characterized as low gradient
stream courses bounded by long spur ridges.

ANALYSIS METHODS
The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS Primer and Field Guide, R -6-REC-021-90, USDA
Forest Service, April 1990) provides the framework to understand how resource management affects
settings, activities and ultimately the experience levels of recreationists. Experience levels are defined as
highly probable outcomes of participating in recreation activities in specific recreation settings. The key
to providing most experiences is the setting and how it is managed. As resource managers, the Forest
Service (FS) can facilitate (or hamper) many desired experiences by the way setting indicators are
managed. These indicators are:
1. Access - includes type and mode of travel.
2. Remoteness - refers to the extent to which individuals perceive themselves removed from the sights
and sounds of human activity.
3. Social Encounters- refers to the number and type of other recreationists met along travelways and at
destinations.
4. Visitor Management - includes the degree to which visitors are regulated and controlled, as well as
the level of information and services provided.
5. Facilities and Site Management - refers to the level of site development.
6. Visitor Impacts - refers to the impacts of visitor use on the environment.
7. Naturalness- refers to the degree of naturalness of the setting; it affects the psychological outcomes
associated with enjoying nature.
SETTING CHARACTERIZATIONS
Primitive Setting - Area is characterized by essentially unmodified natural environment of fairly large
size. Interaction between users is very low and evidence of other users is minimal. The area is managed
to be essentially free from the evidence of human-induced restrictions and controls. Motorized use
within the area is not permitted.
Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized Setting - Area is characterized by a predominantly natural or naturalappearing environment of moderate to large size. Interaction between users is low, but there is often
evidence of other users. The area is managed, in such a way that minimum on-site controls and
restrictions may be present but are subtle. Motorized use is not permitted.
Semi-Primitive Motorized Setting - Area is characterized by predominantly natural or natural-appearing
environment of moderate to large size. Concentration of users is low, but there is often evidence of
other users. The area is managed in such a way that minimum on-site controls and restrictions may be
present, but are subtle. Motorized use is permitted.
Roaded Natural Setting - Area is characterized by predominantly natural appearing environment with
moderate evidences of the sights and sounds of man. Such evidences harmonize with the natural
environment. Interaction between users may be low to moderate, but with the evidence of other users
prevalent. Resource modification and utilization practices are evident, but harmonize with the natural
environment. Conventional motorized use is provided for in construction standards and design of
facilities.
Rural Setting- Area is characterized by substantially modified natural environment. Resource
modification and utilization practices are to enhance specific recreation activities and to maintain
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 386 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

vegetative cover and soils. Sights and sounds of humans are readily evident, and the interaction
between users is often moderate to high. A considerable number of facilities are designed for use by a
large number of people. Facilities are often provided for special activities. Moderate densities are
provided for away from developed sites. Facilities for intensified motorized use and parking are
available.
Urban Setting- Area is characterized by a substantially urbanized environment, although the background
may have natural appearing elements. Renewable resource modification and utilization practices are to
enhance specific recreation activities. Vegetative cover is often exotic and manicured. Sights and
sounds of humans, on site, are predominant. Large numbers of users can be expected, both on site and
in nearby areas. Facilities for highly intensified motor use and parking are available with forms of mass
transit often available to carry people throughout the site.
IMPACT LEVELS
Impacts would be high where actions would preclude existing or planned recreational uses after
implementation or permanently negatively affect recreation experiences.
Impacts would be moderate where actions would temporarily preclude existing recreation uses during
peak use periods during implementation or temporarily negatively affect recreation experiences.
Impacts would be low where actions would temporarily preclude existing recreation uses during non-peak
user periods during implementation or temporarily negatively affect recreation experiences.
Within the above framework, the inverse or positive impacts can also be forecasted as high, moderate or
low as well.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
1) Access - The East Reservoir analysis area has a high density of roads (seasonally open and seasonally
designated) that were constructed for a variety of purposes. Many roads are open to motorized vehicle
travel year around. Most spur roads are closed year-round to achieve water quality goals and big game
habitat effectiveness. Snowmobile use is restricted to open roads due to big game winter range values.
Off-road vehicle (ORV) trespass of closed roads is very common (weekly during snow-free period).
Closed roads are used extensively by walk-in hunters during the fall. Motorized trails located in the
analysis area are #279 Warland Ridge 10.70mi; #280 Warland Peak, 2.30mi; #281 Cripple Horse,
6.22mi; #420 Canyon Divide, 9.83mi; #426 Fivemile, 1.82mi; and #500 Hornet Ridge, 5.69mi (total
36.56 miles). These trails are open to motorcycles and snowmobiles. Non-motorized trails in the
analysis area are #25 Dunn Creek, 6.02mi; #97 Richards Mountain, 8.41mi; #241 North Fork of
Canyon Creek, 3.71mi; #242 Sugarloaf Lookout, 4.00mi; and #425 Boundary Mountain, 0.66mi (total
22.80 miles). These trails facilitate hiking, horseback riding and cross-country (x-c) skiing.
2) Remoteness - Due to the high density of roads and traffic levels, the perceived condition of remoteness
is not easily achieved in the East Reservoir area. Exceptions would be cross-country travel, the nonmotorized hiking trails of the area, and roads that have been closed for long periods with dense
revegetation.
3) Social Encounters – Contact between recreationists is low to moderate along open roads and
seasonally on trails. Contacts are highest during peak seasons examples: driving to view scenery and
wildlife during the summer and hunting during the fall. Contact on closed roads is low, as most
recreationists respect another person’s desire for space and will bypass the road if a vehicle is parked
there. Encounters by season are often by people pursuing the same recreation activity.
4) Visitor Management - The most common control on recreationists in the East Reservoir area is road
closures to motorized vehicle travel. Over half the road mileage in the area has been closed yearlong to
benefit big game or watershed health. The information most commonly provided to visitors is related to
vehicle travel, i.e. road numbers, mile markers, traffic control signs.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 387 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

5) Facilities and Site Management - There is one FS developed recreation facility within the East
Reservoir area. This is the Cripple Horse Boat Ramp which has toilets and parking areas. This site is
managed for April through October activities. Koocanusa Marina, attached to this boat ramp, is
managed by a private party under a special use permit. Private facilities at the Marina include: store,
restaurant, showers, laundry, campground, RV-Park and rental cabins. FS high use dispersed sites
located along Koocanusa Reservoirs’ east shoreline have concrete vault toilets. These sites are at
Warland Creek and Canyon Creek. Five scenic turnouts are located along MSH 37. Developments
include parking, signs and vegetation clearing for vistas.
6) Visitor Impacts - The most common impacts of visitors are littering and spread of noxious weeds.
Vandalism to gates, once common, is now declining. Cross-country Off-Road Vehicle (ORV) use has
resulted in the creation of new travel ways, vegetation elimination, soil erosion and weed spread.
Nearly all signs, regardless of message, have several to numerous bullet holes in them.
7) Naturalness - Visual quality objectives are used to quantify the degree of landscape naturalness. See
the Scenic Resource analysis (Chapter3) for more information.
The East Reservoir analysis area provides important recreation settings, ranging from semi-primitive to
roaded natural to rural, for a wide spectrum of recreation activities. The area is important due to the ease
of access year-round from Libby and Eureka. Important dispersed recreation activities are viewing/
photographing scenery and wildlife, hiking, hunting and fishing (Koocanusa Reservoir). There is one
outfitter/guide permitted in the analysis area for hunting activities.
Desired future condition for National Forest System (NFS) land within the East Reservoir analysis area is
described by Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) management allocation. The future condition utilizes
the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum model to classify lands along a scale from Primitive (least
development) to Urban (most development).
The majority of the analysis area is inventoried as roaded natural. There are no inventoried roadless areas
within East Reservoir analysis area. There is one area (MA-2 Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized Recreation)
associated with the Richards Mountain-Dunn Peak Divide that totals approximately 4,000 acres. There
are no tree harvest or road construction proposals in this area. Fuels treatment burning to benefit wildlife
habitat is proposed in Sections 11 and 13 associated with this area. Primitive recreation settings are
lacking due to the high level of development (road construction and tree harvest).
Managed trails in the area are: #25 Dunn Creek, #97 Richards Mountain, #241 North Fork of Canyon
Creek, #242 Sugarloaf Lookout, #279 Warland Ridge, #280 Warland Peak, #281 Cripple Horse, #420
Canyon Divide, #425 Boundary Mountain, #426 Fivemile and #500 Hornet Ridge. There are vistas along
these trails which offer panoramic views of Koocanusa Reservoir, Salish Mountains, Purcell Mountains
and Cabinet Mountains.
Currently, stock use of the East Reservoir area is low. Favored riding areas are associated with closed
roads. Loop opportunities are present by traversing areas between trails and roads which allow a rider to
cover new terrain for most of a ride.
ORV use within the analysis area is presently moderate. Four wheelers and motorcycles are the two major
ORV types. Use is concentrated near Koocanusa Reservoir. ORV trespass use of roads which are closed
to motor vehicles is very common.
Snowmobile use is light with touring on open/closed roads the most common activity. There are no
concentrated high elevation play areas.
People participating in activities where a semi-primitive, non-motorized experience is desired are, for the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 388 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

most part, dependent upon road closures and trail management. Currently, the yearlong and seasonal
closures on spur roads are doing a marginal job of maintaining this setting. Violations of road closures by
four-wheelers and motorcycles are common and limit the opportunity for a semi-primitive experience in
the area.
The East Reservoir area is used by recreationists in all seasons. Peak use periods are during the springsummer for fishing and driving to view scenery/wildlife, and fall for hunting. Recreation activities are
dispersed over time and space.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
The no-action alternative would see a very slow change to setting indicators and characterizations. As
vegetation growth increases on closed roads and prior tree harvest areas, All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV)
trespass would be less likely. For these indicators, low level, long-term positive impacts are estimated.
ALTERNATIVES 2, 3 and 4
Direct and Indirect Effects
Alternatives 2 and 3 propose 131 to 124 tree harvest treatments on 6,589 to 5,817 acres, 27 to 25
commercial thinning areas on 2,256 to 1,965 acres, 18 to 13 fuel treatments on 1,378 to 1,309 acres, 33
fuel and wildlife treatments on 10,049 acres, precommercial thinning on 5,563 acres, and 13.51 to 12.11
miles of temporary/permanent road construction. Road access and site improvement is proposed at the
Fivemile and Yarnell dispersed recreation sites along Koocanusa Reservoir. This would include pre-cast
vault toilet installation. All existing closed access roads on NFS lands would remain closed seasonally/
yearlong by gate/barrier to public motorized travel to meet watershed and big game security goals. ORV
trespass of access roads would continue to be common. On the NFS land, access management is the focus
of public attention and agency analysis as well.
Alternative 2 proposes to close, by Forest Supervisor Order, six trails (Warland Ridge, Warland Peak,
Cripple Horse, Canyon Divide, Fivemile and Hornet Ridge) totaling approximately 37 miles to motorized
vehicle use yearlong. Protecting big game summer range habitat effectiveness is the rationale for these
proposed closures. These trails are currently open to motorcycles and over snow vehicles. These trails,
when constructed in 1930-1950, were designed for stock traffic and today do not safely support OHV use.
Motor vehicle use of these trails is light.
Alternative 3 proposes to create an OHV loop that starts on the Boundary Mountain road #4904 (approx.
1.5 miles) proceeds on the Cripple Horse trail #281(6.22 miles), intersects the Canyon Divide trail #420
(approx. 2.5 miles), continues on Canyon Creek road #4912 (approx. 4 miles), and ends on the CrippleCanyon Connector road #4925 (approx. 3.5 miles) for an approximate total distance of 17.72 miles. The
Cripple Horse trail mileage is marginally suited for motorcycles currently and unsuitable for all other
OHV traffic. Implementation of this proposal would require partnership cooperation to improve trail
standards for OHV safety.
Alternative 3 proposes to create a non-motorized loop trail around Cripple Hill located in Section 2 just
south of the outlet of Cripple Horse Creek to Koocanusa Reservoir. The proposed trail location is
positioned between Koocanusa Reservoir and Montana State Highway 37. The trail would be
approximately 2.75 miles in length with 1.75 miles on existing historic railroad grade. The remaining
mile of trail would utilize a temporary road location that would access a proposed harvest unit. This trail
would be suitable for hiking, biking and horseback riding. Implementation of this proposal would require
minimal clearing and tread construction
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 389 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

Alternative 3 proposes to close, by Forest Supervisor Order five trails, (Warland Ridge, Warland Peak,
Canyon Divide (partial), Fivemile and Hornet Ridge) totaling approximately 27 miles to motorized
vehicle use yearlong. Protecting big game summer range habitat effectiveness is the rationale for these
proposed closures. These trails are currently open to motorcycles and over snow vehicles. These trails,
when constructed in 1930-1950, were designed for stock traffic and today do not safely support motor
vehicle use. Motor vehicle use of these trails is low.
1) Access – In 2006, Dale Bosworth Chief of the US Forest Service identified “Unmanaged Recreation”
as one of four threats facing the Agency in the near future. He stated “We believe the off-highway
vehicles are a legitimate use of the National Forest System. But it’s a use that should be managed
carefully. That’s what our new rule for OHV use on national forest system lands is all about: providing
access that can be used and enjoyed into the future. And if we want to sustain that use, then have got to
work together.” Providing for the long-term sustainability of the NFS lands and resources is essential to
maintaining the quality of the recreation experience in the national forests for all users. Dramatic
increase in OHV use coupled with impressive advances in motor vehicle technology is prompting the
Forest Service to take a closer look at its management of this use.
Alternative 2 would change settings for a variety of activities and ultimately the experience derived by
recreationists. Public use of several roads would likely be restricted for safety reasons where proposed
tree harvest units adjoin the road. This is judged to be a low level, short-term negative impact to access.
All temporary road construction would be recontoured and revegetated following treatment activities.
New tree harvest areas could enhance gathering forest products (berry/mushroom picking, Christmas
tree, firewood cutting). Proposed tree harvest treatments would enhance hunting opportunities by
allowing easier travel by hunters, and easier viewing of big game animals. Within the East Reservoir
analysis area, six of the 11 FS managed trails are currently open to public motorized travel by
motorcycle or snowmobile. Under Alternative 2, six trails currently open to motorized access would be
closed to that activity (i.e. 36.56 miles or 69% of the motorized trails on the Libby Ranger District).
Alternative 3 proposes closing five trails to motorized access for a total of 26.89 miles.
Proposed access improvement to dispersed recreation sites near Koocanusa Reservoir would be a longterm positive effect. Effects analysis often looks at access management to determine if a balance of
recreation opportunity is available. In the East Reservoir analysis area, a balance of open and closed
road-related recreation settings would be available under the action alternatives.
Alternatives 2 and 3 are judged to provide a moderate-term positive impact to public access when taken
in total.
Management measures could include bi-annual monitoring of motorized vehicle closure devices and
effective closure of ATV trespass trails.
2) Remoteness- During tree harvest and temporary road construction, the public would see and hear these
activities over time and space. Therefore, a low-level, short-term negative impact is anticipated for the
public's sense of remoteness. The long-term impact relates to the time it takes vegetation to recover to a
natural appearing state. As management measures for public safety, use of several roads may be
restricted during operations.
3) Social Encounters - Public use of several roads would likely be restricted during tree harvest
operations adjacent to the road for safety reasons. Following tree harvest activities, social encounters
are anticipated to increase slightly due to the increase in huntable acres. Under this scenario, impacts
are judged to low-level and short-term. No management measure is proposed to address social
encounters.
4) Visitor Management -Visitor regulation and control would be increased under the Alternatives 2 and
3. These alternatives have several proposed tree harvest treatments adjacent to roads. Therefore, public
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 390 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

access could be restricted for safety reasons on those roads. This is judged to be a low level, short-term
negative impact. Temporary roads would be recontoured and revegetated following tree harvest to
protect wildlife and watershed values. These roads would provide new non-motorized travel route for a
variety of activities, however, fall hunting would likely dominate use. Public perception of regulation
and control is largely negative. Where new road closures are implemented, the impacts would be low
level and long-term. Management measures would include biannual monitoring of closure devices to
assure effectiveness. Care would need to be exercised during treatments along several of the area roads
to not facilitate ATV trespass.
5) Facilities and Site Management - One managed site is positioned along the west portion of the
analysis area (Koocanusa Marina/Cripple Horse Boat Ramp). One improvement tree harvest (57 acres)
is proposed adjacent to this site. Treatment area slash could be deposited on site travel ways and would
be a direct impact. Design criteria would exclude activity slash and equipment from travel ways.
Impacts are judged to be low level and short term. There is an opportunity to use activity slash to limit
use of trespass ORV routes near the Marina. This opportunity would need to be coordinated with the
Marina permittee.
6) Visitor Impacts - Under Alternatives 2 and 3, each segment of new temporary road required for
proposed treatments would be recontoured and revegetated to protect wildlife and watershed values.
Signs placed on the Forest for management of resources or regulation of the public may be vandalized.
ATV users would circumvent barriers to use new roads and develop new routes from the roads where
terrain is suitable. Such use would spread noxious weeds, eliminate vegetation and result in erosion.
This is judged to be a low-level, long-term impact. Management measures would include biannual
monitoring to assure closure effectiveness and repair of structure and resource damages.
7) Naturalness- The scenic quality of tree harvest treatments, fuel treatments, precommercial thinning
and road construction is discussed in the Scenic Resource analysis (Chapter3). However, the
psychological effect on recreation experiences of encountering heavily manipulated settings
(regeneration harvest areas) could be high level and long-term until vegetation recovers to a natural
appearing condition.
Recreation opportunities would continue to be varied and dispersed through the area. Trails located in the
analysis area would be maintained at longer intervals as the FS manages decreasing maintenance budgets.
The need for public outfitter/guide services would remain low due to the areas’ high level of accessibility.
Proposed activities would have indirect effects on recreationists and their activities. Increased traffic
levels would be expected on many of the area roads during implementation. There would be short-term
displacement of recreationists from activity areas due to noise, traffic, dust and for safety reasons.
These would be low to moderate, short-term negative impacts depending on activity during peak
recreation seasons.
Cumulative Effects
In 2007, Abigail Kimball, Chief of the US Forest Service, identified “Loss of Open Space” as one of four
threats facing the Agency in the near future. She stated “The loss of open space is an urgent and important
problem, and the Forest Service clearly has a role in helping balance growth and development with open
space conservation. We can work with others as a conservation partner to help conserve critical open
space across the landscape.” The main threat to open space is subdivision and residential development on
private forest lands.
Within the East Reservoir analysis area, the FS is the major land owner followed by the Montana
Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (DNRC) and Plum Creek Timber Company (PCTC).
All of PCTC ownership is found in the Dunn Creek watershed at the south end of the analysis area.
Neither owner (DNRC or PCTC) is currently seeking to dispose of their land holdings in this analysis
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 391 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

area. In the past 25 years, historic homesteads located in major drainage bottoms (Fivemile, Warland
Creek) and adjacent to Lake Koocanusa have been subdivided. Sale and development of these parcels has
proceeded slowly as a result of economic conditions in the area. The DNRC plans to initiate tree harvest
in the area in the next decade whereas the FS and PCTC started tree harvest in the 1920s. Transportation
development coincided with these dates and utilized railroad technology first, followed by truck transport.
This transportation system was unavailable to the general public, and hiking/pack trails were therefore
used for recreation access. By the 1960s, road development for tree harvest had replaced rail lines. These
roads were now available to the recreating public. From 1960 to 1990, the area of tree harvest on FS land
was greatly expanded spatially. The public was afforded motorized access to a high percentage of the area
during this period. Since 1990, the FS has realized the benefit of road management to a variety of
resources. Over 50% of all roads constructed in the area are currently closed seasonally to motorized
travel. This brief history will provide the basis for cumulative effects analysis using the setting indicators
of the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS).
1) Access- From early European settlement to 1950, recreationist used game trails and pack trails to
access settings for recreation activities. From 1950 to 1990, motorized access on roads constructed for
tree removal expanded rapidly. Pack trails during this period were often obliterated or abandoned. Few
trails were maintained for recreation access. With the advent of road closures in 1990, the FS launched
a program of trail restoration to facilitate recreation access. In 2013, the public enjoys both motorized
and non-motorized access to recreation settings.
2) Remoteness- Primitive and semi-primitive non-motorized settings dominated the East Reservoir area
up to 1950. With greatly expanded tree harvest and road construction from 1950 to 1990, the sights and
sound of human activity were common. The 1950s semi-primitive motorized settings associated with
primitive roads and vehicles by 1990 had, with higher standard roads and improved technology in
vehicles, evolved to roaded natural settings. From 1990 to present, recreation settings have shown a
slight movement to the more primitive side of the spectrum with road closures and revegetation of
harvest areas.
3) Social Encounters - Up to 1950, social encounters were rare except at the most popular destinations.
Even with a low population of recreationists, encounters increased from 1950 to 1990 due to the ease of
motorized access afforded by road construction and more available free time. With road closures
starting in 1990, social encounters in semi-primitive settings have been reduced. Overall, the recreation
population has aged and with more available free time, encounters are not expected to decrease.
4) Visitor Management - Up to 1950, visitor management was virtually non-existent except for a few
fire prevention posters. From 1950 to present, visitor management has steadily increased with the most
visible being road closures. Since1990, permits for a variety of activities (firewood gathering,
Christmas tree cutting, etc.) have been used by the Forest Service.
5) Facilities and Site Management - Prior to 1950, the FS maintained a vast network of pack trails
primarily for fire suppression. Recreationists used these trails as well. From 1950 to present, roads have
become the major facility within the East Reservoir area. Beyond restored pack trails, very few
recreation-specific facilities exist within the area. Dispersed campsites can be found throughout the
area. User created developments (e g. fire rings) are common at campsites.
6) Visitor Impacts- Prior to 1950, few impacts from recreationists could be found on the environment.
From 1950 to present impacts are wide ranging (weeds, litter) and localized (vandalism to gates, signs).
In the future, visitor created trails from ATV use is expected to accelerate in the East Reservoir area.
7) Naturalness - Prior to 1950, the degree of setting naturalness was very high. From 1950 to 1990,
naturalness declined with large geometric patterns of tree harvest and road construction to access
harvest areas. From 1990 to present, tree harvest has been reduced and has utilized smaller unit sizes
and irregular shapes. Few new roads have been constructed and other yarding systems (helicopter,
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 392 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
RECREATION RESOURCE

skyline) have been employed. The proposed action would likely continue this trend started in 1990. In
the future, recreation setting naturalness is expected to increase as tree harvest areas and closed road
surfaces revegetate.
In addition to the proposed tree harvest and fuel treatments, a number of proposed actions, in or close to
the East Reservoir area would impact public recreation settings, activities and experiences. These are:
1) US Army Corps of Engineers plans intermediate tree harvest treatments on approximately 400 acres
of their lands. These lands are located downstream of Libby Dam between MSH 37 and the Kootenai
River. Such activities could impact naturalness, public perception of remoteness and facilitate ATV
trespass through their lands.
2) Montana DNRC plans road construction and extensive tree harvest in their Sections located in the
lower Warland, Cripple Horse and Canyon Creek areas. Such activities could impact naturalness,
public perception of remoteness and facilitate ATV trespass through their lands and adjacent
ownerships.
3) PCTC owns approximately 10 sections in the headwaters and lower reaches of Dunn Creek. Those
sections, suitable for private development, would be sold through their real estate division. All other
sections have been harvested in the last 20 years and limited harvest activity is anticipated in the next
decade. Such activities would impact naturalness and public perception of remoteness. Private
developments are usually accompanied by fencing or signing to prohibit public access.

FOREST PLAN CONSISTENCY
The NFS lands where tree harvest is proposed is allocated MA-l1, Big Game Winter Range (suitable
timberland); MA-12, Big Game Summer Range (suitable timberland); MA-15, Timber Production; MA16, Timber with Viewing (suitable timberland) and M A-17, Viewing with Timber (suitable timberland).
Within these allocations, tree harvest and road construction would be implemented. However, provisions
for scheduling to prevent conflicts during periods of wildlife use and management measures to protect
scenic resources would be implemented. Motorized access is generally not permitted during important
wintering periods (usually December 1 through April 30). The environmental consequences of the action
alternative on recreation settings, activities, and experiences would be consistent with goals, objectives
and standards of the Kootenai National Forest Plan.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 393 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

TRANSPORTATION INTRODUCTION
Forest roads are an essential part of the transportation system designed to support multiple use of National
Forest System (NFS) lands. They help to meet recreational demands and facilitate access to forest
commodities. Forest roads provide access needed to manage the many resources of each forest ecosystem.
The goal of the interdisciplinary transportation analyses is to identify a road system that:
• Meets management objectives and needs;
• Is safe and responsive to public needs and desires;
• Is affordable and efficiently managed;
• Has minimal negative ecological effects on the land;
• Is in balance with available funding for needed management actions.
The East Reservoir Travel Analysis Process (TAP) was completed in the winter of 2013. The TAP Report is
a separate, independent document, resulting from an interdisciplinary analysis of the existing road system.
The TAP produced a list of opportunities that could reduce the environmental risk of roads and bring the
road system closer to desired management goals, examined the current road management and resulted in
recommended road management changes that would provide a full range of motorized and non-motorized
opportunities balanced with any legal and environmental constraints.
The East Reservoir TAP provides a detailed road-by-road analysis of the existing condition. Therefore, this
section will only summarize information that can be found in greater detail in the East Reservoir TAP. The
East Reservoir Travel Analysis Report can be found in the Project File.
ANALYSIS AREA

The roads for the East Reservoir Project were analyzed using the travel analysis boundary which is different
from the analysis area boundary for all alternatives. The analysis area boundary is equivalent to the Cripple
Planning Subunit boundary. The travel analysis boundary includes some roads that fall outside the Cripple
Planning Subunit boundary. These roads are exclusively connected to roads in the Cripple Planning Subunit
boundary and are only accessed through the Cripple Planning Subunit. Figure 1 depicts the difference
between the Cripple Planning Subunit boundary and the travel analysis boundary.
Figure 1 – Map - Boundary Difference

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 394 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The TAP complies with 36 CFR Part 212 Administration of the Forest Transportation System Final Rule
and with the Forest Service (FS) Transportation Administrative Policy FSM Chapter 7700 (2001). The final
rule is intended to help ensure that additions to the NFS road network are those deemed essential for
resource management and use; that construction, reconstruction and maintenance of roads minimize adverse
environmental impacts; and that unneeded roads are decommissioned and restoration of ecological
processes are initiated.
On November 9, 2005, the new final rule for 36 CFR Parts 212, 251, 261 and 295 was issued to address
travel management and designated routes for motor vehicle use. This rule establishes the development of a
Motor Vehicle Use Map for each Administrative Unit. The East Reservoir Interdisciplinary Team (IDT)
completed a TAP under the requirements of this new final rule. The travel management decisions in the
East Reservoir EIS Record of Decision would be used in updating the Motor Vehicle Use Map.
Forest Plan Direction
The Kootenai National Forest Plan (KNFP) gives goals, objectives and standards for resource management
for the entire Forest in general and for specific subdivisions of the Forest called Management Areas (MAs).
Goals, objectives and standards that apply to NFS roads (roads wholly or partly within or adjacent to and
serving the NFS and which are necessary for the protection, administration and utilization of the NFS and
the use and development of its resources) are listed. A glossary to assist in the understanding of certain
terms used to describe or categorize roads is also included in the Transportation Section of the Project File.
Goals
Goals are KNFP management directions as expressed in broad general terms that describe a desired
condition to be achieved sometime in the future. General forestwide goals that apply to roads include the
following and may be found on page II-1 of the KNFP:
1) Construct the minimum number of roads necessary to permit the efficient removal of timber and
mineral resources. Construct and reconstruct roads only to the minimum standards necessary to
prevent soil loss, maintain water quality, minimize safety hazards for a reasonable and prudent Forest
user, and provide access for fire protection where needed to meet MA goals.
2) Maintain a balance of open and closed roads to continue present levels of motorized access, insure
big-game habitat security, insure grizzly bear security to meet recovery goals, and reduce road
maintenance costs.
Objectives
KNFP management objectives are concise statements of measurable results that respond to pre-established
goals and are classified in the KNFP by various resources. General forestwide objectives relating to roads
include the following and may be found on pages II-4, 5, 7 and 10 of the KNFP:
1) Roads, including capital investment roads (those built with specially appropriated funds) will be built to
access harvest areas on schedule (Timber).
2) The Forest Travel Planning (TAP) process will be used to review, evaluate and implement the goals
and standards of the MAs, with regard to roads, trails and motorized vehicle use (Recreation).
3) Ground disturbing activities such as road construction, road reconstruction, and timber harvest will be
accompanied by mitigating measures to prevent or reduce increases in sedimentation and stream channel
erosion. The soil and water conservation practices specified in Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 2509.22
and/or those activities that prevent or reduce stream sedimentation will be implemented. Examples
include: location of roadbeds out of stream bottoms, design of stream crossing structures to allow water to
freely pass, rock surfacing of roads at stream crossings, keeping equipment from operating in or alongside
streams and maintenance of roads to allow proper drainage (Soil and Water).
4) Each project plan for which the use of heavy equipment is required shall evaluate the effect of operating
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 395 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

that equipment on soil productivity. When it is determined that equipment operation is a hazard to soil
productivity, the project plan shall establish a standard for how much of the analysis area will be allocated
to skid trails, landings, temporary roads or similar areas of concentrated equipment travel. The standard
shall minimize the area allocated to those uses to the extent practical (Soil and Water).
5) Transportation facilities including roads, trails and bridges will be constructed and maintained to meet
the objectives of the KNFP (Roads and Trails).
Standards
The KNFP also contains standards that supplement National and Regional policies, standards and
guidelines found in FS Manuals, Handbooks and the Northern Regional Guide. These are also classified by
the various resource or function. Those pertaining to roads include the following and can be found in the
KNFP on pages II-21, 25 and 30:
1) The most cost effective logging system (including associated roads) that meets the MA standards will be
used (Timber).
2) Developmental activities will be rigorously examined to insure that the minimum number and length of
roads are constructed to the minimum standard necessary (Roads).
3) The Forest Travel Planning Process will be used to review, evaluate, and implement the goals and
standards of the MAs in the KNFP with regard to road, trail and area wide motorized vehicle use (OffRoad Vehicles).
The KNFP also contains specific standards for riparian areas, which include water features (e.g. perennial
streams, lakes, ponds) and the transition zone between the water feature and adjacent terrestrial habitat.
Riparian zones include areas at least 100’ from the aquatic feature and can be a greater distance depending
on recognizable soil characteristics and distinctive vegetative communities that require free and unbound
water. Riparian areas include intermittent streams or those which flow only as a direct response to rainfall
or snowmelt events, bogs, marshes, sloughs, potholes, mud flats, springs, wet meadows, seeps and
floodplains or side channels of perennial streams. Riparian area standards, which apply to roads, include the
following and may be found in the KNFP on pages II-30 and 33:
1) Improvements such as boat ramps, roads and trails that exist or are planned in riparian areas will
have surfaces designed to minimize sedimentation (e.g. paving, seeding, or gravelling).
2) Roads that parallel streams will be located at a distance determined by sediment transport models, and
outside the 100-year floodplain.
3) Active construction projects will be completed or treated before expected peak runoff times to minimize
sediment yield.
4) When funds for road maintenance are limited, roads and drainage structures in riparian zones will be a
top priority.
5) Necessary stream course crossings will insure fish passage, non-erosive water velocities and channel
stability and insure erosion control on cuts, fills and road surfaces.
6) Eliminate or replace existing structures that are identified as fish barriers or sediment sources.
7) Roads will be located to avoid key riparian habitats such as wallows, bogs and wet meadows unless there
is no reasonable alternative. In any case, as much screening, cover and distance as possible will be
retained.
8) Road closures will be used to protect riparian habitat and values.
Other Regulatory Framework
Factors of consideration for how roads relate to other resources follow the legally mandated processes of
the Endangered Species Act, the Clean Water Act, State-Adopted Best Management Practices, the Clean
Air Act, the NFS Land Resource Management Planning Rule and relevant administrative policy. The IDT
would work to develop opportunities that meet the KNFP goals and standards as they relate to the
transportation system.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 396 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

Applicable Laws, Regulations and Policies
The East Reservoir analysis area has some unique restrictions due to the presence of a grizzly bear
reoccurring use area outside the recovery zones (BORZ). The following are some laws, regulations and
policies associated with these characteristics.
Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (IGBC) Direction
In 1998, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) issued an Interim Access Management Rule Set to guide
motorized access decisions for the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem (NCDE) Grizzly Bear Recovery
Areas. Standards for open road densities, core areas, and habitat security were established that superseded
management area direction for road density standards and uses.
Grizzly bear reoccurring use areas outside the recovery zones (BORZ polygons) have been identified
(Wittinger et al. 2002). The FWS has identified three factors falling under FS jurisdiction that contribute to
“taking” (ESA Section 9) of grizzly bears that apply in these areas. They are access management, food
attractants (human and livestock food storage and garbage) and livestock presence. The proposed project
includes portions of the Tobacco BORZ.
The FWS, using baseline information from Johnson (2003), established access management desired
conditions for areas outside the BORZ, with reoccurring grizzly bear use. The baseline conditions for access
management in the Tobacco BORZ polygon are 2.0 mi/mi2 of linear open road density and 3.0 mi/mi2 of
linear total road density.
Access Amendment
In November, 2011, The Kootenai National Forest (KNF) adopted the Addendum to KNFP Appendix 8
which replaces the KNFP standard for linear open road density with the Motorized Access Management
Direction. This direction provides standards for both Bear Management Units (BMUs) and BORZ
occupancy areas.
Under Alternative 2, the East Reservoir Project has a cumulative reduction of 4.1 miles of linear total road
during operation and 7.1 miles following implementation in the Tobacco BORZ area.
Similarly, for Alternatives 3, the East Reservoir Project has a cumulative reduction of 6.4 miles of linear
total road during operation and 7.9 miles following implementation and Alternative 4 has a cumulative
reduction of 5.7 miles during with 7.9 miles following implementation.
Measurement Indicators
Road miles are used to measure and quantify all facets of the transportation analysis.

REFERENCE CONDITIONS/HISTORICAL REFERENCE
The first travel routes in the East Reservoir analysis area were skid trails and railroads associated with the
Warland Lumber Company and later the Baird & Harper Lumber Company developed between 1906 and
1926.
Timber harvesting activities and recreational uses resulted in other road and trail development within the
analysis area from that time through the 1990s.
Existing Condition
Within the East Reservoir travel analysis area, there are approximately 443 miles of existing road (mixed
ownership). This total includes private (65 miles), State (29 miles), other federal (Corps of Engineers/BPA,
10 miles), undetermined on NFS lands (18 miles), and National Forest Service (320 miles) jurisdictions.
Table 3.119 displays information on the existing characteristics of the current East Reservoir road system.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 397 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

Table 3.119 - East Reservoir Road System Existing Characteristics
EAST RESERVOIR ANALYSIS AREA ROADS

MILES

Total Miles of All Roads In The East Reservoir Travel Analysis Area
National Forest System Roads (NFSR)
State Roads/Highway 37
COE/BPA Roads
Private Roads
Undetermined Roads on Forest Service Land

439.16
324.25
27.89
11.58
55.34
20.11

NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM ROADS – EXISTING ROAD STANDARDS and CHARACTERISTICS
EXISTING ROAD MANAGEMENT

NFSR Restricted Yearlong
NFSR Open Yearlong
NFSR Restricted Seasonally
Undetermined Roads Closed Yearlong

170.58
126.66
27.02
5.04

FUNCTIONAL CLASS

Arterial
Collector
Local

22.81
111.00
190.44
OBJECTIVE MAINTENANCE LEVELS

Maintenance Level 5
Maintenance Level 4
Maintenance Level 3
Maintenance Level 2
Maintenance Level 1

0
0.98
102.94
19.63
200.70
ROAD SURFACING

Native
Aggregate
Bituminous

232.40
89.86
1.99
CRITICAL TRAFFIC

Pickup Truck
Log Truck
Lowboy
Motorhome

2.24
242.67
62.59
0.79

Open Road Densities (ORDs)
The MAs on FS lands in the East Reservoir analysis area consist of MA 2, 3, 5,6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17,
18, 18og, 19, 24 and 30. Table 3.120 describes the ORDs of these management areas.
Table 3.120 - Management Area Open Road Densities
MA

ACRES

SQUARE
MILES

OPEN
ROADS
(miles)

SEASONAL ROAD
RESTRICTIONS
(miles)

CURRENT
ORD

ORD during
RESTRICTED
SEASON

KNFP ORD
STANDARDS

2
2og
3
3og
5
5og
6
10
10og
11

1,552
101
1,544
2
1,220
51
126
4,008
284
8,683

2.43
0.16
2.41
0.003
1.91
0.08
0.20
6.26
0.44
13.57

0
0
0
0
1.83
0
0.87
0.07
0
26.08

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.60
0
14.89

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
4.42
0.27
0.00
3.02

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
4.42
0.01
0.00
1.92

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
12/1-4/30
12/1-4/30
12/1-4/30

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 398 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

MA

ACRES

SQUARE
MILES

OPEN
ROADS
(miles)

SEASONAL ROAD
RESTRICTIONS
(miles)

CURRENT
ORD

ORD during
RESTRICTED
SEASON

KNFP ORD
STANDARDS

12
13
15
16
17
18
18og
19
19og
24
24og
30
Private

21,061
7,894
20,679
2,651
2,848
2,198
135
2,370
62
1,105
5
6
13,962

32.91
12.33
32.31
4.14
4.45
3.43
0.21
3.70
0.10
1.73
0.01
0.01
21.82

14.15
6.82
40.86
5.89
5.30
1.55
0.86
1.05
0
0.57
0
0.04
20.72

5.12
0.98
0.32
1.53
0
0
0
1.00
0
0.09
0
0.00
1.48

0.59
0.63
1.27
1.79
1.19
0.45
4.10
0.55
0.00
0.38
0.00
4.00
1.02

0.43
0.55
1.26
1.42
1.19
0.45
4.10
0.28
0.00
0.33
0.00
4.00
0.95

0.75
NA
3
3
3
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

In MA 11, the KNFP management direction states that motorized access is generally not permitted during
the big game wintering period from December 1 through April 30 (KNFP Vol. 1, p. III-45). Currently, there
are approximately 6.27 miles of road restricted yearlong in MA 11 and 26.06 miles of road open yearlong
and 15.06 miles of seasonally open roads in the analysis area. The open roads are needed for yearlong
access to private lands, administrative sites, utilities and roads that have traditionally remained open for
access to higher elevations. KNFP direction states that while motorized access is generally not permitted
during important wintering periods, roads that have traditionally been used as snowmobile routes to higher
elevations may remain open unless it is determined that continued snowmobile use limits use of the area by
big game.
In MA 13, there are currently 8.31 miles of open or seasonally open roads in the East Reservoir analysis
area. All of these are main collector or arterial roads.
Physical Condition of the Roads
The overall condition of the existing NFS roads in the East Reservoir analysis area is satisfactory. BMPs
have been performed on portions of the main roads, but have not been completed for the full length of most
roads. The needed BMPs include adding culverts to relieve long ditch sections, installing additional surface
drainage structures such as drain dips and surface water deflectors, and other minor work items. These
items include cleaning ditches and catch basins, reshaping out-sloped roads, and placing geo-fabric and
aggregate to bridge wet areas on roads.
Road maintenance is regularly performed on NFS roads with an objective maintenance level of 2 or higher.
Brushing, road grading, slough removal and ditch cleaning are part of the regular maintenance schedule for
these roads. Occasionally, the maintenance crew will perform BMPs. This usually involves adding culverts,
surface water deflectors or drain dips to correct obvious drainage problems. Some of the local roads in the
analysis area have recently been used for timber sales and brought up to current BMPs.
The only maintenance scheduled for roads that are restricted yearlong is to inspect the road for drainage
problems.
Efficiency of the Road System
The existing road system in the East Reservoir analysis area has been evaluated for road necessity. Many
roads have already been treated to apply State of Montana BMPs to minimize sediment transport. The IDT
determined that additional road storage until the roads are needed and road decommissioning where roads
are no longer needed would result in the minimum road system needed to meet objectives of the KNFP.
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 399 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

Adding Existing Roads to the National Forest System
During the analysis process, several roads were found in the East Reservoir analysis area for which the
purpose and need was undetermined. These roads cross NFS lands, but for various reasons, had never been
included as a part of the NFSR system. Inventory of the roads for the East Reservoir TAP revealed several
forest roads that should have been listed as NFS roads, but were not designated as NFSR in the INFRA
database or the Transportation Atlas when it was completed.
The IDT analyzed and evaluated any and all resource needs for each existing road, whether they were NFS
roads or “Undetermined Roads”. Any obvious skid trails or illegally developed roads, for which the FS
already has the authority to eliminate traffic, were not analyzed, or considered as roads. Twenty-seven
undetermined roads totaling approximately 13.5 miles were determined as needed for the long-term
transportation system and are recommended to become NFS roads in Alternative 2 and 3.
Placing Roads into Intermittent Stored Service
The analysis for Alternative 2 identified 17 roads (16 miles) while Alternative 3 identified 23 roads (17.6
miles), which would not be needed for resource access during the next 10 to 20 years. All of these roads
(except for 4885C, 4885H, 4885I) are currently restricted yearlong. The IDT recommends putting them in
intermittent stored service to reduce the risk these roads have to watersheds and to reduce road maintenance
costs.
Road Management
The existing road system in the East Reservoir analysis area has a good balance of open and restricted
roads. Several major roads provide adequate access through the area. Many of the spur roads in the upper
elevations of the analysis area are restricted yearlong.
Desired Future Conditions
The minimum necessary transportation system of NFS Roads has been identified and managed so:
• There is safe and efficient access for Forest Service land management activities.
• There is suitable and safe access for recreation and other public access values.
• Threatened, endangered, sensitive, and management indicator species habitat needs, as defined by
research and science, have been met.
• Sediment, water quality, and water quantity effects from roads to streams, riparian areas, and wetlands
have been reduced.
• Road maintenance costs have been reduced.
• The travel plan within the East Reservoir analysis area is easily understood and enforceable.
Actions needed to achieve the optimal road system include:
• Evaluate and determine the minimum road system necessary for resource and public access.
• Decommission unneeded roads or convert them to other uses, such as trails.
• Bring roads up to BMP standards.
• Regularly monitor all roads for maintenance needs.
• Manage each road according to the road management objective.
With roads identified to be placed into intermittent stored service, and numerous roads needing BMP
improvements, it is apparent that the existing road system in the East Reservoir analysis area does not meet
our desired future condition. The following proposed alternatives and associated effects will address the
needed strategies to bring the roads in the analysis area closer to the optimal road system.
Develop a Travel Plan
The East Reservoir TAP provided the framework for travel management planning. This framework
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 400 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

identified opportunities and set priorities for motorized use within the analysis area. The clear identification
of roads, trails and areas for motor vehicle use would enhance management of NFS lands, sustain natural
resource values through more effective management of motor vehicle use, enhance opportunities for
motorized recreation experiences on NFS lands, address needs for access to private lands, and preserve
areas of opportunity on each National Forest for non-motorized travel and experiences. During the East
Reservoir planning process, KNF specialists identified a variety of resource concerns related to travel
management including conflicts between recreational uses, and impacts to wildlife, fish and water quality
from motorized travel, and economic impact to the community. These concerns were captured in the East
Reservoir TAP as “Risks and Benefits” (TAP page 13 through 15).
The alternatives being considered identify specific levels and seasons of use for all NFS roads within the
analysis area. All of the action alternatives would allow motorized access to dispersed campsites via routes
that terminate in dispersed campsites as well as within 300 feet of most designated system roads and
motorized trails where slope, vegetation type and resource conditions would permit such use without
causing unacceptable levels of damage.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
To meet the desired future condition, all action alternatives propose similar activities to implement. The
direct and indirect effects would also be similar, but differing by quantity. Therefore, the effects will first be
analyzed by proposed activities to achieve the optimal road system and then compared by alternatives.
ALTERNATIVE 1 (No-Action)
Direct and Indirect Effects
If the strategies to address the Purpose and Need in Chapter 1 are not realized, the desired future condition
of the East Reservoir analysis area would not be met. All of the proposed road management actions were
developed to reduce risks and effects and to achieve the optimal road system. If these actions were not
accomplished, the road system would continue to generate risks and effects to water quality, wildlife
security and transportation efficiency.
ALTERNATIVE 2 and 3
Direct and Indirect Effects
Road Decommissioning
Routes proposed for decommissioning are those roads that are no longer needed and can be removed from
service. Removing these roads from service would improve watershed conditions and maintenance dollars
would not be needed. These roads, proposed for decommissioning, are NFS roads and undetermined roads.
The undetermined roads are roads that exist but are not part of the NFS of roads. See Table 3.121 for miles
of road to be decommissioned by alternative.
Intermittent Stored Service
Roads continue to affect water quality and wildlife security, and incur maintenance costs even when
restricted yearlong. Placing roads that are not needed for resource management purposes for the next ten to
20 years into intermittent stored service can reduce these effects through implementation of Water Quality
BMP’s. Treatment activities for intermittent stored service may include removing culverts, restoring stream
crossings and natural drainage patterns, out-sloping the road surface, installing water bars, and seeding and
fertilizing the roadbed. Each road would be stored in accordance with the KNF road storage policy that is
adopted and in place at the time this document is signed. The road prism would remain on the landscape.
Placing a road into intermittent stored service allows the watershed risks posed by the road to be minimized
and maintenance costs deferred while the road remains on the NFSR system for future use.
Placing 16 miles for Alternative 2 and 17.62 miles for Alternative 3, into intermittent stored service would
reduce road maintenance costs, reduce road-related effects to water quality and would help provide for
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 401 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

wildlife security.
Additions to the National Forest Road System
The undetermined roads that are proposed as additions to the transportation system are, in fact, existing
forest roads that have been shown through a roads analysis to be needed for the protection, administration
and utilization of the NFS and the use and development of its resources. The effects of not having these
needed roads as NFS roads include the lack of any authorized funding to maintain the road. These existing
roads provide the most efficient location for access to timber resources and recreational sites. If they were
decommissioned, there would be no feasible access to these resources. Because these roads are already on
the landscape and generating risk and effects to other resources, adding them to the system would not
increase any of these effects. In fact, adding them would allow for funded road maintenance and
management that would reduce these existing risks and effects.
Adding these undetermined roads to the NFSR system would achieve the minimum road system necessary
for efficient access to manage the resource and recreational opportunities of the East Reservoir analysis
area. This action would directly and beneficially affect the efficiency and practicality of the transportation
system. See Table 3.121 for miles of road to be added to the system by alternative.
Table 3.121 lists the proposed road management for the alternatives. The direct and indirect effects incurred
by road management proposals in Alternatives 2 and 3 are positive and beneficial to the transportation
system, the watersheds and wildlife resources.
Table 3.121 – Comparing Road Related Actions by Alternatives (miles)
PROPOSED ROAD MANAGEMENT ACTIONS

Roads to be included in Cost Share Agreement with MT DNRC
Newly Constructed Roads Added to NFSR
Temporary Roads to be Constructed
Roads Proposed For Intermittent Stored Service
NFS Roads Proposed For Decommissioning
Undetermined Roads To Be Added To The National Forest Road System
Undetermined Roads To Be Decommissioned
Trails: Currently Motorized Trails Converted to Non-Motorized Trails
Road Access Changes, from Seasonal Restrictions to Open Yearlong.
Road Access Changes, From Closed Yearlong to Closed Seasonally

ALT 1

ALT 2

ALT 3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

29.72
9.25
4.26
16.00
5.93
13.50
6.24
36.56
1.79
0

29.72
8.06
4.05
17.62
5.93
13.50
6.48
26.89
1.64
3.70

Cumulative Effects
No measurable increase in long-term negative effects would result from the implementation of any
proposed or on-going road management activities. It is, however, recognized that most road management
activities that provide long-term benefits also create some minor and acceptable short-term negative effects.
All current, proposed and foreseeable road-related activities would have beneficial cumulative effects to the
transportation system, wildlife, aquatic and recreational resources. These activities would also reduce the
risks and effects created by past road construction and management.
Timber Harvest and Associated Activities
Timber sales typically require needed road improvements in order to move a road into BMP compliance.
Precommercial thinning and prescribed burning do not generally require road improvement work because of
the dispersed, short-term, or low impact nature of these activities on forest roads. Vegetation management
activities, overall, have a beneficial effect on the road system.
Cattle Grazing
Cattle on higher volume roads continue to be a safety concern. However, cattle grazing does not have a
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 402 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
TRANSPORTATION

measurable impact to road function.
Noxious Weed Treatment
Traffic continues to spread noxious weeds along roads. The treatment program is effective along roadways,
but must continue to prevent new infestations from developing along roadways. This program has beneficial
effects to the road system.
Fire Suppression
Fire suppression and related activities would occur in the future. Wildfires that escape initial attack could
impact the road system in the short-term. Roads that are impassable prior to a fire start may be opened with
heavy equipment. This can cause short-term impacts to the roads. Following the suppression actions, these
roads would be restored to a condition that allows proper drainage.
Road Management
Deferred and regular, scheduled maintenance activities continue to maintain or improve road conditions
within the analysis area.
Public Use
Various roads in the analysis area are heavily used during the summer and fall months. Excessive speeds
and braking activity cause corrugation and potholing in the gravel surface. Narrow road prisms can cause
damage to edges of roads as traffic is forced onto road shoulders when vehicles meet. Traffic during wet
periods may cause rutting and create surface drainage problems. Firewood gathering can plug road ditches
and/or culverts when this activity is conducted outside the terms of the firewood permit. Other public use
activities occurring throughout the year have a negligible effect to the road system. Annual maintenance of
main roads is scheduled specifically to address high public use.
Recreation Maintenance
Maintenance of recreational facilities generally consists of removal of blown down timber, brush removal
and minor drainage repair of trails or other recreational facilities. This activity has very little impact to the
road system.
Special Uses
Special use permits (road use, water lines, utility lines, irrigation improvements, etc.) and outfitter/guide
permits have not been identified as having a measurable effect on the road system. These activities have a
low impact to road resources due to their dispersed nature. Cumulatively, there would be no effect.
Activities on Private Land
New residential construction would increase traffic on forest roads. These increases are gradual over time
and not generally impactive unless hauling over wet roads occurs during periods of construction.
Overall, the previously described activities would have a neutral or beneficial impact to the road system.
Management activities that require heavy use of roadways collect monies for maintenance activities that
improve road function and reduce road-related impacts to other resources. Other activities are low impact
and dispersed in nature and outside of wet periods, generally have very little impact on road systems.

CONSISTENCY with REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The process of this analysis and the road management proposals listed in this document comply with all
laws, executive orders, Forest Service directives, memorandums of understandings, and with the current
KNFP goals, objectives, guidelines and standards.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 403 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

ECONOMICS INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
The management of the Kootenai National Forest (KNF) has the potential to affect local economies. People
and economies are an important part of the ecosystem. Use of resources and recreational visitation to the
KNF generate employment and income in the surrounding communities and counties and generate revenues
that are returned to the federal treasury.
This section presents concepts used to delineate an affected area and methods used to analyze the economic
effects of the project, including the project feasibility, financial efficiency and economic impacts. Project
feasibility and financial efficiency relate to the costs and revenues of doing the action. Economic impacts
relate to how the action affects the local economy in the surrounding area.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
The preparation of NEPA documents is guided by CEQ regulations for implementing NEPA [40 CFR 15001508]. NEPA requires that consequences to the human environment be analyzed and disclosed. The extent
to which these environmental factors are analyzed and discussed is related to the nature of public comments
received during scoping. NEPA does not require a monetary benefit-cost analysis. If an agency prepares an
economic efficiency analysis, then one must be prepared and displayed for all alternatives [40 CFR
1502.23].
OMB Circular A-94 promotes efficient resource use through well-informed decision-making by the Federal
Government. It suggests agencies prepare an efficiency analysis as part of project decision-making. It
prescribes present net value as the criterion for an efficiency analysis.
The development of timber sale programs and individual timber sales is guided by agency direction found
in Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2430. Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 2409.18 guides the financial and, if
applicable, economic efficiency analysis for timber sales.

ANALYSIS AREA
The analysis area for the efficiency analysis is the project area. All costs and revenues associated with the
project decision were included.
Timber management activities within the analysis area have the potential to impact the economic conditions
of local communities and counties. To estimate the potential effect on jobs and income, a zone of influence
(or impact area) was delineated. Counties were selected based on commuting data suggesting a functioning
economy and where the timber is likely to be processed (log flows). Recent data on log flows from the KNF
was provided by the University of Montana’s Bureau of Business and Economic Research. The zone of
influence for this project is comprised of Lincoln, Sanders, and Flathead counties in Montana and Boundary
and Bonner counties in Idaho.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
The combination of small towns and rural settings, along with people from a wide variety of backgrounds,
provide a diverse social environment for the geographical region around the KNF. Local residents pursue a
wide variety of life-styles, but many share a common theme, an orientation to the outdoors and natural
resources. This is reflected in both vocational and recreational pursuits including employment in logging
and milling operations, outfitter and guide businesses, hiking, hunting, fishing, camping and many other
recreational activities.
Timber, tourism and agricultural industries are important to the economy of local areas. Despite the
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 404 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

common concern for, and dependence on, natural resources within the local communities, social attitudes
vary widely with respect to their management. Local residents hold a broad spectrum of perspectives and
preferences ranging from complete preservation to maximum development and utilization of natural
resources.
A comprehensive socio-economic analysis was recently completed for the KNF. See the document “Social
and Economic Systems: Conditions and Trends” (available at http://www.fs.usda.gov/ Internet/FSE_
DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5345935.pdf) (Russell et al, 2006). This document provides a description of the
employment, income and social composition of the counties comprising the analysis area and the impact on
counties from management of the KNF. This analysis indicates the counties within the analysis area are
affected by timber management on the forest. In addition, the draft Environmental Impact Statement for the
Draft Forest Plan described the affected environment for the planning area and the effect of forest
management on the local communities and economy. See pages 397 – 401 of the draft Environmental
Impact Statement (USDA Forest Service 2011).
There is local demand for stumpage from the KNF, as evidenced by the amount of timber sales sold on the
Kootenai in recent years. In addition, recent analysis indicates timber processing capacity is well above
timber supply for the analysis area (Sorenson et al. 2012). Most sales offered have been sold with strong
competition. The outlook for the timber market is to improve over the next several years, with modest
improvement in 2013 and more substantial improvements in 2014 and beyond (Sorenson et al. 2012).
Methodology

Three measures are appropriate for the economic analysis: project feasibility, financial efficiency, and
economic impacts. These measures are described including methodologies.
Project feasibility is used to determine if a project is feasible – will it sell, given current market conditions.
It relies on the Region 1 Transaction Evidence Appraisal (TEA) System and delivered log prices. The TEA
uses regression analysis of recently sold timber sales to predict bid prices. The most recent appraisal and
feasibility model for the area of interest was used to estimate the stumpage value (expected high bid
resulting from the timber sale auction) for the timber project. The estimated stumpage value for each
alternative was compared to the base rates (revenues considered essential to cover regeneration plus
minimum return to the federal treasury) for that alternative. The project is considered to be feasible if the
estimated stumpage value exceeds the base rates. If the feasibility analysis indicates that the project is not
feasible (estimated stumpage value is less than the base rates), the project may need to be modified. The
infeasibility indicates an increased risk that the project may not attract bids and may not be implemented.
Financial efficiency provides information relevant to the future financial position of the program if the
project is implemented. Financial efficiency considers anticipated costs and revenues that are part of Forest
Service (FS) monetary transactions. Present net value (PNV) is used as an indicator of financial efficiency
and presents one tool to be used in conjunction with many other factors in the decision-making process.
PNV combines benefits and costs that occur at different times and discounts them into an amount that is
equivalent to all economic activity in a single year. A positive PNV indicates that the alternative is
financially efficient.
Many of the costs and benefits associated with a project are not quantifiable. For example, the benefits to
wildlife from prescribed burning to stimulate browse and reduced fuel loadings, are not quantifiable. These
costs and benefits are described qualitatively, in the individual resource sections of this document. Title 40,
Code of Federal Regulations for NEPA (40 CFR 1502.23) indicates “For the purposes of complying with
the Act, the weighing of the merits and drawbacks of the various alternatives need not be displayed in a
monetary cost-benefit analysis and should not be when there are qualitative considerations.”
Management of the forest is expected to yield positive benefits, but not necessarily financial benefits. Costs
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 405 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

for various vegetation, recreation, wildlife, road and burning activities are based on recent experienced costs
and professional estimates. Non-harvest related costs are included in the PNV analysis, but they are not
included in appraised timber value.
Economic impacts are used to evaluate potential direct, indirect and cumulative effects on the economy.
Economic impacts are estimated using input-output analysis. Input-output analysis is a means of examining
relationships within an economy, both between businesses and between businesses and final consumers. It
captures all monetary market transactions for consumption in a given time period. The resulting
mathematical representation allows one to examine the effect of a change in one or several economic
activities on an entire economy, all else constant. This examination is called impact analysis. IMPLAN
translates changes in final demand for goods and services into resulting changes in economic effects, such
as labor income and employment of the affected area’s economy. The IMPLAN modeling system allows
the user to build regional economic models of one or more counties for a particular year. The regional
model for this analysis used the 2009 IMPLAN data.
The economic impact effects are measured by estimating the direct jobs and labor income generated by the
1) processing of the timber volume from the project, and 2) dollars resulting from any other activities of the
project into the local economy affected by the treatments proposed. The direct employment and labor
income benefit employees and their families and therefore directly affect the local economy. Additional
indirect and induced, multiplier effects (ripple effects) are generated by the direct activities. Together the
direct and multiplier effects comprise the total economic impacts to the local economy. The data used to
estimate the direct effects from timber harvest is information provided by University of Montana’s Bureau
of Business and Economic Research. The economic effects tied to restoration activities and the multiplier
effects (of both timber harvest and restoration activities) were estimated using IMPLAN.
Potential limitations of these estimates are the time lag in IMPLAN data and the data intensive nature of the
input-output model. Significant changes in economic sectors since the latest data for IMPLAN have been
adjusted using information from the University of Montana’s Bureau of Business and Economic Research.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Project Feasibility
The estimation of project feasibility was based on a transaction-evidence and delivered log price appraisal,
which took into account logging system, timber species and quality, volume removed per acre, lumber
market trends, costs for slash treatment, and the cost of specified roads, temporary roads and road
maintenance. The estimated high bid was compared to base rates (revenues considered essential to cover
regeneration plus minimum return to the federal treasury). The estimated high bid and base rates for each
alternative are displayed in Table 3.122. Given the predicted high bids and the base rates, all alternatives are
feasible.
The predicted high bid is the basis for the timber revenue estimate. The actual timber value would depend
on the market when the timber is sold, and may be higher or lower than the predicted high bid. The analysis
included a relatively low Western Wood Products Association (WWPA) average value per thousand board
feet (MBF).
Financial Efficiency
The financial efficiency analysis is specific to the timber harvest and ecosystem management activities
associated with the alternatives (as directed in FSM 2400, Timber Management and guidance found in the
FSH 2409.18). Costs for sale preparation, sale administration, regeneration and other activities are included.
All costs, timing and amounts were developed by the specialists on the project’s interdisciplinary team. The
expected revenue for each alternative is the corresponding predicted high bid from the transaction evidence
and delivered log price appraisal. The present net value (PNV) was calculated using Quicksilver, a program
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 406 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

for economic analysis of long-term, on-the-ground resource management projects. A four percent discount
rate was used over the 12-year project lifespan (2013-2024). For more information on the values or costs,
see the project file.
This analysis is not intended to be a comprehensive benefit-cost or present net value analysis that
incorporates a monetary expression of all known market and non-market benefits and costs that is generally
used when economic efficiency is the sole or primary criterion upon which a decision is made. Many of the
values associated with natural resource management are best handled apart from, but in conjunction with, a
more limited benefit-cost framework. These values are discussed throughout this document, for each
resource area.
Changes to resources like fisheries and wildlife habitats, and recreation are further discussed in the
corresponding sections of this DEBE. These resources will not be described in this section in financial or
economic terms. The economic efficiency analysis included costs for trail construction, prescribed burning
outside the timber sale to reduce fuel loading and improve wildlife habitat, and thinning. There is no
generated revenue from these activities. These activities would be funded by some means other than the
timber sale.
Planning costs (NEPA) were not included in any of the alternatives since they are sunk costs at the point of
alternative selection.
Table 3.122 summarizes the project feasibility and financial efficiency for each alternative. Alternative 1 is
not listed, as all values would be zero (no costs or revenues). The no-action alternative would not harvest,
plant trees, enhance wildlife habitat, implement BMPs on haul routes, return fire to the landscape or take
other restorative actions and, therefore, incur no costs. Because all costs of the project are not related to the
timber sale, two PNVs were calculated. One PNV indicates the financial efficiency of the timber sale,
including all costs and revenues associated with the timber harvest and required design criteria. A second
PNV includes all costs for each alternative, including other activities that are non-timber harvest related
(burning to reduce fuels, burning to improve wildlife habitat, trail construction, etc.).
Table 3.122 indicates that Alternative 3 has the highest PNV and is financially efficient for the timber
harvest and required design criteria. Alternative 2 is also financially efficient for the timber harvest and
required design criteria, but with a slightly lower PNV than Alternative 3. All alternatives are financially
inefficient when the non-timber harvest activities are included in the PNV. Alternative 3 also has the
highest PNV for the harvest plus non-timber harvest activities. For the Corps of Engineers alternatives,
Alternative 3 has the highest PNV for both the timber harvest and the non-harvest activities.
A reduction of financial PNV in any alternative as compared to the most efficient solution is a component
of the economic trade-off, or opportunity cost, of achieving that alternative. As indicated earlier, many of
the values associated with natural resource management are non-market benefits. These benefits should be
considered in conjunction with the financial efficiency information presented here. These non-market
values are discussed in the various resource sections found in this document.
Table 3.122 Project Feasibility and Financial Efficiency Summary (2011 dollars)
CATEGORY

MEASURE

Timber Harvest Information
Volume(CCF)

Acres Harvested
Total Sawtimber Harvested
Base Rates ($/CCF)
Predicted High Bid ($/CCF)

ALT. 2

8,845
78,761
$23.53
$55.25

ALT. 3

7,782
67,987
$25.94
$56.47

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 407 of 410

COE
ALT 2

261
1,848
$24.80
$74.68

COE
ALT 3

261
2,088
$24.80
$74.51

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

CATEGORY

MEASURE

ALT. 2

Total Revenue
Timber Harvest and
Required Design Criteria
Timber Harvest and Other
Planned Activities

ALT. 3

COE
ALT 2

COE
ALT 3

$4,351,545

$3,839,225

$138,008

$155,576

PNV

$200,272

$235,143

$42,248

$47,339

PNV

-$2,589,535

-$2,432,304

-$57,370

-$28,689

When evaluating trade-offs, the use of efficiency measures is one tool used by the decision-maker in
making the decision. Many things cannot be quantified, such as effects on wildlife, impacts on local
economies, and restoration of watersheds and vegetation. The decision-maker takes many factors into
account in making the decision.
Economic Impact Effects (Jobs and Labor Income)
Timber production from this proposed KNF project would have direct and indirect effects on local jobs and
labor income. The KNF used an input-output model, IMPLAN (Impact Analysis for Planning) to estimate
effects on employment and labor income within the zone of influence (impact area).
For timber harvest, the direct employment and labor income response coefficients (e.g. jobs and labor
income per million cubic feet) were derived by the University of Montana’s Bureau of Business and
Economic Research. The indirect and induced multiplier effects were estimated using the IMPLAN model
for the economic impact area.
For restoration and reforestation activities, the direct, indirect and induced effects were derived using
IMPLAN. The resulting direct, indirect and induced employment and labor income coefficients have been
incorporated into a spreadsheet developed by the Regional Economist for the USFS, Northern Region.
The analysis calculated the jobs and labor income associated with timber harvest and other resource
activities. In order to estimate jobs and labor income associated with timber harvest, the timber harvest
levels were proportionally broken out by product type with an estimated 80% of the sale going towards
sawtimber and 20% to post and poles. In order to estimate jobs and labor income associated with
reforestation and restoration activities, expenditures for these activities were developed for each alternative
(see Table 3.123).
Table 3.123 - Reforestation and Other Restoration Activity Expenditures by Alternative
over a 20-yr period (2012 dollars) (does not include overhead costs)
ACTIVITY

ALT. 2

ALT. 3

Trail Construction
Road Storage/Decommissioning
Weed Spraying
Botanical Monitoring and Inventory
Precommercial Thinning and Pruning
Prescribed Fire
Site prep and planting
Grapple Pile Fuels
Total

0
$85,695
$3,308
$8,000
$793,941
$2,924,840
$875,750
0
$4,691,534

$2,000
$93,570
$3,696
$8,000
$687,741
$2,875,960
$767,700
0
$4,438,667

COE ALT. 2

COE ALT. 3

0
0
0
0
0
$104,550
0
0
$104,550

0
0
0
0
0
$69,870
0
$3,680
$73,550

Table 3.124 displays both direct and total estimates for employment (part and full-time) and labor income
that may be attributed to each alternative. Alternative 1 is not listed, as all values would be zero, with no
jobs or labor income generated. Since the expenditures occur over a twenty-year period, the estimated
impacts of jobs and labor income would be spread out over the life of the project. These are not new jobs or
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 408 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
ECONOMICS

income, but rather jobs and income that can be attributed to this project.
Table 3.124 – Total Employment and Income Over the Life of the Project (2010 dollars)
ANALYSIS ITEM

Direct Employment (persons)
Total Employment (persons)
Direct Labor Income
Total Labor Income

ALT. 2

403
629
$15,777,000
$23,987,000

ALT. 3

363
560
$13,951,000
$21,113000

COE ALT. 2

9
15
$366,000
$558,000

COE ALT. 3

9
14
$375,000
$582,000

Definitions:
1. Employment is the total full- and part-time wage, salaried, and self-employed jobs in the region.
2. Labor income includes the wages, salaries and benefits of workers who are paid by employers and income paid to proprietors.

Estimates in Table 3.124 indicate that Alternative 2 would maintain the highest number of jobs and labor
income with total employment at 629 persons and total labor income nearly $24 million dollars. Alternative
3 maintains fewer jobs and labor income. Alternative 1 maintains no jobs or income because there are no
activities associated with this alternative.
Activities on the Corps of Engineers land maintains about the same number of jobs under all alternatives
except alternative 1. Alternative 2 maintains 15 jobs and $558,000 in total labor income.
The analysis assumes the timber volume processed would occur within the KNF zone of influence.
However, if some of the timber were processed outside the region, then a portion of the jobs and income
would be lost by this regional economy.
Cumulative Effects

Management of the KNF has an impact on the economies of local counties. However, there are many
additional factors that influence and affect the local economies, including changes to industry technologies,
management of adjacent national forests and private lands, economic growth, and international trade.
Ongoing and reasonably foreseeable projects that may affect local economies include the following:
• The sale of timber on private lands near the analysis area would have a positive impact on the local
economy, maintaining jobs and labor income in the surrounding counties.
• Large-scale mining activities take place near the analysis area. Most significant for the economy is the
Troy Mine and the proposed Montanore Mine. The Troy Mine continues to bring jobs and labor income
to Lincoln County. Possible development of the Montanore Mine would bring a significant amount of
jobs and labor income to Lincoln County.
• Private timber lands owned by Plum Creek Timber Company are either for sale or sold and actively
being subdivided in the zone of influence. Real estate transactions could potentially be a significant
short-term contributor to the local economy, though the loss of natural resource management activities
associated with these lands would have a negative impact to the economy.
• The analysis area is very popular for recreation activities such as hiking, hunting, camping, horseback
riding and berry picking. These activities generate income in the local economy through local and nonlocal participants who purchase goods and services in the area.
• For the East Reservoir project, the jobs and labor income associated with timber harvest, restoration
and reforestation activities in the action alternatives, would contribute to the stability of the local
economy during the life of the project and also for the future.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 409 of 410

CHAPTER 3

EAST RESERVOIR PROJECT
OTHER DISCLOSURES

OTHER REQUIRED DISCLOSURES
NEPA at 40 CFR 1502.25(a) directs “to the fullest extent possible, agencies shall prepare draft
environmental impact statements concurrently with and integrated with …other environmental review laws
and executive orders.”
Effects of Alternatives on Social Groups
Executive Order 12898 ordered federal agencies to identify and address the issue of environmental justice
(i.e. adverse human health and environmental effects of agency programs that disproportionately impact
minority and low income populations). Based on experience with similar projects on the Libby Ranger
District, none of the alternatives would disproportionately affect minority or low-income individuals,
Native American Indians, women, or civil rights. The implementation of this project is expected to provide
job opportunities in communities such as Libby, Montana. Small or minority-owned businesses would have
the opportunity to compete for some of the work, including timber sales, non-commercial thinning, and
fuels reduction projects.
Effects on Floodplains and Wetlands
Floodplain areas constitute all of the wetlands in the analysis area and are protected as RHCA’s. Wetlands
may occur in the form of seeps, springs, and small bogs; however, the exact locations of all these have not
been identified prior to unit layout. These seeps, springs, and small bogs are not evident through aerial
photography and are probably less than one-quarter acre in size. These areas would be protected by
adhering to the Montana Stream Management Zone regulations, Kootenai National Forest Riparian Area
Guidelines as amended by INFS (USDA, Forest Service, 1987), Best Management Practices and Section
404 of the Clean Water Act (33 CFR 323). See the Water Resources section of this chapter for more
specifics.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT & ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
Page 410 of 410

East Reservoir Project DEIS
Chapter 4
Consultation & Coordination

CHAPTER 4: CONSULTATION and COOPERATION
Preparers and Contributors
The Forest Service consulted the following individuals, Federal, State and local agencies, tribes and nonForest Service persons during the development of this environmental assessment:
ID TEAM MEMBERS:
The following Forest Service Employees assisted with the development of this Environmental Impact
Statement:
Lucinda Hemry
Debra Bond
Ellen Frament
April D Rainey
Ken Wickward
Nikia Hernandez
Paul Hooper
Autumn Mason
Rita Gillan
Hannah Hernandez
Ellen Sullivan
Jon Jeresek
Anne Weber
John Gier
David Deavours
Denise Beck

Archeology
Botanist
Economics
Economics, Timber
Engineering, Transportation
Fire Management Officer
Fisheries Biologist
GIS
GIS
Hydrologist
Range Specialist
Recreation, Scenic Specialist
Silviculture, Noxious Weeds
Soils Scientist
Wildlife Biologist
Team Leader, Writer/Editor

FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL AGENCIES:
Lincoln County Commissioners Tony Berget, Marianne Roose, and John Konzen
Sanders County Commissioner Justin Patton
United States Environmental Protection Agency (John Wardell)
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Montana Department of Environmental Quality (Robert Ray)
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation (Mark Peck)
Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks
TRIBES:
Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes
Kootenai Tribe of Idaho
OTHERS:
Kootenai Forest Stakeholders Coalition
Distribution of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement
This environmental impact statement has been distributed to individuals who specifically requested a copy
of the document. In addition, copies have been sent to the following Federal agencies, federally recognized
tribes, State and local governments, and organizations representing a wide range of views.
Lincoln County Commissioners Rita Windom, Tony Berget, Marianne Roose, and John Konzen
United States Environmental Protection Agency
WildWest Institute
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
The Lands Council
Montana Department of Environmental Quality
Montana Wilderness Association
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation
Yaak Valley Forest Council
Alliance for the Wild Rockies

MAPS

Map 1
East Reservoir
Vicinity

37

¬
«
East
Reservoir
Project
Area

2

£
¤
37

¬
«
2

£
¤

Canada
Kootenai National Forest

Montana

"

0

5

10

20

Miles

Idaho

Wyoming

MAP 2
East Reservoir Project
Alternative 2

! ! ! 3!7 ! !

!
!!
!

!

!
!

!

!
!

!
!

80

!

337

8

9

340

6

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

11

12

15

14

13

!

!

!

8

9

10

11

18

17

16

15

14

20

24

!

18

F16 F16
F16

19
30

!
!

East Reservoir Boundary

!

!

!
! !
!

Existing Regen Harvests

Proposed Units (Alt 2)

Clearcut w/ Reserves

47

8
17 ma
yo
W

20

29

32

9

Cr

362

10

Irregular Shelterwood

11

14

15

16

12

ST

ST/SW

13

SW

Improvement

!

13

347

!!

! !

Improvement/SW

367A

21

22

G
ul
ch

R
er
sh
Fi

14

15

F45

7

2

3

4

35

23

27

26

33

34

35

3

Sanitation/Salvage

24

Salvage
Fuels

28

4

27

28

!
!!

Cr

Sn
ag

!

F18

45A

40

34

25

!

37

!!

12

11

345

Ca
ny
on

26

!

22

21

!

!

!!

3

327

!

! !

344

!

F18

!

5 369

6

1

!

33

25

Commercial Thin

Proposed State Harvests
Regen

36

Roads

Non-Regen
Open

Seasonal Restriction

2

Yearlong Restriction
! ! !

Undetermined Roads
Stored Roads

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

®
0

MT State

Other Private

1.25

2.5
1:100,000

5
Miles

35

! ! ! ! !

!

!

HI
GH
W
AY

34

! !

Du
nn
2 Cr

F18

16

!

344

26

4

5

!

3

10

9

!

32

62
318

27

33

!!

COE3

31

36

35

343

!

5

4

34

33 33

!

COE1
COE1
COE5F

34

!

33

23

7

GEL

317

28

!

30
CR
20
22
IP
21
29
19
F14og
PL
23
203
E24
! 22
CA
31
NY
32 32
C
ON
F
ANY
26
ON C
n Cr N
! 207
27
29
Canyo
! !
! ! !
R
W
34
28
DRY
33 25
34! !
27
FK
30
! !

!

! !
! !
!
!
!
!

1

10

16

17

18

2

32

23

! !

14

Cripple Horse Cr

7

340

!

! !
!

36

340

13

179

3

56

21

!

14

22

!

! ! ! ! ! !

25

12

182

4

!

!

!

!

!

!

192

15 27

!

190A
190

339
339

5

31

Cr

!

!

!

11

24

6

36

!

29

!

! !! !
! !!
!

!

!

!

23

F11og
20
20 21

35

Warl
and

34

33

30

!

!

!

! !

22

170

32

27

! ! !

25

!

!
!

2

1

!

49

26

! ! !

183

11 306 307 307 307

14

31

36

566 305

150

SF
Cr

17

! !
! !

28

29

147

!

12

30

19

ile
em
Fiv

35

!

9

10 10

!

26

158
9
158
25

157

24

151

11

15

r
16
eC
mil
e
v
Fi

149

!
20 148

!

!

COE5F

13
18
CR LAK
E CR
!

23

22

21

9

Cr
NF
17

!

!

F2 F2 F2 F2

20

19

24

F8

!

14
F1 FIVE MILE

!

!

!

15

12

7 Fiv 8
em
ile

! !

!

!

!

!

!

!

2B

2B

16 F1 F1

17

!

!

18!

1!

2

11
10 Blue Sky Cr

2D

9

8

!! !
4

3

4

!

5

Plum Creek

Lakes and Rivers

Plot Date: 5/16/2013 nk

Map 3
East Reservoir Project
Alternative 3

!

!
!!

!

!

!

! !
!

!

!

! !
! !
!
!
!
!

!

11

17

16

15

14

!

!

18

F45
347

er

F16 F16
F16

2

Existing Regen Harvests

Proposed Units (Alt 3)

Clearcut w/ Reserves

!

Irregular Shelterwood

47

8
17 ma
yo
W

9

362A

11

362B

14

15

16

368

29

32

12

ST/SW
SW

21

28

33
4

13

Improvement
Improvement/SW
Sanitation/Salvage

367A

22

Sn
ag

20

ST

10

Cr

ch
30

!
! !
!

! !

R
19

!
East Reservoir
Boundary

!
!
!!

Cr
3

40

4

!!

!

on

35

27

34
3

27

28

!

13

7

34

G
ul

sh
Fi

14

F18

45A

!

!

12

Ca
ny

25

!

!!

F18

15

! !

11

345

!

F18

!

5 369

6

1

!

!

344

26

!

22

21

!

!

!!

10

!

!

!

37

9

20

!

!

!

8

!

!

HI
GH
W
AY

!

! ! ! 3!7 ! !

!

Du
nn
2 Cr

!

33

23

26

35
2

Salvage

24

Fuels
Commercial Thin

25

36

Proposed State Harvests
Regen

Roads

Non-Regen
Open
Seasonal Restriction
Yearlong Restriction

! ! !

Undetermined Roads
Stored Roads

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

®
0

MT State
Other Private

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

35

3

327

! !

!

344

26

4

5

!

18

24

!

!

! !! !
! !!
!

!

!

!

! !

!

34

33

!

!

32

62

! !

10

16

GEL

!!

3

9

23

27

! ! ! ! !

!

!

!

13

32

!

14

7

317

28

29

!

31

36

35

34

343

!

COE3

4

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

15

33 33

!

5

COE5F

34

!

COE1
COE1
COE5F

6

!

!

33

1

12

30 !
!

29

2

11

CR
20
IP
22
21
19 !
PL
203
E24
CA
31
NY
32 32
CAN
ON
26
Y
Cr NF
O
207
!
27
N
!
29
anyon
CR W
C
! !
! !
28
DRY
33 25
34! ! 34
27
FK
30
23

31

10

16

17

18

36

21

!

SF
Cr

!

13

74T

340

35

SF
Cr

!

340

14

8

340

!

!
! !

!

80

30

!

14
23

22

!

!

! ! ! ! ! !

192

22

!

25

7

9

! 20
!
! !

151

150
!

!

!

15

!

190A
190

12

3

56

Cripple Horse Cr

e
rs
Ho

!

11

6

24

4

5

147

25

Warl
and
Cr

34

33

e
pl

23

20
21

20

170

32

27

! ! !

ip
Cr

22

F19

27

1

!

49

26

! 148

19

15

Cr
16
ile
em
v
i
F

!

! ! !

183

2

14

31

36

11 306 307 307 307

29

24

23

18

11

le
mi

12

KE CR

9

Cr
NF
17

e
Fiv

35

17

30

14

305

28

!

26

9

10 10

7 Fiv 8
em
ile

! !

!
!

!

158
25 158 9

F8

!

157

12

13
F1 FIVE MILE
C R LA

22

21

20

19

24

!

15

F2 F2 F2 F2

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

2B

2B

16 F1 F1

17

!

!!4!

1!

2

11
10 Blue Sky Cr

2D

9

8

18!

3

4

!

5

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers

Plot Date: 5/16/2013 by

Map 4
ny o
CaEast Reservoir Project
Alternatives 2 & 3
Corps of Engineers Land
34

27
37

¬
«

Ko

oc

an

usa

Re

se r

Souse Cr

vo

ir

Koot
en

ai R

r
nC

34

33

37

COE1

COE1

PLE
CRIP

COE5F

4

COE5F

V
R RI
SHE
I
F
SE
HOR

3

COE3

Cr
nn
u
D

37

¬
«
9

10

East Reservoir Boundary
Roads
Highway 37

Proposed Units (Alts 2 & 3)

HIGH
WAY
37

Improvement
Fuels

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng
MT State
Other Private
Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers

16

15

®
0.25

0.5

rR

1:20,000

1
Miles

e
Fish

0

Plot Date: 5/16/2013 by

34

Map 5
East Reservoir Project
Management Areas (MA)
24
pvt

5
8

18

17

24 13
pvt

26

pvt

37

17

35

13

17

2

25

6

pvt

36

24 24
16

pvt

pvt

10
13

1

11

29

9

16

13

8

10

14

18

9

13

13

35 13

2

3
24

13

19

16 24
24

10

18 13

37
HI
GH
W
AY

33

5

4

10

11

18

16

10

1

2
11 2

2og

15

14

11

11

13

12

2og

13

7

pvt

18
2

24

33

5

13

30

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

19

20

21

30

12

13

16
15

13

32

12

18
18og 13 18og

8

7

13

17
20

24

24

34

10

9
18

15

13

13

21

18
13

13

22

13 18
18
13
28
27
24
24
15 24og

35

11

16

17 13

20

13

13

12

12

13

13

23

22

21

24

13

28

29 pvt

14

15 12

33 pvt

26

27 pvt

34

13
12

3

12

pvt
15

35

pvt

24

35

25

12
15

36

2

East Reservoir Boundary
Management Areas
Plot Date: 5/17/2013 by

11

18 14

15

2

10

26

24

13

13

23

3

4

16

18

13

27

13

18og
13
12

14

13

22

33

12

18

25

15

28

19

5

18

18

13

31

6

12

13

15

29

24

13

4

0

24

16 19 18

24

12

9 21

17

13

1

5

13

13
11

36 12

18

13

32

®

34

24

3

9

13

19

13 13

24

25

3

13

4

8 13

11

13
2og

13

6 11

13

15

15
13

24

32

31

36

pvt

3

27

13

35

34

10

9

26

13

8

18

24

13

12

12
13

13

34 13

11

7

11

26

27

13

33

23

13
13
13
16
18
17
16
18
16
13
17
30
5
13
14
15
18
13
13
14
18
15
16
5og 13 17
12
18
18
10 18 13
15
pvt
13
17 10og
11
18og
13
5
13
13
13
17 10og
24
18
23
11
18
13
13 11
30
10
13
18
22
20
pvt
19
18og 18
24 pvt
23 11
21 19
13 17
13
17
24
13
22
30
16
26
13
11
13
5
13
13
28
12
29
27 17
30
25
13 17

13

19

19og

13

11

4

12

15

13

13

12

24

pvt

22

28

10og 11
13 10og
11
10og 13

7

19

13

15

pvt
16

19og 13

24

13

13

5

11 12 19

10

19

32 13

10

2

12

21

13

15

6

15

pvt

20

pvt

31

12 pvt

17

17

11

3 13

11

13

30

pvt

10og

10og
13

19 13

10

4

10og
13

11

30 pvt
30 13

10

11

12

0

0.5

1

º

3
Miles

32

31

36

4

3

2

8

9

10

11

VRU3

2

10

11

9

VRU2S

VRU3

oi r
5

31

serv
K ooc

3

4

VRU7S
24

23

27

26

VRU3

VRU2N
VRU1

36

35

28

VRU4N

VRU3

4

5

6

1

10

9

8

29

30

VRU7N

36

VRU7N

6

VRU3

13

22

29

28

27

33

VRU1

3

4

5

VRU1
8

17

VRU3

VRU1

9

16

VRU2S

24

19

VRU7N

VRU4N

25

VRU2N

36

35

30

VRU1

29

28

22

27

VRU4N
VRU3

33

6

5

VRU5N

12

7

8

VRU9

VRU7S

34

VRU7S

VRU7N

1

VRU3
11

10

21

32

31

VRU2S
2

20

VRU3

VRU1
32

15

23

VRU9

22

VRU7S

27

28

25

26

32

33

34

35

36

5

4

3

2

1

11

12

15

14

13

22

23

9

8

VRU7S

10

VRU7N
16

17

18

14

13

23

24

19

20

21

26

25

30

29

28

27

26

35

36

31

32

33

34

35

VRU7N

VRU7N

26

34

VRU7N

16

17

18

VRU1

23

21

VRU7N

VRU3

VRU1
20

12

11

10

VRU3

7

14

15

21

VRU2S

31

1

2

3

9

8

7

12

14

15

16

17

VRU4N

16

20

VRU4N

VRU2S
11

11

VRU5N

19

25

35

34

33

32

VRU2S
2

9

17

18

VRU7S

anus

a Re

34

33

32

13

22

8

VRU7N

VRU7N

29

30

25

26

27

28

VRU9

VRU9

VRU2S
29

12

VRU2N

VRU3

21

7

14

15

16

20

VRU7S

VRU4S

VRU4N

19

24

23

17

18

13

3

4

8

7

12

14

22

21

20

5

6

15

16

33
1

5

17

Map 6
East Reservoir Project
Vegetation Response Unit (VRU)

1:100,000

35

34

2

VRU9

24

4

3

2

1

6

5

4

3

2

9

10

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

VRU3

15

14

13

18

17

16

15

14

21

22

VRU7S

24

19

20

21

22

23

27

26

25

30

29

28

27

26

31

32

33

34

35

6

5

4

3

2

VRU2N

15

14

13

XX5

16

17

18

VRU4N
20

21

22

23

24

29

28

27

26

25

32

33

34

35

5

4

3

2

20

19

30

36

31

1

6

VRU7N
29

XX5

28

VRU7S

5

VRU7N
VRU9

4

VRU7N
VRU7S

34

33

32

23

35

3

2

36

1

0

0.5

1

º

2

Map 7
East Reservoir Project
Landtypes

1:100,000

1

8

7

12

11

251
353

18

13

14

15

16

17

355

23

22

21

20

24

19

355

oi r
serv
35

a Re

34

33

22

21

32

33

302

8

17

20

101

34

303

108

3

510
324
16

21

108

302

303

14

303

29

13

252 365

351

355

103

108

34

33

355
301

4

106

8

7

13

352

355

15

16

353

353

10

101

22

27

352

12

352

19

24

303

301
25

26

28

29

30

352

357

355

355

15

23

352

360

27

32

360 353
5

25

26

353

360

352

355

355

252

14

352

22

28

355

352

33

34

35

36

4

3

2

1

9

10

11

12

14

13

351
7

353

8

252

355

13

18

17

24

19

20

352

16

355

21

355

352

353

29

251

353

23

22

21

20

15

22

23

24

360

355

27

26

25

30

29

28

27

26

34

35

36

31

32

33

34

35

353
303

33

32

31

36

6

1

2

352

303

11

2

1

6

5

4

3

2

10

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

15

14

13

18

17

16

15

14

23

24

19

20

21

22

23

25

30

29

28

27

26

32

33

34

35

3

4

5

301

352

355
9

8

7

12

302

510
15

30

352
6
352 355

353
14

353

357

201

11

353

21

20

201

31

1

251

360

351

357

36

2

201

16

360

360

3

19

17

11

355

302

23

35

510 251

352
355
352

352

35

355

10

9

17

18

301

9

251

302

252

351

360

8

18

25

26

27

28

29

5

201

101
24 365
252

23

355
252

353

252

14

23

105
13

24

17

18

352

16

353
353

19

26

32

33

34

35

5

4

3

2

25

30

36

31

1

6

360

353

28

29

353

22

21

20

352
28

353
14

22

7
12

302

355
9

15

360
355

352

351

21

353 251

252

355

251

110

355

301

303

353

324

4

5

27

28

29

102

20

11

201

353

6

329

12

303
20

352

32

302

1

11

15

16

17

351 352 351

31

36

302

355

301

303

301

10

9

8

K ooc

5

2

3

4

16

101

17

355

30

anus

32

303
301

302

355

2

353

302

25

26

27

28

10

302 303
303

302

353

302

9

303

351
29

353

43

201 365
252

303
102

355

355

201

5

6

10

9

8

33

2

3

4

5

32

31

36

35

34

3
Miles

105
353
26

27

353

355

105
33

32

5

35

34

4

353
352
3

2

36

1

31

Legend
6

5

3
4
East Reservoir
Landtypes

East Reservoir Boundary

2

0 0.5 1

º

2

3
Miles

Map 8
East Reservoir Project
Watersheds and Streams

1:100,000

r
ey C
Hick

ch
G ul

r
Blue Sky C

Bristow C

Bl
ue
Sk
yC

r

Everett Cr

our
Volc

r

ile C
r

ile

Cr

NF

Fivemile Creek

Ba
rro
n

Warland Cr

Warland Creek

F
rS

Cr

C
ile
em
Fiv

Koo

ten

ai R

Five
m

Fi
ve
m

Cr

Cr

Canyo

Canyon Creek

F

y
Dr
Fo

Dr
yF

ork

Cr

W

Wyo
ma

Cr

r

Cr

Cr

C
er

rk

d
an
ex
Al

Du
nn

n Cr N

We
ige
l

Sous
e

Cr

Threemile Cr

on
ny
Ca

Cr

SF

r

Cr

se
or

Little Jackson Cr

Peac
eC

Horse

Weigel Cr

H
le

Cr

Cripple

Cripple Horse Creek

p
ip
Cr

Ja
ck
so
n

K ooc

anus

a Re

serv
oi r

Lake Koocanusa-Little Jackson Creek

r
he
Fis

Dunn Creek

lf C
Wo

Sn
ag

Gu
lc
h

R
Butler Cr

Sy
ru
p

op
Pe

Cr

s
le
C
r

Legend

k Cr
Buc

A

er
ld

East Reservoir Boundary

Cr

Huc6 East Reservoir
y
Cod

Cr

Wetland

Lit
tle

ShelterWatersheds

Wo
lf

Cr

r

37
16

35 50
B

35
36

4424S

44 2
4

44
24
T

44 23 A

#21
2
MT
N

44
24
P

3532 G

05

DAV
IS

CR
EE
K

#3

4423

50 50

4424J

S
DA
VI

83
5C

6790
67 97 A

We
ige
l
4
14 5
4

14525

99
16
6A

44
09

7783

99 16
3A

87 43

49
03

99022C

99 0
3

1

99 02
2A

49 0
9
4909C

49 10 E

67
97

48 23
67
97
B

Cr

49 51

48 23
C

49
40
B

4823D

50 60

99
88
3A

3

76 0

35

2

99189 99159

4899A
5110

2385

C
45 9
3

45
93
A

99 12
4

99 01
54 A

35 36 A

35
39

48

15201

35 50

0

xx2

Fivemile

48
94
B

23
87
A

Snag Gulch
99 12 6

2364V

86 9
7

9D

2B
77 7
77 72 A

6
15
99

99489
99 48

34

0
99 16
99883

990174

26

7
99 15

Cr

3
16
99

1

3
77 7 7 19
7

99 15 4B

Co
dy

14

9
99 4

6A
14
99

4

14 5
6

5

46
66
D

35 51 A

35
51
62
71
J

44
26

Cr SF

r
Bl
ue
Sk
yC

3551B

14258 3714E

48
48 85
85
I

37 14 E

3714A

79
95
A

48
85
H

37
15

35
53

99
5

xx22

49
11

525

99 06
4
46
66
C

48
91

Highway 37

36
xx
37

xx1

87 08
B

77 17

99 06
4A

36

23

27

8762

33

4

r

9915 8

23 62

5

6

23 58
99146

99 96
5

6C

28

6 6B
99 1

C
olf
W

22

4
99 1

99 06 9

0
15
99

99 6
5

ai R
ten
Koo

oi r

Ko o c
a nus

4825A

50 7
6
51 22

a Re
serv

5105

99 03 5C

48 70

48
70
A

5341A
87 08 D

8708 C

82 22

4874B

99 03
5

5341

99 06
3

6
99 1

05
49

87
07

Cr
0A

99 07 2

11

99
02
3A

15

3
99 02

ork
7
16
99

5
99 1

21

A
85
23

8

5A

2

10

99 16
7A

16

7 4X
99 14
6
23

99 0
7

2
99 0

49 05 A

99
02
4

2
02
99

yF
Dr

99 12 5

6

77 80

10, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh, Open Snow Veh; Adm Sites; Campgrnds, Koocanusa

4

A
77 61

B
93

97
45

99 1
4

23 40

79
77

1

45
45 93

99 48 9C

99
14
4A

32

3
15
99

45 95

31

99 15 5

36

4595A

26

35

5
02
99

87
08

B
27
44

4
44 2
58
50

C
97
67

63
50

0
49 1

9

14 06

B

99
05
0

C

4
44 2

D
09
49

B
09
A
49
09
49

F

0

23 90

05, YR, Restricted Yearlong to Motor and Snow Veh

09, YR, Restricted Yearlong to Motor Veh, Open Snow Veh 12/01-04/30

23
64
R

29

30

77
85

17

99
49
0

23
87

49
28

99
99148
14
8F

20

6
23 8

Cr

3

4

9

8

5
52 9

19

99127

2

49 10 C

3
99 0

9A

99 02

26

Cr

27

6

24

23

49 29

511
4

23
99 89
03
4

25

04, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh 10/15-06/30

12, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh 12/01-06/30

5

99
02
8

I
12
49

Dunn

01, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh 10/15-11/30

Costshare Roads

13

34

99 0
2

12
49

420
2
05
99

35

34

3

Sy
ru
p

24

L
22
49

4

8C

18

13

Open Yearlong

Undetermined Roads

27
44

4
44 2

99
04
2

L

57
50

22

28

33

50 70

6

7 9902

12

23

3
11
99

99 111
I

32

50
21
52 A
71

99 02

49 2
2

D

33

1
xx3
G
-1
92
92
45
45

B

14
45
9

0
49 1

48 7
3

4
44 2

15

16

B

E#
N DIVID
CANYO

4918

49
12
F

1

National Forest System Roads in East Reservoir

Other Roads

14

21

50
69

2
49 2

27

99
12
9

2
45 9

5

99
11
1J

14

15

28

-3

Highway 37

6

99111

8

11

86 9
8

DUNN
CREEK
#25
21
22

2
45 9

EastResMotorizedTrails
73
14 5
1 5 96
EastResTrails
4

32

1
49 4

T
12
49
P
13
49

31

45 96 E

4
T5

A

SF

36

50 2
1

31

36 50 6

12

11

4823B

4952

50
49

1

A
27
44

10

9

29

23 64

16

D
92
45

Lakes and Rivers

C
23
49

Other Private

30

29

2

10

20

99
64
1

35

3

F
92
45

MT State

a

3
49 2

G
111
99

Corp of Eng

Cr

20

30
49 41

50 71

49
24

Cr

27

HORNET
RIDGE #5
00

E
92
45

Forest Service

2

Cr

N

25

26

34

9

19

99 44 9

36

2

83
5A

19

24

23

49
17

B
22
49

99
95
9

25

r
de
Al

Cr

23
64
B

1A
64
99

Non-Regen

18

B

Regen

4

6
45 9

Past State Harvests

46
65

m
yo
W

7

Non-Regen

14
56
6

17

#9

Regen

5

49
16

0
57
99

Existing Intermediate/Salvage Harvests

Proposed State Harvests

49 1
3

8

99
46
5A

34

3 46 62
Harvests

xx29

49 1
4

9A
99 44

14
56
4

26

35

8

4940

22

T2
8

T5
5

IN
TA
UN
MO

46
6
14 6 B
56
3

24

49
33
12
U

32

I
13
49

23

61
99 9 99962

rR

3A
99 07

e
Fish

3D
07
99

Existing
08 0A 99 Regen
08 0
9908 6 99

7

DS
AR
CH
RI

7
99 95

81

yon Cr NF
28 Can

Ca
ny
on

49 1
3

A
16
49

12

8
66
99

8
99 06

T3
2

9

13

99 07
0

99
07
6

Buc

Plum Creek

99 0
4

9906 4H

East Reservoir
4
k Cr Boundary

5

0
87 0

27

3
76

3
07
99

53 3
A

77
67

99 07 0A

4
5
99077
Legend
32

6
06
99

99 96 4

33

r

8
19
99

1
99 07

7
99 0

5A
07
99

99 0
7

A
66
46

22 99 06 5

Butler C

28

14

99
01
54

6

99 46
5

6
95
99

46 66 530

8828A

52
46

3E
99 07
3G
07
99
57
46

29

99 07 3F

533

11

15

2
88 3

21

20

7
65
99

99 05 3

16

17

31

1

4D
06
99

3A

87
77

75 9

2

99
03
3
3B
99
03
03 99
3C

77 8 99 05 1
6

99
66
1

10

6
99 0

9

87
2A

49
13
A

A

99
05
4A

30
xx
B
53
0
99
99
06
4C
99 06
4G

28
87

8

4
05
99

3

36

29

30

A
00
87

72
87

4

5

87 8
7

7
87 8

35

E #2

3

4

Horse

25

35

34

49 08 B

49
25

334

LE H
ORS

49 04 N

E #279
D RIDG

99
48

17

18

13

14

15
49 04 K

49
04

21

20

49
08
A

25

49
53
A
49
53

03
87

8

34 770

Y

N
WARLA
33

35 32

26

R
48 98

Cr

26

27

8706A

72
48

26

06
87

33

49 1
2

xx22

Cr

77 09

32

24

23

5298

T2
5

T
49
08 2 4

16

CRI
PP

xx

28

48 90

29

Sous
e

22

r

8
48 0

48
79

17

18

19

5296

Peac
eC

7A
04
99

7

12

11

10

se
or

77 13

13

4

20

67 24

9

Cripple

G
04
49

A

49 07

xx1

99 04 7

21

32

5

6

83 5

9
49 3

48 22

99 04 4

77 1
3

Q

H
le

E
04
49

23

7
62 7

12

27

28

4898

8

22

K

7

14

15

16

99 04 3

4904C

7A
48 0
4807B

14

4
44 2

1

77
62

48
50

29

48 98

31

1

2

3

4

5

6

14 51 9

11

36

35
50
55

p
ip
Cr

7

34

48
94

8644

49 34

48 07

1
XX

Cr

33

32

31

A
39
35

11

15

21

20

30

48 91 D

36

16

Warland Cr

88
62

4906

10

2A

19

25

26

27

7738

A
38
77

79 42

48 81
xx2

24

49 00

5
48 2

7

99 04 5

17

56 6

56
6I

28

29

R
24
44

Y
24
44

NF

Cr
ile 4893 3A
em
48 9
v
i
F

52 62

23

22

17

9

A
49 00

99 03 6B

xx

Ja
ck
so
n

9

8

566F

30

25

6292

32
51

40 1

14 51
7

48

48 88
D

Fi
ve 8
m
ile
Cr
18

x

xx5 xx11
14534

2

3

20

2 71

48 95

48 88
6J
21 56

13

14 6

15

7

12

x3

4
xx

Cr

C

19

24

26

35

34

3
99 0

4

2

Ba
rro
n

228

99035A

5

27

99
03
6

33

8
48 8

82 21

88 43

B
48 88

Blue Sk
y Cr

48

B
50
50

48
04

29

17
52

11

C
85
48

16

4
37 1

7
50 4

48
03
A

48 0
3 99 28
86
0
99 0
03

13

23

59
50

48 49

17

17
37

22

4
51 3

33
49

48
56

52 16

17

5217A

14

2

10

48
86

9

18

4854

51
30

9

xx

r

35 53

37

2
A

5321

21 48

99 00 5

99 86

Bristow C

3

4

8

7

12

4853

15

61 5

4818

86 3A

11

62 45
61 9
1
61 9
1

16

5

6

86 3

10

33
3

17

1

9
85

y Cr
Hicke

48
74
C

4
49 9 21 C
21

48
18

33

2

3

4

9

20

Map 9
East Reservoir Project
Cumulative Effects

32

31

36

35

8

48 17
B

3
Miles

1:100,000

48 7
4

32

2

4905W

º

5

1

22 8

34

0.5

Everett Cr

0

35
39

35
36
44 2
4

3532 3532 G

4423

35 32 E

44 23 A

44
24
P

50 50

35 36 A

35 50
B
44
24
T

44
26

4424S

3551B

14258 3714E

15201

37 14 E

35 50

48

35
51

35 51 A

37
15

62
71
J

48
85
H

4424J

83
5C

6790
67 97 A

4823D

50 60

67
97
B

48 23

48 23
C

4905W

49 51

67
97

48
94
B

4
14 5
4

14525

99
16
6A

44
09

99 16
3A

87 43

99
88
3A

76 0

2

99189 99159

C

49
03

99022C

99 0
3

1

99 02
2A

49 0
9
4909C

99 01
54 A

23
87
A

45
93
A

99 12
4

99 12 6
9D

7783

86 9
7

99489
99 48

3

6
15
99

3
77 7 7 19
7

2B
77 7
77 72 A

35

0
99 16
99883

34

7
99 15

990174

26

1

4

2364V

xx22

14 5
6

5

46
66
D

3
16
99

9
99 4

6A
14
99

99 15 4B

99 96
5

23

27

23 62

99 6
5

46
66
C

99 06 9

49
11

525

99 06
4

99 06
4A

99 06
3

49 10 E

36
xx
37

xx1

87 08
B

77 17

87
07

99 07 2

36

9915 8

8762

33

4

6

23 58
99146

8

6C

5

6B

14

22

4
99 1

99 0
7

0
15
99

28

3
99 02

15

6
99 1

6
99 1

05
49

2385

48
70
A

5341A
87 08 D

8708 C

87
08

5A

14 06

2
99 0

21

A
85
23

45 9
3

K ooc

48 70

Highway 37

serv
a Re
anus

4825A

50 7
6
51 22

oi r

5105

99 03 5C
99 03
5

5341

99
05
0

B
27
44

4
44 2

99
04
2

B

49 05 A

7
16
99

X
7
99 14 64
23

77 80

79
77

6

A
77 61

23 40

4

32

3
15
99

99 1
4

B
93

97
45

45
45 93

1

99 16
7A

16

0A

23
64
R

29

99 15 5

99
14
4A

2

11

99
02
3A

5
99 1

6
23 8

45 95

31

5
02
99

5
52 9

36

77
85

17

99
49
0

30

2
02
99

9

99
14
8F

23 90

4595A

99
02
4

10

49
28

99148

20

99127

2

9

8

0

99 02

25

26

99 48 9C

10, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh, Open Snow Veh; Adm Sites; Campgrnds, Koocanusa

23
99 89
03
4

3

4

99 12 5

3
99 0

9A

23
87

2
05
99

35

34

3

24

23

35

49 29

511
4

19

6

0
49 1

5

99
02
8

18

34

99 0
2

12
49

6

13

26

63
50

B
09
A
49
09
49

F

49 10 C

0
49 1

48 7
3

27
44

C

B

14

L
22
49

99 111
I

4

33

50 70

7 9902

12

49 2
2

D

33

09, YR, Restricted Yearlong to Motor Veh, Open Snow Veh 12/01-04/30
12, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh 12/01-06/30

24

27

28
D
09
49

1
49 4

32

50
21
52 A
71

I
12
49

86 9
8

1
xx3
G
-1
92
92
45
45

14
45
9

3
11
99

6

5

99
11
1J

-3

6
45 9

99111

G
111
99

10/15-11/30
1

45 96 E

32

2
45 9

31

27

28

99
12
9

05, YR, Restricted Yearlong to Motor and Snow Veh

Other Roads

49
12
F

2
49 2

30

99
64
1

D
92
45

3A
99 07

3D
07
99

2
Veh

3

04, SR, Restricted to Motor Veh 10/15-06/30

Undetermined Roads

68

1

11

22

B

29

49 22 B

21

20

B

3
76

36

7
14 5

13

23

22

29

50 2
1

31

8C
99 02

15

2
45 9

99 44 9

25

35

to Motor

30
49 41

23 64

16

6
45 9

3
07
99

01, SR,

08 0A 99
9908 6 99
08 0

3 46 62
Restricted

2

3

10

49
24

17

19

46
65

99
95
9

15

16

21

50
69

9

1A
64
99

4
5A
07
99

4

36 50

4918

14
56
6

Forest System Roads in East Reservoir

Open Yearlong

25

50 71

E
92
45

66
B

14
56
3

34

34

35

T
12
49

24

99 07
0

Highway
37
33

N

F
92
45

14

26

26

23
64
B

3
49 2

18

9A
99 44

27

99
07
6

4

49
16

99
46
5A

27

49
17

49 1
3

5

8

49 1
4

0
57
99

28

T2
8

T5
5

xx29

33

49
12
U

P
13
49

61
99 9 99962

99 07 0A

99 96 4

28

C
23
49

23

20

19

24

23

57
50

58
50

26

77
67

7
99 95

4
44 2

xx

6
06
99

99 06 5

32

I
13
49

8
99 06

A
66
46

7

13

9906 4H

99
01
54

T3
2

9

A
16
49

12

East Reservoir Boundary

National
99077
32
5

14

8
19
99

1
99 07

LAU

99 0
4

99 46
5

56
4
BORZForestPlanAmmendment
46

7
99 0

99 07 3F

22

8828A

3E
99 07
3G
07
99
57
46

29

4940

22

14
4823B

4952

50
49

12

11

C
97
67

49 1
3

6

8
66
99

11

6
95
99

21

52
46

Legend

46 66 530

2
88 3

20

0
87 0

4D
06
99

15

A
00
87

16

17

7
65
99

3A

87
77

75 9

31

1

10

6
99 0

87
2A

03
87

28
87

9

49 04 N

21

29

99
03
3
3B
99
03
03 99
3C

77 8 99 05 1
6

99
66
1

2

05
99
99
06
4C
99 06
4G

36

49
13
A

A

99
05
4A

99 05 3

3

30
xx
3B

8

49 04 K

18

13

14

17

A
27
44

10

9

8

1

2

49 08 B

30

334

3

4

83
5A

15

16

20

49
25

25

49
53
A
49
53

8706A

72
87

4

4
05
99

35

Y

99
48

7

36

35

34
4
44 2

77 13

87 8
7

06
87

8

34 770

7
87 8

5

533

77 09

72
48

53 3
A

49 1
2

T2
5

T
49
08 2 4

33

5

6

12

11

10

9

49
04

49
08
A

5296

33

26

27

28

32

19

24

23

xx22

29

5

67 24

5298

48
79

99 0
7

8
48 0

22

7A
04
99

48 90

20

17

18

4

99 04 7

21

L

49 07

13

xx1

99 04 4

A

25

26

83 5

9
49 3

48 22

14

15

16

99 04 3

77 1
3

32

G
04
49

99 04 5

17

E
04
49

35
32

4
44 2

11

4
T5

7

48 07

1
XX

A

10

Q

4898

8

7

12

23

R
48 98

1

48 98

31

1

2

3

4904C

7A
48 0
4807B

36

35

4

5

6

14 51 9

2A

34

50
55

4906

xx2

33

32

31

48
94

8644

49 34

27

28

29

30

48 91 D

36

2

xx

9

8

7738

A
38
77

25

26

27

88
62

6292

32
51

40 1

14 51
7

56 6

56
6I

28

29

22

7
62 7

xx5 xx11
14534

566F

30

25

79 42

3

3

49 00

5
48 2

2

48 81

4

228

7

99 86

99 03 6B

5

34

3
99 0

48
18

33

35

77
62

48
50

14

15

21

20

A
49 00

99
03
6

99035A

4818

27

19

16

K

29

26

24

11

Y
24
44

3
48 9 3 A
48 9

52 62

23

22

9

17

18

48

48 88
D

A
39
35

4
44 2

48
04

xx

4

20

2 71

48 95

48 88
6J
21 56

13

14 6

15

8

7
50 4

48
03
A

48 0
3 99 28
86
0
99 0
03

xx

C

82 21

88 43

B
48 88

19

24

23

59
50

48 49

99 00 5

32

48
56

22

4
51 3

61 5

8
48 8

C
85
48

16

R
24
44

48

B
50
50

20

51
30

21 48 17

52

4854

5321

48 17
B

18 7
1

13

14

17

7
12

0

5217A

A

48
91

15

16

17

9

4
37 1

11

10

48
86

xx

52 16

62 45
61 9
1
61 9
1

33
3

2

48
48 85
85
I

33
49

4853

4
49 9 21 C
21

9

8

7

12

11

3

4

3714A

9
85

2

86 3A

10

9

8

5

6

86 3

48
74
C

48 7
4

1

2

3

4

5

35
53

99
5

37

79
95
A

33

17
37

32

31

36

35

35 53

4874B

1:100,000

37
16

Map 11
East Reservoir Project
Lynx and BORZ Boundaries

22 8

34

3
Miles

xx2

º

2

4899A
5110

1

49
40
B

0.5

82 22

0

MAP 12
East Reservoir Project
Proposed Road and Trail Changes
Alternative 2

!

N1
3

}

}
}
} } }}

3

459
7

!

!

!

!

!

Undetermined to Stored

!

!

!

!

Undetermined to Closed Yearlong

!

!

!

!

Undetermined to Decommission

Proposed FS Cost Share

25

Proposed State Cost Share

Existing Roads

Open Roads

Seasonally Restricted Roads

36

Yearlong Restricted Roads

2

Non Forest Service Roads
Existing Stored Roads

}

}}

}

East Reservoir Boundary

®

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

2.5
1:100,000

MT State

5
Miles

Other Private

Plot Date: 5/17/2013 nk

Plum Creek

Lakes and Rivers

} } }

4423A

4423

4424

!

Major Highways

1.25

}

}

495
} 2

}4823C

!

} }

0

TRL # 212

44
24
P

5050

4900A

}

4951

Undetermined to Open

!

Proposed Cost Share Roads

4
4595A 595

35 4595

Proposed Decommissioned Roads

} }

Planned State on FS

}

}

26

1

34

353
2

N4
0

T44

!

!

!
!

!

}!
!

! !

}

}
}! }

}

}

}

}
}

}

49
22
H

!

!

} }

Blu
eS
ky C
r

}

N5

491
3

G

}

49
11

!

6724

4898

!

!
!! !
! !
!

!

49

1

4904E

} 39A
}

!

3!7 ! ! 4534
! !
!

}

} }
}

N1
1

4904
G
D

27

}

92
45

4

24

23

L
22
49

}2
492

D
92
45

33

13

Proposed Stored Roads

}

}

!

T5
8

}

!

!

48
85
I

T42

} } }

}

!

492 W
}} 3 yoma Cr

}

}

14

4592B

}
32

Seasonally Restricted to Open

11

}}

!

}

!

}

!

! !

}

!

!

}

} }

!

4890

}

!!

! !

}}

!

} }

4592-3

8
12

Temporary Roads

}}

22

L#
TR

}

TRL
# 25
4592H

28

}

49
22

21

New System Roads

}}

}

Proposed Road Changes (Alt 2)

242
TRL #

} }

49
22
B

Trail Motorized

!

15

27

Trail Non-Motorized

2J
h 492
ulc } }
gG
Sna

16}

}

Trails Motorized to Non-Motorized

TRL #!500

10

14

!

!

3

ny 2
on
Cr

57
50

22

}
!

28

4918

N

34

}
}}
15

!

21

25

26

}

} }

4823B

11

!

}} }}! }

20

10

A
24
44

50
49

5204

9

16

}

}

17

3

4898R

4

835A

420

!

33

35

34

!

49
40

79
TRL # 2

26

!

42 24
5

TRL
#

23

27

}

#

4L
442
7A
627 277
6

8

11

J

GEL

18

28

4
442

13

}

N6

}

5

14

22

}
}

99
48

Y

15

!

TRL # 426
4900

12

7

!

6

!

32

35

4924

20

97

1

23

27

P
13
49

D
23
49 }

29

TR
L

49
17
49
12
Ca
U

9

8

E
92
45

TR
L
30
#

}

14

1
24

L#
TR

T
12
49

64
B

A
22 }

65
46

}

}

491
3

4
23

17

19

0
T}RL # 28

21

29

Q

! ! ! ! !

22

} }

49
16

!

33

!

!

18

}

}}

} }

!

5

24

}

T54

T28

N9
7 4914

14
56
6

281

28

} 49}

R
er
sh
Fi

13

14

15

} }

11

15 4904N

N8

!

}

}

T55

12

!

3I
491

5
52

16

6

6A
491

11

10

9

21

491
3

} }

5

TRL
#

32

31

1

}

N3

8
480

3

4

}

16

29

30

!

Du
nn
2 Cr

}

31

8
489

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

}

17

T2
49
5
08
19
49
4908B
08
A

36

35

34

33

254912Y

334!
3A
495 49
53

}

K
04
49

!
!

26
! !

J
04
39
49
49

!

!

27

!

36

16

48
93
A

}

!
!

49
25

10

9

}

20

24

! ! !

}

}18

13

14

23

4907

30

! ! !

12

} 8} }4907

49
04

7

!

!

A
04
49

Cripple Horse Cr

}

!

22

7
480

!

!

15

4904C

!

4
442

3
489

8!
!4
!! 0
5

7
489

!

B
07
48

25

2

3

4

5

N19

6292

504
6

20

}
}

14519

11

4915

T57

6 835

4906

01

T6

2 49

1

4934

!

19

4894B

42
79

3
T5

!

24

23

}

35

32

31

36

Fivemile Cr

66
79
56 5 27
6I
#2
26 4
L
28
TR 4891
} 891A
Cr !
B
! !
91
!
48
}
N15
4891D
48
9
35
N23
34 4 }
} 505
33
5209
}5
!

T5

22

21

29
Warla
nd

566F
30 6
56
7
8 N
8
2
6

566J

17

18

}}

N16

4
25 N1

4888
D

20

19

24

26

4888

4895

13

48

9

}

!

4888C

}

627
1

15

8

!

!
!

!

!

4885 4885C
16
4888B

12

14

4E

7

}

}

!

!! !

N!1

18
! Y 37
!WA
G
I
H !H

!

e
lu
B

11

3532G

17

488
6

H

} } } } } }

}

} } } } }

9

TR
L#

}

}

8

}

488
5

2

10
r
C
y
k
S

} } } } }
!

}

}

3

4

!

5

}

}

}} }

A

!

}

}

799
5

H

22

24

23

49

}

25

L

}

22

26

}

}

} }
} } }}

45

2
353

4423

4424

79
#2
TR
L

Undetermined to Open

! ! !

Undetermined to Stored

! ! !

Undetermined to Closed Yearlong

! ! !

Undetermined to Decommission

Proposed Cost Share Roads
Planned State on FS

92

!

!

!

!

}

}}

92

459

7

-1

45
D

3

! ! !

4595A

35 4595

459

36

Proprosed FS Cost Share

5

2

Proposed State Cost Share

Existing Roads

Open Roads
Seasonally Restricted Roads

}

Non Forest Service Roads

} }

Existing Stored Roads
Major Highway
East Reservoir Boundary

®

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

2.5

1:100,000

MT State

5
Miles

Other Private
Plot Date: 5/16/2013 by

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers

} } }

TRL # 212

4423A

P

}

}

24

44

2

}

}

505!0

}

495

}4823C

}

T44

! !
! !
!
!
!
!

4900A

} }

4898

}
}! }

}

}

}

}
}

}

2J

E

4592B

92

33

34

Proposed Stored Roads

} } Proposed Decommissioned Roads

}

}2D

492

45

27

Seasonally Restricted to Open

13

49

}

N5

!

4951

r

Sky
C

}

}

! !! !
! !!
!

!

!

4

Blu
e

I
85

} }
}

48

T42

} } }

Seasonal Restriction Change

24 2

492 }
}

22

Temporary Roads

#
TRL

492 W
}} 3 yoma Cr

New System Roads

}

h

14

22

4592-3

28

Boundary Mountain Motor Trail

}}

15

TRL
# 25
4592H

21

Trail Motorized to Non-Motorized

11

}}

}

}
3

L # 500

lc
Gu

B

Trail Non-Motorized

g
Sna

}

1
! ! ! 3!
7 ! ! 453

!

27

Cripple Horse Walking Trail

}

3G

22

Yearlong Restricted Roads

1.25

14

Proposed Road Changes (Alt 3)

!
TR !

}

491

3

on 2
Cr

4924

}

N1

!

57

Trail Motorized

}}

!

11

}

28

35

Ca
ny

10

49

4

0

50

}

}

49

}

} }

!

!

}

!

! !

!!

}

! !

4904E

} }

}

} } } } } }

6724

!

N1
1

A

!

24

! !37
!

11

44

15

A
4823}

!

1

10

4823B

}

4890

N2

}

21

}} }}! }

!!

!

4L
442
7A 7
7
62

627

4898R

3

! !

4

0
95

26

35

34

5204

9

16

20

9

}

27

4

25

26

4J

17

40

33

11

23

N6

27

7
TRL # 2

835A

42 0

22

442

U

P

}

}

22

}
32

TRL
#

49

28

26

TRL # 426
4900

18

0
# 42

}

5

4918

12

17

13

16}

} }

49

A

29

8

A

14

15

21

!

!

Cr NF

65

30

13

99

93

}
}

T

17

20

49

} }

49

48

23

34

49

4

B

D
23 }

22

19

3N

!

16

7

46

} }

49

#9

}

6

L
TR

}

}

56

64

49

9

} 49}

R

}}

24

23

8

5

18

er

}

14

0

N9
7 4914

! !

52

sh
Fi

13

14

5

}

33

491

50

12

11

!

#

6A

3I

T54

12

!

}

48

4Y

49

!

3

T28

491

!

28

T55

32

491

0
TRL # 42

#4

32

! ! ! ! !

TR TRL
L
#
42 24
5

22

n
Canyo

24 1

L
TR

6

491

N8
TRL
#

29

31

1

21

28 1

7

12

14

4904N

8Q

GEL

16

3

!

A

30

36

TRL
#

4908B

6

442

}

08

TR
L

! ! !

K}

49

}

}

19

08

}

1

04

J

49

25

0
T}RL # 28

489

8
!
! !4
! ! 50

29

89
31 4

} }

11

15

16

}

04

334

Du
nn
2 Cr

15

}

49

49

35

10

}

20

T2
5

} }

16

3

53

17

18 }

}

9

3A
! 495 4
9
!

}

04

8

5

N3

480

4

4939

25
! ! ! !4912Y

26
! !

34

8

30

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

10

9

}

49

!

27

33

4907

49

} } } 07
4904G

7

24

}

36

49

!
!

! !

!

4904C

13

14

23

12

Cripple Horse Cr

}

7

!

!

22

B

6292

46

7

!
!

15

4

7
80

480

!

11

0
49

4915
4A

4906

T57

14519

25

2

3

4

5

6 835

50

3

20

489

4934

T6

2 490
1

1

19

}
}

42

5
! T

}}

79

27

6I

!

24

}

35

32

31

36

Fivemile Cr

23

17

18

4894B

T5

566J

22

13

48

79
#2
26 4
L
28
TR 4891
} 891A
Cr !
B
!
91
!
!
48
}
N15
4891D
48
9
35
33
34 4 }
} 505
5209
}5

56

!

26

29
Warla
nd

566F
30 6
56
7
8 N
628

D

14

9

}

!

N16

4
25 N1

21

20

19

24

4888

4895

1

8

}

!

16

627

15

E

}
}}

!
!

!

!

N!1

!!

12

#4

}}

4885 4885C

!
18
!AY 37
4888B
!W
}
HIG!H
4888C 4888

e
lu
B

7

} }

6

11

3532G

17

!

488

5H

!

}

}

} } } } }

9

TR
L

}

}

8

}

488

2

10
r
C
y
Sk

}

3

4

}

5

}

} } } } }

}

! !

}

}

}} }

5A

}

}

!

799

Map 13
East Reservoir Project
Proposed Road and Trail Changes
Alternative 3

Map 14
East Reservoir Project
Alternatives 2 & 3
Fuels and Wildlife Units
5 FW501
FW509
FW511

9

8

3

4

2

FW503

FW502

10

FW50602

11

FW512

12

FW50601

18
37
WAY
G
HI H

22

23

21

20

37
FW533
FW535

2

FW53401

33

34

35

4

3

Du
nn
2 Cr

9

10

sh
Fi

15

14

15

14

13

Cany
on
29

32

31

36

6

1

13

er

FW5125

8

7

CR
18

W

O

R

FW5125

22

23

Cr N
F

27

26

34

35

28

CA
NY
O
33

LF

FW589

CR

N

CR

W

DR
Y
3

4

5

FW5122

12 D
UN
N

21

20

9

17

16

20

21

29

28

FK

FW5125

19
30

32

33
4

22

21

22

28

27

FW525

29

32

5

Cripple
Horse C
r
7
8

18

17
20

24

Cr
mile
e
v
i
F
15
14

33

10

11

15

14

27

34
3

23

26

35

10

11

16

15

14

22

27

2

13

24

36

East Reservoir Boundary
Roads

Fuels and Wildlife Units
Open
Seasonal Restriction
Yearlong Restriction

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

®
0

MT State
Other Private

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

35

9

12

25

26

3

21

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers
Plot Date: 5/17/2013 by

11

23

4

28

25

34

2

ch

16

11

12

16

17

19
24 CRIP
PL
on
ECA
Cr
NY
ON
30
25

6

11

G
ul

34

1

FW539

FW536

Sn
ag

FW577

2

10

Wyo
ma C
r

26

31

SF
Cr

5

18

8

e
rs
Ho

23 Ca
ny

27

33

13

FW544

FW545

22

7

9

e
pl

14

15 FW543

12

36

16

FW516

20

FW521

30

FW540

ip
Cr

11

3

4

5

17

19

25

35

FW53403

FW53402

6

1

27

32

31

36

24

9

FW5111 FW5109

18

26
Wa
rlan
dC
r

28

8

F
Cr S
mile
Five

29
ILE
M
E
25
IV
F
ND CR
A
L
R
A
W
30

13

FW51102 FW51103

14

FW522

FW524

35

FW51101

19

24

26

17 FIVE MILE CR LAKE CR
15
16

7

Map 15
East Reservoir Project
Alternative 2
Precommercial Thinning
5

3

4

2

29

18

5

4

2

1

20

10

8

19

21

22

23

44

24

20

32

237

22

21

61

66

55

28

50

46

27

Wa
rla

56

60

252

36

35

29

30

nd
Cr

34

33

31

25

28

239

31

253

33

243

Cripple Horse Cr

97

11

75

14

13

18

76

85

17

78

92

108
24 CRIP
PL
ECAN
CA
YON
NY
CR
ON
WD
RY
F
25
K
26
30
109

37
HI
GH
W
AY

33

5

4

111
112

34

3

Du
nn
2 Cr

6

1

159

115

144

147

114

28

29

82
88
95

11

100

149

89

32

7

5

70

GEL

13

18

259

26

27

3

10 255

9

257

264

248
260 261

20

16

255

11

262

247

17

35

34

67

4

8

71

23

Cr NF

254

26

15

245
267245

14

273
273

272

256

265

263

25

22

21

266

28

27

35

122

2

123

156

9
16

10

11

158
165
166 164
167

12

7

8 169

170

171

sh
Fi

15

14

13

18

er
R
30

162

17

172
188

177189
153
154

20

196

155

152

29

32

9

199 173
179
194
186
174
193175
185 198

161

168
163

19

184 191

16

180
192

183

12

11

10
213

220
209

15

221

14

13

207

210
202
200
215 226
204
182
224 223
190 205
201
203
181
187
227
176 208 212
218
178
216
211
217
206
236
274
235
214 222
271
225
219
234
231
150151
229
233
232 230
228
195

197

21

23

22

28

33
4

27

34
3

26

35
2

24

East Reservoir Boundary

25

36

Proposed Precommercial Thinning Units (Alt 2)
Roads

Proposed White Pine Daylighting
Open
Seasonal Restriction
Yearlong Restriction

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

®
0

23

241

33

258
246

24

268

3

4

5

73

90

124

12

74

14

99

34

33

69

103

15

n
Canyo

6

106

135 136
142
120
137
130 121
143 131141 129 138
117 134128
140
132
125
118
270 148
127 133
270
119126

157

160

105

22

139

32

31

36

96 84

21

113116

10

72

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

68

98 101

81

87

275 83
240

20

110

35

16

104

269

23

27

86

91

19

22

93
94

79

77

15

9

8

7

12

102

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

251

27

242

SF
Cr

58

59

57

26

52

53

51

32

31

4754

238

2

11

249

250

36
30

19

Cr
mile
e
v
i
F
15
14

16

39

40

41

37

43

38

17

18

9

le
mi

37

11

8

e
Fiv

63

35

17

14

42

244

62
30 64
65
ILE
M
E
25
IV
F
ND CR
A
L
R
A
W
29

36

18

48

49

26

Cr

13
6

26

27

7

12

14
FIVE
13
MILE
C
R LAK
15
E
C
45
R
12

16

9

15
16

20

19

24

7

22

21
24

17

3

28

Bl
ue
Sk
y

25

11
r
Blue Sky C

10

9

8

MT State
Other Private

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers
Plot Date: 5/17/2013 by

Map 16
East Reservoir Project
Alternative 3
Precommercial Thinning
5

3

4

2

29

18

5

4

2

1

20

10

8

19

21

66

55

28

46

53

51

37

33

2

1

6

5

4

3

14

15

13

18

76

17

37
34

3

Du
nn
2 Cr

93
94

111
112

6

1

104

96 84

82
88
95

159

115

113116

144

147

114

28

10

11

100

33

157

89
90

23

Cr NF

26

27

124

22

28

27

29

32

31

6

69

7

GEL
71

34

33

35

3

67

8

9

10

11

18

17

16

15

14

20

24

28

25

22

21

27

122

2

123

156

9
16

10

11

158
165
167 164
166

12

7

8 169

170

171

sh
Fi

15

14

13

18

er
R
30

162

17

172
188

177189
153
154

20

196

155

152

29

32

9

199 173
179
194
186
174
193175
185 198

161

168
163

19

184 191

16

180
192

183

12

11

10
213

220
209

15

221

14

13

207

210
202
200
215 226
204
182
224 223
190 205
201
203
181
187
227
176 208 212
218
178
216
211
217
206
236
274
235
214 222
225
219
234
231
150151
229
233
232 230
228
195

197

21

23

22

28

33
4

27

34
3

26

35
2

24

25

36

East Reservoir Boundary
Roads

Proposed Precommercial Thinning Units (Alt 3)
Open
Seasonal Restriction
Yearlong Restriction

Ownership

Forest Service
Corp of Eng

®
0

26

33

4

5

70

23

35

3

4

5

160

149

13

14

99

34

32

73

21

103

15

n
Canyo

72

12

74

32

106

135 136
142
120
137
130 121
143 131141 129 138
117 134128
140
132
125
118
148
127 133
119126

139

1

105

22

21

36

11

36

20

30

Cr
mile
e
v
i
F
15
14

16

39

31

CRIPPLE HORSE
WEI

98 101

81

87

275 83

29

31

36

16

20

110

2

38
40

30

19

25

68

92

108
24 CRIP
PL
ECAN
CA
YON
NY
CR
ON
WD
RY
F
25
K
26
30
109

35

86

91

23

27

9

85

78

19

22

102

79

77

35

Cripple Horse Cr

8

75

HI
GH
W
AY

56

9

SF
Cr

58

59

57

32

7

41

37

43

24

26
60
Wa
rlan
dC
r

52

31

11

5

27

36

12

23

44

17

18

4754

50

97

4

22

34

35

33

11

8

le
mi

26

62

14

42

e
Fiv

30
65
ILE
25
R FIVE M
C
D
N
A
L
R
A
W
29
64

61

18

17

48

49
63

Cr

13
6

26

27

7

12

14
FIVE
13
MILE
C
R LAK
15
E
C
45
R
12

16

9

15
16

20

19

24

7

22

21
23

17

3

28

Bl
ue
Sk
y

25

11
r
Blue Sky C

10

9

8

MT State
Other Private

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers
Plot Date: 5/17/2013 by

Map 17
East Reservoir Project
Cumulative Effects
Past Fire and Fuels
5

2

9

10

18

17

16

15

14

13

18

17

16

15

24

19

20

21

22

23

24

19

20

21

22

25

30

29

28

27

26

25

30

29

28

27

37

11

8

36

31

32

33

34

35

36

31

32

33

34

2

1

6

5

4

3

2

1

6

5

4

3

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

14

13

18

17

16

15

14

13

18

17

16

15

14

26

35

15

23

22

5

3

4

12

24

19

20

21

22

23

29

28

27

26

27

26

25

30

33

34

35

36

31

32

33

34

35

4

3

2

1

6

5

4

3

2

9

10

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

16

15

14

13

18

17

16

15

14

19

20

21

22

23

30

29

32

28

33
4

27

34
3

7

8

9

11

20

24

28

13

24

East Reservoir Boundary
Past Wildfires in East Reservoir

26

35
2

25

36

Past Non-Wildfire Burns
Broadcast Burn
Jackpot Burn
Roads

Underburn
Open
Seasonal Restriction
Yearlong Restriction

Corp of Eng
MT State
Other Private

1.25

2.5

1:100,000

5
Miles

35

12

Forest Service

0

26

27

Ownership

®

23

22

21

25

14

Plum Creek
Lakes and Rivers
Plot Date: 5/17/2013 by

APPENDICES

Appendix A: East Reservoir Water Resources Management Requirements and Design
Criteria
The following mitigation measures are intended to assist planning, contract preparation, and project
contract administration by highlighting some of the most important requirements of Forest Service
Handbook 2509.22, Soil and Water Conservation Practices, Montana Water Quality Best Management
Practices (BMPs), and the Kootenai Forest Plan, including the Inland Native Fish Strategy. For additional
detail, please review these guiding documents.
For modifications to these requirements, contact the hydrologist or fish biologist.
1. INFISH Buffers: Boundaries of RHCAs would be delineated prior to activities to exclude ground-based
equipment and other activities. Incidental fire is allowed within the RHCAs, but no equipment or
building of fire lines is allowed.
2. Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Forestry: BMPs for forestry would be met for all ground based
operations. At a minimum, basic surface drainage requirements will be met for project roads with the
intent of working towards meeting all required BMPs required under the Forest Service Handbook
2509.22, Soil and Water Conservation Practices, and Montana Water Quality Best Management
Practices.
3. BMP Timing: Prior to timber haul, implement, and maintain all BMPs needed to control surface
drainage on project roads. If winter haul will occur before planned road BMPs, the timber sale
administrator will contact the appropriate engineer or hydrologist to assure that typical winter operation
requirements are sufficient to mitigate sediment effects, or if specific BMPs will be necessary prior to
winter operations.
4. Erosion Control Measures: Erosion control measures (i.e. straw bales, wattles, silt fences, hydro
mulching, etc.) would be implemented where necessary and remain in place during and after ground
disturbing activities. To ensure effectiveness, erosion control measures would remain functional until
disturbed sites (roads, culverts, landings, etc.) are stabilized; typically for a minimum period of one
growing season after ground disturbing activity occurs. Where necessary and as additionally described
in the soils mitigation requirements, the timber sale administrator will determine and apply one or more
of the following techniques to reduce the potential of soil detachment from disturbed areas such as skid
trails, decommissioned roads, harvest units, sky-line corridors, or landings:
Facilitate rain and snow-melt infiltration by applying
specified sub-soiling techniques to de-compact areas
that are excessively compacted
Reduce rain drop energy, create shade, and facilitate
wood deterioration for microbial soil functions by
mechanically or hand applying appropriate quantities
and sizes of wood slash.

Appendix B:

Encourage ground cover by applying certified weedfree seed and/or mulch (mulch as approved wood
fibers or straw)
Reduce concentration and magnitude of overland
flow (should it occur) by installing water bars at
appropriate spacing.

Standard RHCA Widths

Standard RHCA widths for four categories of stream or water body are:
(1) Fish bearing streams - minimum 300 feet each side of the stream;
(2) Perennial non fish bearing streams - minimum 150 feet each side of stream;
(3) Ponds, lakes, and wetlands greater than 1 acre - minimum 150 feet from maximum pool
elevation;
(4) Intermittent and seasonally flowing streams, wetlands less than 1 acre, landslides and landslide
prone areas - minimum 50 feet from edge except in priority watersheds (Streams identified by
the USFWS as being of the highest importance for bull trout survival) where the minimum
distance would be 100 feet.
Streams in the project area fall into categories 2 and 4 and should use appropriate buffering for
management activities.
1

Appendix C:

East Reservoir Best Management Practices (BMPs)

Federal agency compliance with pollution control is addressed through Section 313 of the Clean Water
Act, Executive Order 12580 (January 23, 1987), National Nonpoint Source Policy (December 12, 1984),
USDA Nonpoint Source Water Quality Policy (December 5, 1986) and the Environmental Protection
Agency in their guidance "Nonpoint Source Controls and Water Quality Standards" (August 19, 1987). In
order to comply with State and local non-point pollution controls the Forest Service will apply Best
Management Practices (BMPs) to all possible non-point sources which may result from management
activities proposed in this DEIS. These BMPs are the Soil and Water Conservation Practices described in
the Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 2509.22.
BMPs are the primary mechanism for achievement of water quality standards (EPA, 1987). This appendix
describes the Forest Service's BMP process in detail, and lists the key Soil and Water Conservation
Practices that have been selected to be used in the action alternatives analyzed in this DEIS.
BMPs include, but are not limited to, structural, and non-structural controls, operations, and maintenance
procedures. BMPs can be applied before, during, or after potential pollution-producing activities to reduce
or eliminate the introduction of pollutants into the receiving watershed (40 CFR 130.2, EPA Water
Quality Standards Regulation). BMPs are usually applied as a system of practices rather than a single
practice. They are selected on the basis of site-specific conditions that reflect natural background
conditions and political, social, economic, and technical feasibility.
The Forest Plan states that soil and water conservation practices, as outlined in the Soil and Water
Conservation Practices Handbook (FSH 2509.22, May 1988), will be incorporated into all land use
project plans as a principal mechanism for controlling non-point pollution sources, meeting soil and water
quality goals, and protecting beneficial uses. Activities found not to comply with the soil and water
conservation practices or State standards will be brought into compliance, modified, or stopped (USDA
Forest Service, 1987a, pp. 11-23). Montana State Water Quality Standards require the use of reasonable
land, soil, and water conservation practices (analogous to BMPs) as the controlling mechanism for nonpoint pollution. The use of BMPs is also required in the Memorandum of Understanding between the
Forest Service and the State of Montana as part of the agency's responsibility as the designated water
quality management agency on National Forest System lands.
BMP Implementation Process
In cooperation with the State, the Forest Service's primary strategy for the control of non-point sources of
pollution is based on the implementation of preventive practices (i.e. BMPs). The BMPs have been
designed and selected to protect the identified beneficial uses of the watershed.
The Forest Service non-point source management system consists of the following steps:
1) BMP Selection and Design - Water quality goals are identified in the Forest Plan. These goals meet
or exceed applicable legal requirements including State water quality regulations, the Clean Water
Act and the National Forest Management Act. Environmental assessments for projects are tiered to
Forest Plans using the National Environmental Policy Act process. The appropriate BMPs are
selected for each project by an interdisciplinary team. In each new location, there is flexibility to
design different BMPs depending on local conditions and values and downstream beneficial uses of
water. The BMP selection and design are dictated by the proposed activity, water quality objectives,
soils, topography, geology, vegetation, and climate. Environmental impacts and water quality
protection options are evaluated, and alternative mixes of practices are considered. A final collection
of practices are selected that not only protect water quality but meet other resource needs. These final
selected practices constitute the BMPs for the project.
2) BMP Application - The BMPs are translated into contract provisions, special use permit
requirements, project plan specifications, and so forth. This insures that the operator or person
responsible for applying the BMPs actually is required to do so. Site-specific BMP prescriptions are
2

taken from plan-to-ground by a combination of project layout and resource specialists (hydrology,
fisheries, soils, etc.). This is when final adjustments to fit BMP prescriptions to the site are made.
3) BMP Monitoring - When the resource activity begins (e.g., timber harvest or road building), timber
sale administrators, engineering representatives, resource specialists, and others insure the BMPs are
implemented according to plan. BMP implementation monitoring is done before, during, and after
resource activity implementation. This monitoring answers the question: Did we do what we said we
were going to do? Once BMPs have been implemented, further monitoring is done to evaluate if the
BMPs are effective in meeting management objectives and protecting beneficial uses. If monitoring
indicates that water quality standards are not being met or beneficial uses are not being protected,
corrective action will consider the following:
a. Is the BMP technically sound? Is it really best or is there a better practice that is technically
sound and feasible to implement?
b. Was the BMP applied entirely as designated? Was it only partially implemented? Were
personnel, equipment, funds, or training lacking which resulted in inadequate or incomplete
implementation?
c. Do the parameters and criteria that constitute water quality standards adequately reflect humaninduced changes to water quality and beneficial uses?
4) Feedback - Feedback on the results of BMP evaluation is both short- and long-term in nature. Where
corrective action is needed, immediate response will be undertaken. This action may include:
modification of the BMP, modification of the activity, ceasing the activity, or possibly modification
of the State water quality standard. Cumulative effects over the long-term may also lead to the need
for possible corrective actions.

3

KNF BMP Selection and Design Form (KNF-BMP-1) (Revised 3/06)
Site-Specific Best Management Practices
Description of the soil and water conservation practices from the Forest Service Soil and Water Conservation Handbook (FSH 2509.22) will be applied
in all alternatives. The location where the practices will be applied is specified in the table below. For a more detailed description of a specific BMP,
refer to the Soil and Water Conservation Handbook.
Abbreviations used in this table:
SPS = Special Project Specification
TSC = Timber Sale Contract
TSA = Timber Sale Administrator
SMZ = Streamside Management Zone
IDT = Interdisciplinary Team
SWCP = Soil and Water Conservation Practice
SWCP

14.01

14.02

14.03

SWCP OBJECTIVE
TIMBER SALE PLANNING
To incorporate soil and water
resource considerations into
Timber Sale Planning

TIMBER HARVEST UNIT
DESIGN - To insure that
timber harvest unit design
will secure favorable
conditions of water flow,
maintain water quality and
soil productivity, and reduce
soil erosion and
sedimentation.
USE OF SALE AREA
MAPS (SAMs) FOR
DESIGNATING SOIL AND
WATER PROTECTION
NEEDS - To delineate the
location of protected areas
and available water sources
and insure their recognition,
proper consideration, and
protection on the ground.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

94%

93%

91%

KNF = Kootenai National Forest
PSF = Pre-sale Forester
ER = Engineering Representative
COR = Contracting Officer's Representative
SAM = Sale Area Map
FMO = Fire Management Officer
RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA
1. Unit design, mitigation, and effects analysis was
done by IDT.
2. TSC will be prepared by PSF that will include
management constraints and Design Criteria
from EIS.
3. Use standard interim RHCA widths unless
modified through watershed analysis.
4. Use exiting skid trails where feasible.
1. Cumulative effects analysis and unit design
were performed by IDT.
2. The prescriptions and unit design are consistent
with direction outlined in the considerations for
Best Management Practices.
3. Use standard interim RHCA widths unless
modified through watershed analysis.
4. Use exiting skid trails where feasible.

1. Water courses identified and protected using
SMZ buffers as a minimum.
2. Skidding on dry, frozen, or snow-covered soil
conditions.
3. Designated skid trails in units with previous
harvest.
4. Use standard interim RHCA widths unless
modified through watershed analysis.

4

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
IDT has evaluated watershed characteristics and
estimated response to proposed activities. EIS
identifies design criteria to protect soil and water
resources. Timber sale contracts will include
provisions to meet water quality, soils, and other
resources as directed by the Decision.

Proposed activities were evaluated to estimate the
potential watershed response. Prescriptions will be
designed to assure an acceptable level of protection
for soil and water resources. Management will
protect soil/water values by avoiding sensitive
areas, adjusting unit boundaries, adding specific
BMPs to meet specific SWCPs, implementing the
KNF Riparian Area Guidelines, applying
mitigation, and applying implementation/
effectiveness monitoring.
The IDT will identify water courses to be protected,
unit boundaries, and other features required by other
means such as "C" provisions. Ground verification
and preparation of SAMs to be included in TSC will
be done by PSF. TSA reviews areas of concern with
purchaser before operations.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

IDT; PSF

N/A

IDT

N/A

IDT; PSF;
TSA

B(T)1.1
B(T)6.5
C(T)6.50#

SWCP

14.04

14.05

14.06

14.07

14.08

14.09

SWCP OBJECTIVE
LIMITING THE
OPERATION PERIOD OF
TIMBER SALE
ACTIVITIES - To minimize
soil erosion, sedimentation,
and a loss in soil productivity
by insuring that the purchaser
conducts his/her operations
in a timely manner.
PROTECTION OF
UNSTABLE AREAS - To
protect unstable areas and
avoid triggering mass
movements of the soil mantle
and resultant erosion and
sedimentation.
RIPARIAN AREA
DESIGNATION - To
minimize the adverse effects
on riparian areas with
prescriptions that manage
nearby logging and related
land disturbance activities.

DETERMINING
TRACTOR-LOGGABLE
GROUND - To protect water
quality from degradation
caused by tractor logging
ground disturbance.

TRACTOR SKIDDING
DESIGN - To minimize
erosion and sedimentation
and protect soil productivity
by designing skidding
patterns to best fit the terrain.
SUSPENDED LOG
YARDING IN TIMBER
HARVESTING - To protect
the soil from excessive
disturbance and accelerated
erosion and maintain the
integrity of the riparian areas
and other sensitive areas.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

98%

96%

88%

96%

97%

95%.

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

1. Units located on soils sensitive to compaction
and/or displacement have been identified.
2. Designate units needing harvest on frozen or
snow covered ground.
3. All other ground disturbing activities will occur
during dry, frozen, or snow-covered conditions.

If limited operating periods are identified and
recommended during the analysis by the IDT, the
PSF will prepare a contract that includes provision
C(T)6.316 and/or C(T)6.4#.

1. Unstable landtypes will be identified during the
planning process.
2. Units found to need further protection will use
alternative yarding techniques, seasonal
restrictions, and/or unit boundary adjustments.

If the NEPA analysis concluded that soils/geology
in the area were unstable, BMPs would be designed
to prevent irreversible soil and water damage.

1. Identify areas with or adjacent to wet areas.
2. Default RHCA widths will be adhered to unless
modified through watershed analysis.
3. SMZ widths will be used as a minimum if
modification is proposed.
4. Areas found during sale layout will be reported
to the Hydrologist and afforded the same
protections as those identified during the
planning process.
1. Tractor loggable units (slopes < 40%) have
been identified during the planning process.
2. Those areas found not to be tractor loggable
were designated as cable, forwarder, or winter
harvest units; or were dropped from the unit.

All streams and wetlands in the decision area will
comply with KNF Riparian Area Guidelines
(Appendix 26) and KNF Forest Plan as amended by
INFS/UCRB. The width of the riparian areas will be
decided upon by the IDT. These widths will be
included on the sale area map and marked on the
ground. This information will be included in the
timber sale contract.

1. Identify units with designated or dispersed skid
trails.
2. TSA and purchaser agree on proposed
locations before operation.

1. Units that have slopes that are unsuitable for or
sensitive to ground base skidding will be
identified. Units 26, 29, 116, 129, and portions
of 19 and 38.
2. Units with sustained slopes >40% will be
designated cable harvest units.

5

IDT has identified tractor-loggable ground (in
conjunction with personnel from timber
operations) during transportation and timber sale
planning process. The results have been used to
determine intensity of and restrictions for land
disturbance activities. PSF will prepare a TSC that
includes provisions stating areas and conditions
under which tractors can operate.
IDT has identified sensitive areas during the
planning process. The TSA will execute the plan
on the ground by locating the skid trails with the
timber purchaser or by agreeing to the purchaser's
proposed locations prior to operation.
IDT recognizes the hazards associated with
operating on steep and/or rocky slopes. Areas
found to be of concern will use appropriate harvest
systems that provide for a safe work environment
and protect natural resources.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

IDT; PSF;
TSA

B(T)6.31
B(T)6.311
B(T)6.6
C(T)6.6
C(T)6.316#
C(T)6.4#

IDT; PSF;
TSA

C(T)6.4#

IDT; PSF;
TSA

B(T)1.1
B(T)6.5,
C(T)6.4#
C(T)6.41#
C(T)6.50#

IDT; PSF

C(T)6.4#
SAM

IDT; TSA

B(T)6.422
C(T)6.4#

IDT

B(T)6.42
C(T)6.4#
C(T)6.50#

SWCP

14.10

14.11

14.12

14.13

14.14

14.15

SWCP OBJECTIVE
LOG LANDING
LOCATION AND DESIGN
- To locate in such a way as
to avoid soil erosion and
water quality degradation.
LOG LANDING EROSION
PREVENTION AND
CONTROL- To reduce
erosion and subsequent
sedimentation from log
landing through the use of
mitigating measures.
EROSION PREVENTION
AND CONTROL
MEASURES DURING THE
TIMBER SALE
OPERATION - To insure
that the purchaser's
operations shall be conducted
reasonably to minimize soil
erosion.
SPECIAL EROSION
PREVENTION MEASURES
ON AREAS DISTURBED
BY HARVEST
ACTIVITIES - To prevent
erosion and sedimentation on
disturbed areas.
REVEGETATION OF
AREAS DISTURBED BY
HARVEST ACTIVITIES To establish a vegetative
cover on disturbed areas to
prevent erosion and
sedimentation.

EROSION CONTROL ON
SKID TRAILS - To protect
water quality by minimizing
erosion and sedimentation
derived from skid trails.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

99%

98%

91%

91%

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

1. TSA and purchaser agree on landing locations
before operation.
2. Use least excavation needed.
3. No side-cast material into sensitive areas or
waterways.
4. Install proper drainage.
1. Proper drainage will be installed and
maintained during operation.
2. Landings will be scarified, seeded, and
fertilized upon completion harvest activities.
3. TSA will assess conditions and take necessary
steps to insure soil and water protection.

TSA must agree to landing locations proposed by
the purchaser. Approved landing locations will
meet the criteria of: minimal size, least excavation
needed, minimum skid roads necessary, no sidecast material into sensitive areas, and have proper
drainage.
PSF and TSA assess what is necessary to prevent
erosion from landing and to insure stabilization. It
is up to the TSA to request technical assistance as
needed.

TSA

B(T)6.422
C(T)6.422

PSF; TSA

C(T)6.6
BT6.64
B(T)6.6
C(T)6.633#

1. Designate units with seasonal restrictions.
2. Do not operate during wet periods including
spring-snowmelt and/or intense or longduration rain storms.
3. TSA insures that erosion control is kept current
and prevents operation when excessive
impacts are possible.

PSF and TSA sets purchaser's responsibility to
prevent soil/water resource damage in TSC. TSA
insures that erosion control is kept current and
prevents operation when excessive impacts are
possible.

PSF; TSA

A13
B(T)6.6
B(T)6.64
C(T)6.6
C(T)6.601#
C(T)6.633#

1. Waterbar, seed, fertilize, and place woody
debris on skid trails, landings.
2. Recontour, seed, and place woody debris on
constructed skid trails and temporary roads.
3. BMPs may be adjusted by the TSA to meet
operational requirements

IDT identifies locations needing special
stabilization measures. If any such areas are
identified, BMPs may be adjusted by the TSA to
meet operational requirements

IDT

C(T)6.601#
C(T)6.32#
C(T)6.633#

1. Seed and fertilize areas of exposed soil with
KNF approved vegetative and fertilizer mix.

IDT has established vegetation and fertilizer mix to
be used in the project area with outlines on the
extent to which it should be used. TSA is
responsible for seeing that revegetation work
required by purchaser is done correctly and in a
timely manner. The purchaser will be responsible
for revegetation immediately after the completion
of harvest. Funds will be collected for the District
to do follow-up seeding/fertilizing in years two and
three after harvest.
Erosion control measures may be recommended by
the IDT, but site-specifically adjusted by the TSA.
TSA will insure erosion control measures are
applied prior to expected hydrologic events (spring
runoff, high-intensity storms, etc.). Maintenance of
erosion control structures by the purchaser may be
necessary and requested by the TSA.

94%

87%

1. Insure proper skid trail location.
2. Insure proper drainage on skid trails.
3. Recontour, seed, and place woody debris on
constructed skid trails and temporary roads.
4. Insure maintenance of erosion control
structures by purchaser.

6

IDT; TSA

TSA

C(T)6.01#
C(T)6.633#

C(T)6.6
C(T)6.633#
B(T)6.6
B(T)6.65
B(T)6.66

SWCP

14.16

14.17

14.18

14.19

14.20

SWCP OBJECTIVE
WET MEADOW
PROTECTION DURING
TIMBER HARVESTING To avoid damage to the
ground cover, soil, and water
in meadows.

STREAM CHANNEL
PROTECTION
(IMPLEMENTATION AND
ENFORCEMENT) - Protect
natural stream flows; provide
unobstructed passage of
flows; reduce sediment input;
and restore flow if diverted
by timber sale activity.
EROSION CONTROL
STRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE - To
insure that constructed
erosion control structures are
stabilized and working
effectively.
ACCEPTANCE OF
TIMBER SALE EROSION
CONTROL MEASURES
BEFORE SALE CLOSURE
- To assure the adequacy of
required erosion control
work on timber sales.

SLASH TREATMENT IN
SENSITIVE AREAS - To
protect water quality by
protecting sensitive tributary
areas from degradation that
would result from using
mechanized equipment for
slash disposal.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

84%

91%

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

1. Identify units with or adjacent to wet meadows.
Units 9, 10, 12, 17, 23, 52, 120, and 212 have
wet meadows, wetlands, and/or ponds in or
adjacent to their boundaries.
2. Units with unmapped wet areas will be reported
to Hydrologist and afforded the same protection
as those identified during the planning process.
3. Standard interim RHCA widths will be adhered
to unless modification is in place.
4. The SMZ law will be met or exceeded.
1. Standard interim RHCA widths will be adhered
to unless modification is in place.
2. SMZ widths will be used at a minimum if
modification in place.
3. SMZ law will be met or exceeded.

IDT has identified areas needing special
protection. PSF will verify the areas needing
protection and prepare the contract to prevent
damage to meadows. The TSA will be responsible
for on-the-ground protection of meadows. If
meadows are found by the TSA during operations,
it is their responsibility to either afford them the
proper protection or pursue a contract
modification.

1. During the period of the TSC, the purchaser is
responsible for maintaining their erosion
control features.

During the period of the TSC, the purchaser is
responsible for maintaining their erosion control
features. If work is needed beyond this time, the
District will pursue other sources of funding.

1. TSA reviews erosion prevention work before
each harvest unit is considered complete.
2. The inspection will determine if the work is
acceptable and will meet the objective of the
erosion control feature.

A careful review of erosion prevention work will
be made by the TSA before each harvest unit is
considered complete. The inspection will
determine if the work is acceptable and will meet
the objective of the erosion control feature. A
feature is considered not acceptable if it does not
meet standards or is not expected to protect
soil/water values. Technical assistance will be used
as necessary.
All activities will comply with the KNF Riparian
Area Guidelines (FP, Appendix 26). Where harvest
within riparian areas is proposed, either the slash
would be removed with the tree or scattered and
not treated.

93%

97%

92%

1. Where harvest is proposed within riparian
areas, either slash should be removed with the
tree or scattered and not treated.
2. Mechanical fuels treatments should occur on
slopes < 40%.

7

IDT has identified the location of channels in the
decision area. PSF will prepare a SAM locating the
channels needing protection. Layout crew marks
boundaries and trees according to HB-731 and FP
guidelines. TSA will see that TSC items are carried
out on the ground. Technical assistance will be
consulted as needed.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

IDT; PSF;
TSA

IDT; PSF;
TSA

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS
B(T)1.1
B(T)5.1
B(T)6.422
B(T)6.61
C(T)6.4#
C(T)6.62#

B(T)1.1
B(T)6.5
B(T)6.6
C(T)6.50#
C(T)6.6

IDT; PSF;
TSA

B(T)6.66
B(T)6.67

TSA

B(T)6.36

TSA; FMO

B(T)6.5
C(T)6.50#
B(T)6.7
C(T)6.7
C(T)6.71
C(T)6.753

SWCP

14.22

15.01

15.02

15.03

15.04

15.05

SWCP OBJECTIVE
MODIFICATION OF THE
TSC - To modify the TSC if
new circumstances or
conditions indicate the
timber sale will cause
irreversible damage to soil,
water, or watershed values.
GENERAL GUIDELINES
FOR TRANSPORTATION
PLANNING - To introduce
soil and water resource
considerations into
transportation planning.
GENERAL GUIDELINES
FOR THE LOCATION
AND DESIGN OF ROADS
AND TRAILS - To locate
and design roads and trails
with minimal soil and water
impact while considering all
design criteria.
ROAD AND TRAIL
EROSION CONTROL
PLAN - To prevent, limit,
and mitigate erosion,
sedimentation, and resulting
water quality degradation
prior to the initiation of
construction by timely
implementation of erosion
control practices.
TIMING OF
CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITIES - To minimize
erosion by conducting
operations during minimal
runoff periods.
SLOPE STABILIZATION
AND PREVENTION OF
MASS FAILURES - To
reduce sedimentation by
minimizing the chances for
road-related mass failures,
including landslides and
embankment slumps.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA
1. Environmental modification procedure.

100%

100%

96%

95%

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

If TSC is not adequate to protect soil/water
resources, the TSA and Contracting Officer are
responsible for recommending modification of the
TSC.

TSA

B(T)8.33

IDT; ER

N/A

IDT; ER

N/A

IDT; ER

B(T)6.31
B(T)6.6
B(T)6.312

IDT; ER

B(T)6.31
B(T)6.312
B(T)6.6
SPS 204

IDT; ER

N/A

1. Complete a roads analysis.
2. Transportation plans include installation and
maintaining proper drainage.

A roads Analysis has been completed. The IDT has
evaluated watershed characteristics and estimated
the response of soil and water resources to
proposed transportation alternatives and activities.

1. Follow INFS Standards and Guidelines for
road management.
2. Identify sensitive landtypes, riparian areas, and
wetlands during planning.
3. Use the minimum amount of roads and trails
necessary.

The IDT has insured that the location and design of
roads and trails are based on multiple resource
objectives. Mitigation measures have been
designed to protect the soil and water resources
identified in the NEPA process. Contract
provisions will be prepared by the ER that meets
the soil and water resource protection
requirements.
IDT has established soil/water conservation
objectives and mitigation measures. ER will then
prepare a contract that reflects the objectives. ER
will see that erosion control measures are approved
and completed in a timely manner. IDT reviews
projects to check effectiveness of erosion control
features.

1. Seed and fertilize disturbed areas.
2. Install proper ditching and road slope.
3. Install proper drainage.
4. Incorporate road grade breaks.
5. Use minimum road or trail length/width
necessary.
6. Avoid wet areas or areas of sensitive soil types.

1. Avoid construction during wet periods.
97%

99%

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

1. Avoid construction across unstable areas.
2. Construct embankments following approved
engineering practices.
3. Use minimum road or trail length/width
necessary.

8

IDT has outlined detailed erosion control measures
in NEPA process. ER puts these measures into
contract provisions. Compliance is assured by
Contracting Officer or ER.

Road and trail construction in mountainous terrain
requires cutting and loading natural slopes which
may lead to landslides and/or embankment
failures. In areas with intrinsic slope stability
problems, appropriate technical resource personnel
must be involved in an interdisciplinary approach
to route location.

SWCP

SWCP OBJECTIVE

15.06

MITIGATION OF
SURFACE EROSION AND
STABILIZATION OF
SLOPES - To minimize soil
erosion from road cutslopes,
fill slopes, and travel ways.

15.07

15.08

15.09

15.10

CONTROL OF
PERMANENT ROAD
DRAINAGE - To minimize
the erosive effects of
concentrated water and
degradation of water quality
by proper design and
construction of road drainage
systems and drainage control
structures.
PIONEER ROAD
CONSTRUCTION - To
minimize sediment
production and mass wasting
associated with pioneer road
construction.
TIMELY EROSION
CONTROL MEASURES
ON INCOMPLETE ROADS
AND STREAM CROSSING
PROJECTS - To minimize
erosion of and sedimentation
from disturbed ground on
incomplete projects.
CONTROL OF ROAD
CONSTRUCTION,
EXCAVATION, AND
SIDE-CAST MATERIAL To reduce sedimentation
from unconsolidated
excavated and side-cast
material caused by road
construction, reconstruction,
or maintenance.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

94%

94%

100%

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

1. Seed and fertilize cut and fill slopes.
2. Install proper ditching and road slope.
3. Install proper drainage.
4. Incorporate road grade breaks.
5. Install ditch relief culverts before/after stream
crossings.

IDT has outlined detailed erosion control measures
in the NEPA process. Stabilization techniques are
included in contract provisions. Compliance is
assured by Contracting Officer or ER.

1. Avoid long, steep grades.
2. Maintain adequate surface drainage.
3. Prevent erosion of culvert fills.
4. Maintain ditches.
5. Ditch relief culverts before/after stream
crossings.

IDT has identified locations, design criteria,
drainage control features, and mitigation.
Compliance will be assured by the ER/Contracting
Officer.

1. Insure stable slopes during construction.
2. Seed and fertilize exposed soil.
3. Avoid construction during wet periods.
4. Use slash filter windrows.

ER/Contracting Officer will be responsible for
enforcing contract specifications. The purchaser is
responsible for submitting an operating plan that
includes erosion control measures.

1. Avoid construction during wet periods.
2. Use slash filter windrows or silt fence.
3. Seed and fertilize disturbed areas.

IDT has identified project location and mitigation
measures in NEPA process. Protective measures
will be kept current on all areas of disturbed,
erosion-prone areas. TSA insures contract
compliance.

96%

1. Do not side-cast into waterways or sensitive
areas.
2. Use slash filter windrows or silt fence.
96%

9

IDT has identified project location and mitigation
measures in NEPA process. Protective measures
will be kept current on all areas of disturbed,
erosion-prone areas. TSA insures contract
compliance.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

IDT; ER

SPS 203, 204,
206A 210, 412
619, 625, 626 630
B(T)5.3,
B(T)6.31
B(T)6.6,
B(T)6.62
B(T)6.66
B(T)6.312,
C(T)6.6
C(T)6.601#

ER

B(T)5.3
C(T)5.31#
B(T)6.311
B(T)6.6
C(T)6.6

ER

B(T)6.6
B(T)5.23
B(T)6.31
B(T)6.312
B(T)6.311
SPS 204

IDT; TSA

B(T)6.31
B(T)6.6
B(T)5.23
B(T)6.66
C(T)6.6

IDT; TSA

B(T)5.3
C(T)5.31#
SPS 203
SPS 204

SWCP

15.11

15.12

15.13

15.14

15.15

15.16

15.17

SWCP OBJECTIVE
SERVICING AND
REFUELING EQUIPMENT
- To prevent contamination
of waters from accidental
spills of fuels, lubricants,
bitumens, and other harmful
materials.
CONTROL OF
CONSTRUCTION IN
RIPARIAN AREAS - To
minimize the adverse effects
on riparian areas from roads.
CONTROLLING INCHANNEL EXCAVATION
- To minimize stream
channel disturbances and
related sediment production.
DIVERSION OF FLOWS
AROUND
CONSTRUCTION SITES:
To minimize downstream
sedimentation by insuring all
stream diversions are
carefully planned.
STREAM CROSSINGS ON
TEMPORARY ROADS: To
keep temporary roads from
unduly damaging streams,
disturbing channels, or
obstructing fish passage.
BRIDGE AND CULVERT
INSTALLATION: To
minimize sedimentation and
turbidity resulting from
excavation for in-channel
structures.
REGULATION OF
BORROW PITS, GRAVEL
SOURCES, AND
QUARRIES: To minimize
sediment production from
borrow pits, gravel sources,
and quarries and limit
channel disturbance in those
gravel sources suitable for
development in floodplains.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA
1. Insure proper fuel storage and transportation.
2. Keep fuel from streams, wetlands, ponds, and
lakes.

99%

97%

94%

93%

96%

98%

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
ER/TSA/Contracting Officer will designate the
location, size, and uses of service refueling areas.
All projects will adhere to the KNF Hazardous
Substance Spill Plan in case of accidents.

1. Follow INFS Standards and Guidelines for
construction within riparian areas.
2. Use slash filter windrows or silt fence.
3. Install ditch relief culverts and surface water
deflectors before/after stream crossings.
1. Use silt fence to minimize introduced
sediment.
2. Use minimum amount of road.
3. Construct minimum number of crossings.

Proposed new and temporary roads will adhere to
guidelines in the Montana Streamside Management
Zone Law (HB-731). All road activities will follow
INFS Standards and Guidelines for road
management.
BMP improvements at crossings would adhere to
the guidelines in Montana Streamside Management
Zone Law (HB-731) and the INFS Standards and
Guidelines for road management.

1. Divert streamflow around construction.
2. Use silt fence to minimize introduced
sediment.
3. Construction during low-flow

The IDT has determined, where stream crossings
meet multiple resource objectives, the crossings
would require a State 124 permit. This would
require the State Fish, Wildlife, and Parks to
review the adequacy of the proposed mitigation.
Compliance with contract provisions would be
done by the ER.
The IDT identifies areas in need of a temporary
road during the NEPA process. Proposed stream
crossings would adhere to the guidelines in
Montana Streamside Management Zone Law (HB731).

1. Consult Hydrologist on placement of crossing
2. Use minimum number of stream crossings.
3. Construction during low-flow.
4. Follow INFS Standards and Guidelines for
construction within riparian areas.
1. Installation should be done during periods of
low flow.
2. Instream sediment retention devices should be
used throughout implementation.

98%

10

IDT has identified project location and mitigation
measures in NEPA process. Protective measures
will be kept current on all areas of disturbed,
erosion-prone areas. TSA insures contract
compliance.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

ER; TSA

B(T)6.222
B(T)6.34
B(T)6.341

ER; TSA

B(T)6.5
B(T)6.62
C(T)6.50#
SPS 206
SPS 206A

ER; TSA

B(T)6.5
SPS 204
SPS 206
206A

IDT; ER

B(T)6.5
B(T)6.31
C(T)6.50#
C(T)6.6

PSF

N/A

IDT; TSA

C(T)6.5#

ER

B(T)6.5
C(T)6.50#

SWCP

15.18

15.19

15.20

15.21

15.22

15.23

SWCP OBJECTIVE
DISPOSAL OF RIGHT-OFWAY AND ROADSIDE
DEBRIS: To insure that
debris generated during road
construction is kept out of
streams and prevent slash
and debris from subsequently
obstructing channels.
STREAM BANK
PROTECTION: To minimize
sediment production from
stream banks and structural
abutments in natural
waterways.
WATER SOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
CONSISTENT WITH
WATER QUALITY
PROTECTION: To supply
water for road construction
and maintenance and fire
protection while maintaining
water quality.
MAINTENANCE OF
ROADS: To maintain all
roads in a manner that
provides for soil and water
protection by minimizing
rutting, failures, side-cast,
and blockage of drainage
facilities.
ROAD SURFACE
TREATMENT TO
PREVENT LOSS OF
MATERIALS: To minimize
the erosion of road surface
materials and, consequently,
reduce the likelihood of
sediment production.
TRAFFIC CONTROL
DURING WET PERIODS:
To reduce the potential for
road surface disturbance
during wet weather and
reduce sedimentation.

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA
1. Debris and slash generated during road
construction should not be side-cast into
streams.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

98%

IDT has identified project location and mitigation
measures during NEPA process. Protective
measures will be kept current on all areas of
disturbed soils. TSA and ER insures contract
compliance.

91%

1. Contract Clause CT 5.31#.

Road maintenance associated with a timber sale is
the responsibility of purchaser. The ER/SA will
insure that the purchaser maintains roads according
to the appropriate maintenance level.

96%

1. Maintenance of road surface should include
proper blading and/or dust abatement.
2. Use crush-gravel where necessary.

Road restrictions and traffic control measures will
be implemented on all haul roads when damage
would occur during spring breakup. The decision
to restrict a road is made by the ER. Hauling
restrictions would be controlled by the TSA.

96%

11

ER

Std Spec 201
SPS 201

IDT; ER; TSA

Std Spec 619

ER; FMO

Std Spec 207

ER; SA

B(T)5.12
B(T)5.3
B(T)6.6
C(T)6.6
C(T)5.32#
B(T)6.31

IDT; ER

B(T)5.3
C(T)5.31#
C(T)5.314#

ER; TSA

B(T)6.6
C(T)6.6
C(T5).316#
C(T)5.41#

Protective measures will be kept current on all
areas of disturbed, erosion-prone areas. ER insures
contract compliance.

97%

1. Avoid hauling during wet periods.

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

Proposed road construction will adhere to the
guidelines in the Montana Streamside Management
Zone Law (HB-731).

97%

1. Take precautions to minimize or eliminate
disturbance to stream banks.
2. Maintain instream structures.

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

SWCP

SWCP OBJECTIVE

15.24

SNOW REMOVAL
CONTROLS: To minimize
the impact of snow melt on
road surfaces and
embankments and reduce the
probability of sediment
production resulting from
snow removal operations.
OBLITERATION OF
TEMPORARY ROADS: To
reduce sediment generated
from temporary roads by
obliterating them at the
completion of their intended
use.
PROTECTION OF SOIL
AND WATER FROM
PRESCRIBED BURNING
EFFECTS: To maintain soil
productivity, minimize
erosion, and prevent ash,
sediment, nutrients, and
debris from entering surface
water.

15.25

18.03

PERCENT
EFFECTIVE

96%

95%

100%

RECOMMENDED BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES BY IDT/TSA

CONSIDERATIONS FOR BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

1. Be careful not to leave snow berm at edge of
road where possible.
2. Where a berm cannot be avoided, insure proper
drainage by opening sections of berm to allow
water to leave road surface.

Snow removal will be kept current on all roads
associated with winter logging operations. The
TSA insures compliance with contract provisions.

1. Re-contour road fully where feasible.
2. Seed and fertilize exposed soil.
3. Pull slash and woody debris back onto
rehabilitated road.

This work will be done on all new temporary roads
in the decision area. The work will be done by the
purchaser with compliance by the TSA.

1. Follow INFS Standards and Guidelines for
burning in RHCAs.
2. Adhere to SMZ Law.
3. Where harvest within riparian areas is
proposed, either the slash should be removed
with the tree or scattered and not treated.

Broadcast burning adjacent to riparian areas will
adhere to guidelines in the Montana Streamside
Management Zone Law (HB-731). Prescribed burn
plans identify the conditions necessary to prevent
soil damage and meet site preparation objectives.

12

PERSON(S)
RESPONSIBLE

CONTRACT
PROVISIONS

IDT; TSA

C(T)5.316#
Std Spec 203.09

TSA

B(T)6.63
C(T)6.6
C(T)6.632#
C(T)6.633#

FMO

N/A

Appendix D:

SWCP/BMP
PRACTICE #
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
11.10
11.11
11.12
11.13

Kootenai National Forest BMP Monitoring Summary
KOOTENAI NATIONAL FOREST BMP TRACKING-DOCUMENTATION
SUMMARY: 1991 - 2011
IMPLEMENTATION SCORES
EFFECTIVENESS SCORES
% 4 or
% 3 or
3
4
5
Total
1
2
3
4
5
Total
5
less
1
12
0
13
92
8
0
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
58
1
64
92
8
0
1
1
52
0
54
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
279
7
290
99
1
0
1
3
127
0
131
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
223
4
227
100
0
0
0
0
77
0
77
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
37
1
38
100
0
0
0
1
7
0
8

1

2

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
3
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0

12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
12.7
12.8
12.9
12.10
12.11
12.12

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0

50
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
0
100
0
0

50
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6
13.7

0
0
1
0
0
0
0

0
12
10
0
4
6
0

1
69
45
10
16
37
0

79
1416
533
341
246
581
0

3
6
7
8
0
5
0

83
1503
596
359
266
629
0

99
95
91
97
92
93
0

1
5
9
3
8
7
0

0
0
1
0
0
1
0

0
4
4
0
1
4
0

2
33
33
15
12
24
0

66
790
241
278
229
243
0

1
1
2
3
0
1
0

13

% 4 or
5
100
0
96
0
0
0
97
0
100
0
0
0
88

% 3 or
less
0
0
4
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
13

2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0

50
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
0
0
0
0

50
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

69
828
281
296
242
273
0

97
96
86
95
95
89
0

3
4
14
5
5
11
0

13.8
13.9
13.10
13.11
13.12
13.13
13.14
13.20

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
107

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
108

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
99

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
107

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
108

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
99

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
14.8
14.9
14.10
14.11
14.12
14.13
14.14
14.15
14.16
14.17
14.18
14.19
14.20
14.21
14.22
14.23

0
3
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
5
2
0
1
3
7
4
3
0
0
6
5
2
8
7
5
6
1
2
0
0
0

0
49
33
9
8
32
29
39
15
16
20
42
44
18
60
32
24
12
19
17
0
1
0

42
1362
795
1131
307
587
926
1395
374
1660
1616
1271
697
994
1581
279
780
918
1035
446
54
98
9

0
11
4
1
5
10
9
22
4
13
13
11
2
3
19
1
12
1
5
7
2
8
0

42
1430
834
1141
322
632
972
1460
396
1689
1649
1333
751
1017
1671
319
821
937
1060
472
56
107
9

100
96
96
99
97
94
96
97
95
99
99
96
93
98
96
88
96
98
98
96
100
99
100

0
4
4
1
3
6
4
3
5
1
1
4
7
2
4
12
4
2
2
4
0
1
0

0
0
1
0
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
5
1
4
2
0
1
0
0
0

0
3
1
2
1
3
2
2
2
0
0
7
5
3
12
4
5
7
1
12
0
0
0

1
32
22
6
6
22
13
20
7
10
15
43
29
23
80
22
19
24
10
9
0
0
0

15
636
311
623
203
251
476
840
166
939
850
531
447
526
800
179
331
401
354
303
3
31
1

0
5
2
0
0
3
2
5
3
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
12
0
2
1
1
2
0

16
676
337
631
211
282
493
867
178
951
867
583
483
554
899
207
371
434
367
326
4
33
1

94
95
93
99
96
90
97
97
95
99
98
91
93
95
89
87
92
92
97
93
100
100
100

6
5
7
1
4
10
3
3
5
1
2
9
7
5
11
13
8
8
3
7
0
0
0

15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.8
15.9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
7
2
0
0
2
2
0
1

0
42
4
6
3
14
52
12
15

36
1097
218
156
227
412
627
60
211

0
8
13
6
2
8
14
3
7

36
1154
237
168
232
436
695
75
234

100
96
97
96
99
96
92
84
93

0
4
3
4
1
4
8
16
7

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
9
0
0
0
2
5
0
2

0
38
8
3
1
14
28
0
4

26
890
164
111
181
301
533
39
130

0
3
8
6
2
3
26
2
6

26
940
180
120
184
321
592
41
142

100
95
96
98
99
95
94
100
96

0
5
4
3
1
5
6
0
4

14

15.10
15.11
15.12
15.13
15.14
15.15
15.16
15.17
15.18
15.19
15.20
15.21
15.22
15.23
15.24
15.25
15.26
15.27

0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
3
2
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
2
3
1
4
2
2
0
0

3
4
1
6
1
6
13
1
1
1
4
43
13
26
8
9
1
0

213
913
143
193
43
232
127
111
145
90
127
2129
703
1363
743
624
1
2

6
5
4
6
4
0
8
2
6
3
0
10
14
3
2
22
0
1

224
926
150
205
49
239
148
114
153
95
133
2185
731
1396
755
657
2
3

98
99
98
97
96
97
91
99
99
98
95
98
98
98
99
98
50
100

2
1
2
3
4
3
9
1
1
2
5
2
2
2
1
2
50
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
1
2
1
0
1
2
1
0
1
1
10
1
2
1
2
0
0

8
5
1
6
2
5
1
1
2
0
5
30
7
17
8
10
0
0

167
555
123
152
25
183
106
100
86
51
100
981
304
586
266
335
2
2

3
0
4
7
3
0
8
3
3
5
0
3
9
0
0
4
0
0

178
561
130
166
30
189
117
105
91
57
107
1024
321
605
275
351
2
2

96
99
98
96
93
97
97
98
98
98
93
96
98
97
97
97
100
100

4
1
2
4
7
3
3
2
2
2
7
4
2
3
3
3
0
0

16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6
16.7
16.8
16.9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5
4
0
3
5
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5
4
0
3
5
0
0
0
0

100
100
0
100
100
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

4
3
0
3
4
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5
4
0
3
5
0
0
0
0

80
75
0
100
80
0
0
0
0

20
25
0
0
20
0
0
0
0

17.1
17.2
17.3
17.4

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

1
1
2
1

2
2
1
1

0
0
0
0

3
3
3
2

67
67
33
50

33
33
67
50

0
0
0
0

0
1
1
0

1
1
1
1

1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

2
2
2
1

50
0
0
0

50
100
100
100

18.1
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.5
18.6

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
2
0
0
0

5
8
218
2
5
1

0
0
0
0
0
0

5
8
220
2
5
1

100
100
99
100
100
100

0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0
0

4
4
231
2
2
1

0
0
0
0
0
0

4
5
231
2
2
1

100
80
100
100
100
100

0
20
0
0
0
0

15

SUMMARY STATISTICS: 1991 - 2011
IMPLEMENTATION SCORES

EFFECTIVENESS SCORES

SUMMARY

1

2

3

4

5

Total

% 4 or 5

% 3 or less

1

2

3

4

5

Total

% 4 or 5

% 3 or less

Totals by score

17

143

1000

33483

362

35,005

97

3

23

133

751

18,197

166

19,270

95

5

Scores as % of total
Implemented. Evals

0.05

0.41

2.86

95.65

1.03

Total Number (N) of Implementation and Effectiveness Scores = 54,275

Scores as % of total
0.12
0.69
3.90
94.43
0.86
Effective. Evals
Note: Includes results from BMP 2 and BMP 4 forms. BMP 2 results are only entered in effectiveness column as a "4". BMP 4 results are entered in both effectiveness
and implementation columns.

16

Appendix E:

Soil Rehabilitation Plans and Mitigations for East Reservoir Project Area

Overview
The level of detrimental soil disturbance (DSD) will depend in large part on how skid trails are laid out and
properties of surface soil layers, specifically soil texture, the amount and size of rock fragments and soil
moisture conditions at the time of use. Coarse textured soils and abundant rock fragments in the soils would
both reduce the depth and width of detrimental soil disturbance beneath the tire or tracks of mechanical
harvesting equipment. Dry soils would not become nearly as compacted as wet soils (Han et al. 2006).
Whether compacted or not, the basic soil resource along skid trails would remain intact providing soil
erosion is controlled.
Major Sources of DSD
Soil compaction may involve soil erosion due to rutting or inadequate erosion control on strongly sloping to
moderately steep grades; potential topsoil displacement; and loss of soil productivity and surface A-horizon
in old skid roads. These road/trail prisms where not rehabilitated following previous activity, typically need
considerably less forest floor or soil structure re-building.
Analysis for DSD found all except four units in proposed East Reservoir Project would meet R1 SQS after
implementation. Rehabilitation of soil resources ties to direction in the Kootenai National Forest Plan
(KNFP), NFMA, and the R1 SQS (soil quality standards). The use of rehabilitation techniques in sitespecific instances would move areas of soil disturbance towards improved site potential at a faster rate than
if no rehabilitation techniques are used. It is estimated that rehabilitation would reduce soil compaction and
thereby significantly enhance soil and forest floor recovery timeframes. This timeframe of recovery is more
dependent on the landtype present and season of timber harvest operations as significant variables which
impact soil rehabilitation success (L. Kuennen pers. comm. 2009).
Rehabilitation actions would be effective at breaking up the area extent and magnitude of detrimental soil
disturbance and provide for improved aeration and hydrologic function within the soil. Rehabilitation
actions start the ultimate goal of soil restoration; that is to provide the building blocks from which soil
organisms and plants can continue to modify and build soil structure and chemistry. By providing these
building blocks, R1 SQS are met since steps have been made to move the treatment units towards improved
soil and site condition. Promoting biologic activity is the best way to remediate damaged soils (Powers
1990). Biologic activity influences many physical characteristics of the soil, e.g. soil aggregation and
associated water infiltration and gas exchange as well as soil chemistry.
REHABILITATION TREATMENTS
Soil rehabilitation techniques may include either natural (passive) restoration or non-natural aggressive
restoration techniques.
 Natural (Passive) Restoration
Natural (passive) restoration includes seeding/planting; scarification, treatment of noxious weeds, or a
combination of techniques. Natural processes include freeze/thaw and wet/dry cycles, forest floor building
and biological activity. Biological activity includes both above ground flora and fauna and soil flora and
fauna. It is anticipated that all units within the East Reservoir analysis area would be exposed and
influenced by natural passive restoration activities; however, the effectiveness would be dependent on
varying features such as freeze-thaw cycles, soil temperatures, vegetative response units (VRUs), and local
soil factors such as landtype, soil texture, aspect, slope and elevations (Kuennen and Gerhardt 1995).
Seeding or Planting
The Kootenai National Forest (KNF) has a localized seed mix that is included in each timber or stewardship
contract package. Seeding or planting with shrubs or trees is recommended where noxious weeds could
invade or at high value sites.
Scarification with a piece of equipment to a depth of 6-12 inches to roughen the soil surface improves
17

seedling germination and survival by creating microsites. On areas with deep compaction, sub-soiling or
other decompaction techniques to the depth of compaction improves the seedbed.
Fertilization is not recommended. Fertilization has been found to increase weed presence through changes
in the soil nutrient cycles which favor fast growing opportunistic vegetation.
 Non-Natural (Aggressive) Restoration
Ripping, Sub-Soiling and other Soil Decompaction Techniques
Rehabilitation of soil compaction should be prescribed on a site-specific basis. Those units in the East
Reservoir analysis area where such activities should occur in at least one of the alternatives include
proposed units 194S, 194T, 330, and 331. For more depth refer to the Soils Resource analysis.
Ripping, sub-soiling, or other decompaction techniques (e.g. using an excavator bucket to pierce the soil
surface) are prescribed to accelerate the recovery of compacted soils through reducing bulk density.
Several types of equipment are available including rock rippers, large disks, slash-rakes, winged rippers,
winged sub-soilers and excavators with specialized buckets.
The objectives for this technique are to loosen the upper (6-12) inches of soil to allow natural processes
(such as root penetration, soil microbial activity, water infiltration, gas exchange, freeze-thaw cycles) to
operate and restore soil function and aggregation in the rooting zone. As plants and soil organisms modify
soil structure and chemistry, they continue to naturally restore soil process. By providing the building
blocks through decompaction, the R1 soil quality guidelines are achieved since steps have been made to
move the treatment units toward improved soil and site condition.
Ripping or sub-soiling should only be used on severely compacted soils and in relatively small areas, e.g.,
landings, main skid trails and temporary roads. Ripping skid trails is appropriate if trails are benched with
obvious cut and fill slopes or deeply trenched with obvious outside berms can be accomplished with Timber
Sale Contract Provision C(T)6.6.32# Temporary Road and Tractor Road Obliteration. Where soils contain
35% or greater rock content such activities may only be marginal in effectiveness (L. Kuennen pers. comm.
2009).
Sub-soiling done correctly does not mix soil horizons or create deep furrows, instead the winged tinges and
till bars shatter the compaction. Mixing may occur if the tinges encounter large rocks or buried logs. To
effectively loosen or decompact existing soil conditions, the soils need to be heavily compacted and the
compaction needs to be continuous. No evidence of soil resettling on medium textured landings two years
after sub-soiling was noted (Carlson 2002, monitoring observation).
Ripping and topsoil restoration on fine textured soils is challenging due to the difficulty of timing field
operations to coincide with optimum soil moisture conditions. Sub-soiling significantly reduced the bulk
density of soils in heavily used landings with the overall reduction of bulk density dependent on soil
texture, with coarser soils showing the greatest improvements in bulk density (Plotnikoff et al. (2002). In
addition to ripping, wood chips incorporated into the soil surface were found successful in reducing bulk
densities (B.C. Ministry of Forests 2002, 2000).
The rehabilitation techniques are not expected to immediately reduce historic detrimental soil conditions.
However, by breaking up the subsurface compaction, natural processes (such as root penetration, soil
microbial activity, water infiltration, and freeze-thaw cycles) will be accelerated and will be more capable
of returning the soil to pre-disturbance condition. Within a 5 to 10 year timeframe, the rehabilitated soils
are anticipated to more closely resemble the reference condition. The soil productivity of the unit will be
improved from its current condition.
The analysis of this project assumes that 50% of historic skid trails in ground based units would be reused
for units containing 8% or greater existing DSD values. Thus for all such units the statistical average of
18

percent DSD was reduced by half to determine an estimated cumulative effects value on a unit-by-unit
basis.
Organic Matter Placement
Placing slash on old and new skid trails and leaving slash of various sizes throughout the activity area
would occur in conjunction with conventional erosion control measures required under the Timber Sale
contract. Such activities are suggested to occur where the greatest impacts to soils dominantly occurs as a
result of skid trail convergence (typically lower 25% of harvest unit). Such activities are the best way to
promote biological activity and reduce soil compaction. Placement of slash on a landing or skid trail would:
1) decrease erosion through the creation of microsites; 2) decrease the amount of surface sealing (caused
when mineral soil is exposed to rain); 3) provide shade and associated soil moisture; 4) provide germination
substrates and microsites that encourage native species while deterring weedy species; and 5) increase
biologic activity and all associated benefits. Such activities are proposed for East Reservoir Units 194S,
194T, 330, and 331. Additionally, such activities should also be used in units with proposed ground based
operations that are near a cumulative value of 15% DSD. This includes units : 2, 2B, 3, 7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 24,
26, 64, 70T, 73T, 74T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196, 305, 307, 311, 318, 319, 327, 328, 330,
331, 334, 335, 339, 340, 344, 345, 346, 347, 349, 350 and COE6.
Placing slash on skid trails for erosion control and soil rehabilitation can be effective as it provides a
physical buffer between raindrop energy and the bare soil surface. It also reduces soil sealing, raindrop
slash soil particle detachment, and provides roughness and microsites for the settling and storage of any soil
movement. In addition, placing slash on skid trails improves soil productivity by providing fines to the bare
forest floor ameliorating (lessening) soil heating, providing microsites for plant establishment, and
improving soil water retention. Where available such activities would aid in increasing the biological
resiliency and native plant re-establishment.
Suggested Slash Depth and Coverage (Erosion Control, Site Amelioration)
• Place slash (all size classes, both <3” and greater than 3”) in conjunction with erosion control measures
on all sites where material is available. Ensure contact with the soil surface. Measure coverage at the
time of placement. The retaining tons of woody material is dependent if harvest prescription is
regeneration harvest operations and what the VRU is for that timber stand (refer to soils Table 10 of
Soils report).
Landing Rehabilitation
In contrast to temporary roads, landings do not generally require cut and fill operations provided they are
correctly sited. Selection of a relatively flat area is the prime consideration.
Abundant rock fragments in surface soil layers also reduce the overall level of soil compaction. In some
instances, the presence of grassland vegetation in an area may indicate soil conditions that make sites
unsuitable for use as landings. Examples include: areas of shallow groundwater (wet soils), or heavy clay
soil textures.
Burning of large slash piles on a portion of the landing has the potential for creating DSD immediately
below the pile due to severe burning. In extreme cases, this could reduce long-term soil productivity of the
mineral soil resource itself due to changes associated with extremely high soil temperatures. Loss of organic
substrates and coarse woody debris are the most obvious impacts of burn piles. These would likely be
temporal impacts and in most cases can be mitigated. Unlike extreme wildfires, burned areas under slash
piles are isolated from adjacent burned areas. While significant soil impacts occur at landings, the topsoil
resource remains largely intact so long as adequate erosion control is provided.
In order to minimize the effects from landing construction and burning of landing slash, the following
design features and mitigation measures will be incorporated into the timber sale contract.
Constructed landings should be rehabilitated on a unit specific basis as soon as possible by the purchaser if
19

the timber sale is still active by doing the following:
• Spread larger woody material on landing where available following harvest activity.
• Machine-scarify the soil surface to improve moisture drainage characteristics in areas of high intensity
burns where soils contain hydrophobic conditions. Depending on soil texture, access, and existing
recovery levels, the landing could be sub-soiled or ripped. Avoid turning the soil. Recontour previously
excavated and graded material back across the landing site to re-establish natural contours. Re-spread
the surface soil back over the scarified or re-contoured landing.
• Seed with grasses and forbs or plant shrubs/trees on the site (per C6.601 – Erosion Control Seeding).
• Note that currently the FS normally burns landings following harvest operations. If available such
activities could be funded through KV funds to treat landings following harvest operations if the
purchaser is no longer available and the sale has closed. Where the purchaser is responsible for treating
burned landing area – purchaser would have to burn landing.
Skyline Corridor Rehabilitation
Skyline corridor concerns may be present on a site-specific basis in areas of concern due to a lack of singleend suspension or deflector problems. In such areas the exposed mineral soil should be water-barred
(B(T)6.65 – Skid Trails and Fire Lines), seeded and fertilized (C(T)6.601 – Erosion Control Seeding). In
lieu of (or in conjunction with conventional EC measures) water-barring in some cases, erosion control
measures involving slash placement on exposed mineral soil areas can be more effective at reducing
erosion. Such activities apply to Unit 194S.
Road Intermittent Stored Service
Following the KNF Intermittent Stored Service/Decommissioning Policy, the roads listed in Tables 2.9 and
2.21 (DEIS, Chapter 2) would be placed in Intermittent Stored Service (ISS). The identified roads would be
placed in a condition that there is little resource risk if maintenance is not performed (FSH 5409.17-94-2).
Closure of Temporary Roads
Many factors can affect the actual level of DSD created at landings or along temporary roads. These same
factors determine both the suitability and effectiveness of different mitigation procedures. For temporary
roads, it is assumed that some blading of the road bed would occur prior to the start of harvesting and that
trees along the road corridor would be tipped over and removed, root ball and all. Topsoil loss would be the
major concern. Topsoil displacement and mixing with underlying subsoil is inevitable. Not all of the topsoil
resource would be lost, however, as much of it would just be redistributed to the downslope side of the
road. Soil compaction and loss of organic substrates are also issues along temporary roads. Despite a lot of
attention, these are secondary and more short-term concerns on temporary roads than potential topsoil loss.
Factors affecting the level of DSD created along temporary roads include steepness of the terrain, soil
texture and the amount of rock fragments in both the topsoil and underlying subsoil horizons, as well as the
depth of blading. Within the constraints of suitable road construction standards, depth of blading should be
minimized to the extent practical during road construction if maintaining soil productivity within the road
corridor is a consideration.
The degree of lost soil productivity in the road corridor would often depend on differences in soil properties
of topsoil layers relative to underlying subsoil. If little difference exists, both are good or both are poor, then
changes in soil productivity would be limited. If there are dramatic differences in soil chemical and/or
physical properties between topsoil and subsoil layers, then loss of topsoil layers would result in a
significant loss of soil productivity. If the primary difference between topsoil and subsoil is in the amount
of soil organic matter and organic substrates, then lost soil productivity may be dramatic at the start but
would recover over time. In soils that are shallow or very shallow over bedrock, removal of the topsoil layer
would result in permanent loss of soil productivity.
Table 1 provides a listing of those harvest units where temporary road scarification would be required on a
unit-by-unit bass in at least one of the proposed alternatives of the East Reservoir analysis area. Such
20

concerns can be addressed on a unit specific basis by scarification and seeding the road prism and pulling
slash material onto the temporary road prism where present. Such activities would occur on all temporary
road prisms by the contractor when harvest activities are completed.
Table 1 - Calculated DSD Related to Temporary Road Construction
TEMPORARY
ROAD #

T5
T6
T14
T25
T25
T28
T37
T42
T43
T42
T43
T44
T45
T53
T54
T55
T57
T58
Alt 2
Alt 3

LENGTH
(miles)

0.2
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.2
4.3
4.1

UNIT #

UNIT
ACRES
ALT 2/ALT 3

ROAD DSD by
UNIT (ac)
Alt 2/Alt3

% DSD RELATED to TEMPORARY
ROAD by UNIT
ALT 2/ALT3

17
22
318
31
197
345
340
362
362
362B
362C
150
49
148
344
343
23
179

68/68
83/83
131/0
698/698
24/24
45/45
266/266
192/0
192/0
0/40
0/39
103/40
64/64
77/40
73/64
100/93
146/146
76/0

0.4/0.4
0.8/0.8
0.2/0
1.0/1.0
0.2/0.2
0.8/0.8
0.2/0.2
0.4/0
0.6/0
0/0.4
0/0.6
0.4/0.4
0.6/0.6
0.8/0.8
0.4/0.4
0.6/0.6
0.6/0.6
0.4/0
8.6
8.2

<1/<1
1/1
<1/0
<1/<1
1/1
2/2
<1/<1
<1/0
<1/0
0/1
0/2
<1/1
1/1
1/2
1/1
<1/<1
<1/<1
1/0

^Road length rounded to the nearest tenth of a mile.
*Only those units where new temporary road construction would be required are listed above.

Temporary roads and landings locations and construction standards for the sale(s) would be agreed upon by
the Forest Service (FS) and purchaser. These areas would be constructed and used in adherence to BMPs
and RHCAs to minimize their impacts to soils. Instances where a controlled temporary road location is
desirable, timber sale contract provisions C(T)5.1 (Construction of Temporary Roads in Sensitive Areas)
and/or C(T)5.102 (Construction of Temporary Roads) may be used.
Prevention versus Rehabilitation
The results of a study completed by Rawinski and Page (2008) and Powers and others (2005) indicate that
sites with low recovery rates were sites located in frigid temperature regimes. These studies concluded that
perhaps freeze-thaw cycles in cool, temperate and boreal life zones are not particularly effective of
ameliorating the impact of soil compaction below 10 cm. As a result, prevention of soil compaction is
generally preferred over restoration measures. Careful design and spacing of skid trails can keep soil
impacts within soil standards. Winter logging on snow or frozen conditions can also minimize soil impacts.
Alternatively, operating on dry soil conditions can be useful in managing soil impacts. Use of a winged
subsoiler to ameliorate soil compaction concerns can bring areas considered detrimentally disturbed and
exceeding the 15% DSD threshold back down to and below the threshold levels for both aireal extent and
compaction.
Unit Specific Rehabilitation Plan
Analysis for DSD found all units except proposed commercial thin Units 194T, 194S, 330, and 331would
meet R1 SQS after implementation. Regarding Units 3194T, 194S, 330, and 331 the existing measured
DSD value was found to be 14% (2010-2011 soil surveys). As a result, the post-harvest cumulative DSD
values were all found to exceed 15% DSD values. Based on these values the restoration goal for these units
21

will be to return the soils back to 15% or lower DSD levels within a 3-year timeframe following harvest
activities. These activities are described below. Where post-harvest DSD values are calculated to exceed
15% project design standards includes incorporating slash material during skid trail scarification and layback in proposed harvest units. In these units, slash would be placed by the purchaser as part of timber
harvest contract requirements to control erosion and provide organic matter for forest floor function.
Rehabilitation of soil resources ties to direction in the KNFP, NFMA and the R1 SQS. The use of
rehabilitation techniques in site-specific instances would move areas of soil disturbance towards improved
site potential at a faster rate than if no rehabilitation techniques are used. It is estimated that rehabilitation
would reduce soil and forest floor recovery to approximately 20-40 years. Without rehabilitation, recovery
of soil and forest floor process and function would be expected to take greater than 40 years.
Skid Trails
Skid trails have a much lower level of proportion of detrimental soil disturbance than either temporary
roads or landings. They are also more likely to recover over time providing adequate erosion control
measures. The amount of material being removed from a stand would determine how many trips would be
made along skid trails. Fuel treatments require fewer trips than clearcutting. In general, fewer trips means
less DSD although some research indicates that most of the soil compaction occurs the first couple of passes
of equipment (Han et al. 2006).
Under timber sale contract provision C(T)6.4# (Conduct of Logging) re-use existing skid trails where
possible and feasible. Upon completion of harvest the contractor would obliterate skid trails and rehabilitate
landings in order to reduce the detrimental soil disturbance values over time include Units 17, 22, 23, 31,
49, 148, 150, 179, 194T, 194S, 197, 318, 330, 331, 340, 343, 344, 345, 362, 362B, and 362C (refer to Soils
Resource Report).
Soil Recovery Trends on the KNF following harvest operations
Currently a research study is on-going which is subjectively comparing post-harvest soil disturbance values
with re-sampled unit DSD calculations. This study has just began in the spring of 2012 but has already
displayed remarkable decreases in currently existing DSD values as compared to what was sampled by L.
Kuennen between 1992-2006.
Season of Operation and Impact on Soils
Requirements
The KNF identified a number of units in the East Reservoir analysis area where soils, weed species and/or
archeology are a factor of concern. As a result these units are recommended for winter harvest operations to
reduce potential impacts.
Winter Tractor Based on Archeology
The East Reservoir analysis area contains two units where winter operations are required based on
archeology concerns. These are proposed harvest Units 1 and 1A. This is required based on the fact that
harvest of these units during the winter season is less likely to disturb existing historical sites. As a result, it
is expected that the DSD results associated with harvesting Units 1 and 1A will be 50% of what is expected
during summer operations under both Alternatives 2 and 3.
Winter Tractor Based on Noxious Weeds
An additional restoration activity would be the treatment of weeds in the project area, primarily on landings
and roads. The presence of noxious weeds alters vegetative cover and soil stability especially on droughty
soils. Knapweed on droughty soils effectively reduces the cover of native plant species through allelopathic
chemicals and the plant itself does not provide good soil cover or rooting structure. Treating noxious weeds
would increase soil productivity over the long-term, greater than five years. One of the best ways to treat
noxious weeds is through avoidance of spreading. Such activities can be accomplished by harvesting during
winter seasons. This is also expected to benefit soils and reduce soil compaction by operating heavy
22

equipment on frozen soils. Such conditions lead to significantly lower over DSD as a result of harvest
activities. As a result the following units will be winter harvested based on weed concerns: 2C, 2D, 3A, 9,
11, 17, 28, 157, 158, 158A, and 306. As a result, it is expected that the DSD values will be 50% of what is
expected during summer operations.
Winter Tractor Units Based on Soils
Post-harvest soil monitoring data collected from the KNF (1992-2012) has displayed an overall reduction of
approximately 50% in DSD when comparing winter tractor to summer tractor operations. As a result it was
determined for those units with currently existing higher DSD values to propose such units be harvested in
the winter season on frozen grounds. The following units were identified as winter tractor operations: 2, 2B,
3, 7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 24, 26, 64, 70T, 73T, 74T, 80, 81, 159A, 183, 190, 190A, 194T, 196, 305, 307, 311,
318, 319, 327, 328, 330, 331, 334, 335, 339, 340, 344, 345, 346, 347, 349 and 350.

23

Appendix F:

LITERATURE CITED
Aquatic Species Literature Cited

Apperson, K.A., and P.J. Anders. 1991. Kootenai River White Sturgeon Investigations and Experimental Culture.
Annual Progress Report FY1990. Idaho Department of Fish and Game and Bonneville Power Administration,
Contract DE-A179-88BP93497.
Behnke, R. J. 1992. Native Trout of Western North America. Am. Fish. Soc. Monograph No. 6. 275 pp.
Furniss, M.D., T.D. Roelofs, and C.S. Yee. 1991. Road Construction and Maintenance. American Fisheries Society
Special Publication 19:297-323.
Huston, J.E., 1999. A Review of Historical Fish Planting in Kootenai River Drainage, Montana. Montana Fish
Wildlife and Parks Report. 1-53 pp
Graham, P.J. 1981. Status of White Sturgeon in the Kootenai River. Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks, Kalispell,
Montana. 26pp.
Griffith, J. S. 1988. Review of Competition between Cutthroat Trout and Other Salmonids. American Fisheries
Society Symposium 4:134-140.
Holton, G.S. 1980. The Riddle of Existence: Fishes of Special Concern. Montana Outdoors 11: 2-6.
Paragamian, V.L., G. Kruse, and V. Wakkinen. 1997. Kootenai River White Sturgeon Investigations, Chapter 1:
Kootenai River White Sturgeon Spawning and Recruitment Evaluation, Annual Report 1996. Idaho Department of
Fish and Game, Boise, Idaho.
Reichel, J., and D Flath 1995. Identification of Montana’s Amphibians and Reptiles. Montana Outdoors May/June.
Rieman, B. E., and K. A. Apperson. 1989. Status and Analysis of Salmonids Fisheries: Westslope Cutthroat Trout
Synopsis and Analysis Of Fishery Information, Idaho Department of Fish and Game, Boise, ID. Job Performance
Report, Project F-73-R-11, Subproject II, Job 1.
Rieman, B.E., and J.D. McIntyre. 1993. Demographic and Habitat Requirements for Conservation of Bull Trout.
General Technical Report INT-302, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Research
Station, Ogden, Utah.
Rosgen, D. 1996. Applied Fluvial Geomorphology. Wildland Hydrology Consultants, Pagosa Springs, CO.
Scott, W. B. and E. J. Crossman. 1973. Freshwater Fishes of Canada. Fisheries Research Board of Canada.
Shepard, B. B., B. E. May, and W. Urie. 2003. Status of Westslope Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki lewisi) in
the United States: 2002. Montana Cooperative Fishery Research Unit, Bozeman, MT. pp. 94.
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service (USFS). 1987. Kootenai National Forest Plan, Vol. 1. USDA Forest
Service, Libby, Montana, pp. III26-III31.
1995. Environmental Assessment: Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact. Interim Strategies for
Managing Fish-Producing Watersheds in Eastern Oregon and Washington, Idaho, western Montana and portions of
Nevada. USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain, Northern, and Pacific Northwest Regions.
1998e. Middle Kootenai Restoration - Combining Watershed Restoration Activities and Bull Trout
Restoration. Monitoring Results of Restoration Activities - 1998. Kootenai National Forest, Libby, MT.
2000a. Section 7 Consultation Watershed Baseline: Lower Clark Fork River, Montana. Kootenai National
Forest, Libby, MT.
24

2000b. Section 7 Consultation Watershed Baseline: Upper Kootenai River, Montana. Kootenai National
Forest, Libby, MT.
2000c. Section 7 Consultation Watershed Baseline: Middle Kootenai River, Montana. Kootenai National
Forest, Libby, MT.
2000d Section 7 Consultation Watershed Baseline: Lower Kootenai River, Montana. Kootenai National
Forest, Libby, MT.
USDA Forest Service and Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1995. Soil survey of Kootenai National Forest
Area, Montana and Idaho, U.S. Government Printing Office: 1995-387-974/2050/SCS, pp. 16-18, Map 65.
Weaver, T. and Fraley, J. 1991. Fisheries Habitat and Fish Populations, - Flathead Basin Forest Practices Water
Quality and Fisheries Cooperative Program. Flathead Basin Commission, Kalispell, MT.
Weaver T. M. and R. G. White. 1985. Coal Creek Fisheries Monitoring Study Number III. Final Report. Montana
Cooperative Fisheries Research Unit, Bozeman, Mt.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Fire/Fuels Literature Cited
Agee, J. and Skinner, C. 2005. Basic Principles of Forest Fuel Reduction Treatments. Forest Ecology and
Management, 211(1-2):83-96.
Albini, F.; Baughman, R.G. 1979. Estimating Wind Speeds for Predicting Wildland Fire Behavior. Res. Pap. INT-221.
Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station.
92p.
Anderson, Hal E. 1982. Aids to Determining Fuel Models for Estimating Fire Behavior. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-122.
22p.
Andrews, Patricia L. 2007. BehavePlus Fire Modeling System: Past, Present, and Future. In: Proceedings of 7th
Symposium on Fire and Forest Meteorology; 23-25 October 2007, Bar Harbor, Maine. Boston, MA: American
Meteorological Society. 13 p.
Arno, S.F., Allison-Bunnell, S. 2002. Flames in our Forest: Disaster or Renewal? Washington, DC: Island Press. 227
p.
Cohen, Jack D. 1995. Structure Ignition Assessment Model (SIAM). In: Weise, David R.; Martin, Robert E., technical
coordinators. Proceedings of the Boswell Symposium: Fire Issues and Solutions in Urban Interface and Wildland
Ecosystems. 1994 February 15-17; Walnut Creek, CA. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-158. Albany, CA: Pacific
Southwest Research Station, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture; 85-92.
Cohen, Jack D. 2000a. What is the Wildland Fire Threat to Homes?. Presented at the Thompson Memorial Lecture,
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. April 10, 2000. 13p.
DellaSalla, D.A., David, M., and Barth, S.E. 1995. Forest Health: Moving Beyond Rhetoric to Restore Healthy
Landscapes in the Inland Northwest. Wildlife Society Bulletin 23: 346-356.
Graham, Russell T.; McCaffrey, Sarah; Jain, Theresa B. (tech. Eds.) 2004. Science Basis for Changing Forest
Structure to Modify Wildfire Behavior and Severity. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-120. 43 p.
Heinsch, Faith Ann; Andrews, Patricia L. 2010. BehavePlus Fire Modeling System, Version 5.0: Design and
Features. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-249. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 111 p.
Kalabokidis, K.D.; Omi, P.N. 1998. Reduction of Fire Hazard through Thinning/Residue Disposal in the Urban
Interface. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 8: 29–35.
Omi, Philip N., Martinson, Erik J., Chong, Geneva W. 2006. Effectiveness of Pre-Fire Fuel Treatments. JFSP Project
25

01-2-1-07. Final report submitted to the Joint Fire Science Program Governing Board. Colorado State University,
Fort Collins. 29 p.
Peterson, David L.; Johnson, Morris C.; Agee, James K.; Jain, Theresa B.; McKenzie, Donald; Reinhardt, Elizabeth
D. 2005. Forest Structure and Fire Hazard in Dry Forests of the Western United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNWGTR-628. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 30 p.
Pollet, J.; Omi, P.N. 2002. Effect of Thinning and Prescribed Burning on Crown Fire Severity in Ponderosa Pine
Forests. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 11: 1–10.
Rothermel, Richard C. 1983. How to Predict the Spread and Intensity of Forest and Range Fires. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT143.
Scott, J. H. and Reinhardt, E.D. 2001. Assessing Crown Fire Potential by Linking Models of Surface and Crown Fire
Behavior. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station Research Paper RMRS-RP-29. Fort Collins, CO.
Scott, J. H.; Burgan, R. E. 2005. Standard Fire Behavior Fuel Models: A Comprehensive Set for Use with
Rothermel's Surface Fire Spread Model. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-153. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 72 p..
Scott, J.H. 2006. Comparison of Crown Fire Modeling Systems Used in Three Fire Management Applications. Res.
Pap. RMRS-RP-58. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research
Station. 25 p.
Stratton, R.D. 2004. Assessing the Effectiveness of Landscape Fuel Treatments on Fire Growth and Behavior. Journal
of Forestry, Oct.-Nov. 102(7): 32-40.
Stratton, Richard D. 2006. Guidance on Spatial Wildland Fire Analysis: Models, Tools, and Techniques. Gen. Tech.
Rep. RMRS-GTR-183. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Research Station. 15 p.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Plants Literature Cited
Bakker, Jonathan D. and Scott D. Wilson. 2004. Using Ecological Restoration to Contain Biological Invasion. In
Journal of Applied Ecology (2004) 41, 1058-1064.
Chadde, Steve W.; J. Stephen Shelly; Robert J. Bursik; Robert K. Moseley et al. 1998. Peatlands on National Forests
of the Northern Rocky Mountains: Ecology and Conservation. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-11. USDA
Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station. Ogden, Utah.
Ferriel, Roger. 1999 Revised Sensitive Species Habitat Descriptions. 1999. On File Kootenai National Forest. Libby,
MT. 1999
Leavell, D.M. and F.J. Triepke. Sensitive Plant Program for the Kootenai National Forest. Report on file. Kootenai
National Forest, Libby, MT. 1995.
Lesica, P. and J.S. Shelly. Sensitive, Threatened and Endangered Vascular Plants of Montana. Montana Natural
Heritage Program Occ. Publ. 1: 1992.
Lesica, Peter. 1997. Demography of the Endangered Plant Silene spaldingii (Caryophyllaceae) in northwest
Montana. Madrono 44(4):347-358.
Lesica, Peter and Brian Martin. 2003. Effects of Prescribed Fire and Season of Burn on Recruitment of the Invasive
exotic Plant, Potentilla recta, in a Semiarid Grassland. In Restoration Ecology Vol.11 Number 4 (Dec 2003) pp.
516-523.
Lichthardt, Juanita. 2003. Conservation Strategy for Clustered Lady's-Slipper Orchid (Cypripedium fasciculatum) in
US Forest Service Region 1. Idaho Conservation Data Center. Boise, ID.
26

Morgan, P., G.H. Aplet, J.B. Haufler, G.C. Humpheries, M.M. Moore, and W.D. Wilson. 1994. “Historical Range of
Variability: a Useful Tool for Understanding Ecological Change. In Journal of Sustainable Forestry ("Assessing
Forest Ecosystem Health in the Inland West") 2:1-2. (1994), 87-111.
Odegard, Craig. In draft 2011. Biological Evaluation and Assessment for Forest Service Sensitive and Federally
Listed Plant Species-Cutoff. Plains/Thompson Falls District., Lolo NF. USDA Forest Service. 11pp.
Owen, Wayne. Undated. USDA Forest Service, National Botany and Rare Plant Program Leader, 3 pgs.
Pellant Mike. 1996. Cheatgrass: The Invader That Won the West. Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Mangement
Project. Boise ID. 22 pgs.
Rice Peter M. and Steven Gauer. 2008. Winter Range Weed Treatment and Monitoring, Lolo National Forest: PreSpray Through Fifth Year Post-Treatment results (2203-2007). 19 pages.
Smith, Jane Kapler and William C. Fischer. 1997. Fire Ecology of the Forest Habitat Types of Northern Idaho.
General Technical Report INT-GTR-363. USDA Forest Service Rocky Mountain Research Station (formerly
Intermountain Research Station). Ogden, Utah.
USDA Forest Service. 1994. Conservation Strategy for Howellia aquatilis. Flathead National Forest. USDA Forest
Service Northern Region. Missoula, Montana. April, 1994; updated November 17, 1994.
USDA Agricultural Research Station. 2010. Ecologically-Based Invasive Plant Management (EBIPM) Oregon State
University. Corvallis Oregon. http://ebipm.org/.
USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service. 2009. Ecological Site Description.
http://www.mt.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/ecs/range/ecolsites/43A.html
USDA Forest Service. 2012. Fire Effects Information System http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/index.html
USDA Forest Service Kootenai National Forest - Forest Plan Volume 1. Kootenai NF, Libby, Mt. Vol. I. 1987 II-1.
USDA Forest Service. Kootenai National Forest Sensitive Plant Field Guide, Fifth Edition. 2005.
Vanderhorst, J. Status Report on Sensitive Lady's Slipper Orchids (Cypripedium calceolus var. parviflorum and
Cypripedium passerinum) on the Kootenai National Forest. Unpublished report, Montana Natural Heritage Program,
1996.
Vanderhorst, J. Status Review of Clarkia rhomboidea in Montana. Unpublished report to the Kootenai National
Forest. Montana Natural Heritage Program, Helena, MT. 1997.
Vanderhorst, J. Conservation Assessment of Sensitive Moonworts (Botrychium subg. Botrychium) on the Kootenai
National Forest. Montana Natural Heritage Program, Helena, MT. 1997.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Noxious Weed Literature Cited
Dodson, Erich K., Fiedler, Carl E. 2006 Impacts of Restoration Treatments on Alien Plant Invasion in Pinus
ponderosa Forests, Montana, USA. Journal of Applied Ecology. Vol. 43, 887-897.
Dow AgroSciences. 2000. Picloram and the Environment. 24 pages.
Duncan, Celestine L., Clark, Janet K. 2005. Invasive Plants of Range and Wildlands and their
Environmental, Economic, and Societal Impacts. Weed Science Society of America. 222
pages.
Flaherty, Carol. 2005. It’s What you don’t See that Counts: Knapweed Crashes in 2004. Montana State University
News. 3 pages.
27

Lacey, John R., Clayton B. Marlow, and John R. Lane. 1989. Influence of Spotted Knapweed (Centaurea maculosa)
on Surface Runoff and Sediment Yield. In Weed Technology. Vol. 3:627-631.
Lacey, C. A., J. R. Lacey, P. K. Fay, J. M. Story, and D. L. Zamora. Reprinted August 1995. MSU Circular 311:
Controlling Knapweed on Montana Rangeland. 17 pages.
Littlefield, Jeff. 2007. The Montana Invasive Hawkweed Management Plan (Draft). The Hawkweed Task Force, in
cooperation with various State, Federal, and Tribal Agencies, County Weed Districts, the Montana Department of
Agriculture, private land managers, the Montana State University, University of Idaho and Hawkweed Biological
Control Consortium. 34 pages.
Losensky, B. John. 1987. An Evaluation of Noxious Weeds on the Lolo, Bitterroot, and Flathead Forests. USDA
F.S., Missoula, MT. 62 pages.
Millar. C., N. Stephenson, S Stephens. 2007 Climate Change and Forests of the Future: Managing in the Face of
Uncertainty. Ecological Applications, 17(8), 2007, pp. 2145–2151
Patterson, David T. 1995. Weeds in a Changing Climate. Weed Science, 1995, Volume 43:685-701
Pimentel, David, Rodolfo Zuniga, and Doug Morrison. 2004. Update on the Environmental and Economic Costs
Associated with Alien-Invasive Species in the United States. Ecological Economics 52(2005)273-288.
Sheley, R. L. and J. K. Petroff. 1999. Biology and Management of Noxious Rangeland Weeds. Oregon State
University Press. Pages 180, 282-285, 350-351, 374-376.
Stalling, David. 1999. WEEDS An Exotic Invasion of Elk Country. Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, Missoula, MT.
Bugle, July/August 1998. Pages 16-27.
Taylor, Ronald, J. 1990. Northwest Weeds, the Ugly and Beautiful Villains of Fields, Gardens, and Roadsides.
Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula, MT. 177 pages
Trammel, Michael A. and Jack L. Butler. 1995. Effects of Exotic Plants on Native Ungulate Use of Habitat. Journal
of Wildlife Management Vol. 59(4):808-816.
USDA Forest Service, KNF. 1987. Kootenai National Forest Plan, Volume 1, Table IV-1, pg IV-10.
USDA Forest Service, KNF. 1997. Herbicide Weed Control Environmental Assessment. p. 2.
USDA Forest Service, KNF. 2000. Kootenai National Forest Noxious Weed Handbook. 99 pages.
USDA Forest Service, KNF. 2003. Fisher Landscape Assessment. 130 pages.
USDA Forest Service. 1991. Sustaining Ecological Systems. USDA F.S., Northern Region, Missoula, MT. Page 14.
USDA Forest Service. 1997. Closure Order of NFS Lands to Other Than Certified Weed Free Forage. 2 pages.
USDA Forest Service. 2001. Forest Service Manual 2080, R1 supplement 2000-2001-1. 16 pages.
USDA Forest Service, 2004. National Strategy and Implementation Plan for Invasive Species Management. 24 pages.
USDA Forest Service, KNF. 2007. Kootenai National Forest Invasive Plant Management FEIS. P. 1-8.
USDA Forest Service, Kootenai National Forest. 2008. Forest Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Report. Fiscal Year
2007. Pages 53-62.
USDA MSU Extension Service. 2003. Noxious Weed Alert, Hound’s-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale). 1 page.
28

USDA, NRCS 2008. Invasive Species Technical Note Number MT-18. 13 pages.
Watson, A. K., and A. J. Renney. 1974. The Biology of Canadian Weeds. 6. Centaurea diffusa and C. maculosa.
Canadian Journal of Plant Science 54:687-701. As cited in Sheley and Petroff, 1999.
Westbrooks, R. 1998. Invasive Plants, Changing the Landscape of America: Fact Book. Federal Interagency
Committee for the Management of Noxious and Exotic Weeds (FICMNEW), Washington, D.C. 109 pp.
Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R. Cayan, T. W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western
U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity. Science Vol. 313 pages 940-943.
Whisenant, Steven. 1994. Invasions on Public Lands. 2 pages.
Ziska, L. H. 2004. Rising Carbon Dioxide and Invasive, Noxious Plants: Potential Threats and Consequences. 2004
World Resource Review, Vol. 16, No. 4 page 427-447.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Water Resource Literature Cited
Belt G. H., J. O' Laughlin and T. Merrill. 1992. Design of Forest Riparian Buffer Strips for the Protection of Water
Quality: Analysis of Scientific Literature. Idaho Forest, Wildlife and Range Policy Analysis Group, Report No.8,
Idaho Forest, Wildlife, and Range Experiment Station, University of Idaho.
Bilotta, G.S., and R.E. Brazier. 2008. Understanding the Influence of Suspended Solids on Water Quality and Aquatic
Biota. Water Research, 42, 2849-2861
Brooks, K.N., Folliott, P.F., Gregersen, H.M. & DeBano, L.F. 1997. Hydrology and the Management of Watersheds.
2nd edition. Ames, Iowa, USA, Iowa State University Press.
USDI, USGS and USDA, Forest Service, 2009. Federal Guidelines, Requirements, and Procedures for the National
Watershed Boundary Dataset. Chapter 3, Section A, Federal Standards, Book 11, Collection and Delineation of
Spatial Data.
Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, 1977. http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executiveorders/1977-carter.html
Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, 1977. http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/executiveorders/1977-carter.html
Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Public Law 92-500) as amended in 1977 (Public Law 95-217) and 1987
(Public Law 100-4). http://www.epa.gov/region5/water/cwa.htm. Also known as the Clean Water Act.
Foltz, R.B., K.A. Yanosek, T.M. Brown. 2008. Sediment Concentration and Turbidity Changes during Culvert
Removals. Journal of Environmental Management 87 (2008) 329-340.
Frissell, C. 1996. Healing the Watershed: A Guide to the Restoration of Watersheds and Native Fish in the West.
Pacific Rivers Council, 2nd Edition, Chapter. 1.
Furniss, M. J., S. A. Flanagan, and B. McFadin. 2000. Hydrologically Connected Roads: An Indicator of the Influence
of Roads on Chronic Sedimentation, Surface Water Hydrology, and Exposure to Toxic Chemicals. Stream Notes,
U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
Gomi, T., R.C. Sidle, and J.S. Richardson. 2002. Understanding Processes and Downstream Linkages of Headwater
Systems. Bioscience 52(10):905-976.
Gravelle, J.A., T.E. Link, J.R. Broglio, and J.H. Braatne. 2009. Effects of Timber Harvest on Aquatic
Macroinvertebrate Community Composition in a Northern Idaho Watershed. Forest Science 55(4) 2009.
Lenat, D. R., and D. L. Penrose. 1980. Discussion of "Hierarchical Diversity of Communities of Aquatic Insects and
Fishes" by R. L. Kaesler and E. E. Herricks. Water Research Bulletin 16:361- 362.
29

Litschert, S.E. and L.H. MacDonald, 2009. Frequency and Characteristics of Sediment Delivery Pathways from Forest
Harvest Units to Streams. Forest Ecology and Management 259 (2009) 143-150.
Luce, C.H., 2002. Hydrological Processes and Pathways Affected by Forest Roads: What Do We Still Need to Learn?
Hydrological Processes 16, 2901-2904 (2002).
Luce, C. H. and B. C. Wemple, 2001. Introduction to the Special Issue on Hydrologic and Geomorphic Effects of
Forest Roads, Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 26: 111-113.
MacDonald, L.H. and D. Coe, 2007. Influence of Headwater Streams on Downstream Reaches in Forested Areas.
Forest Science 53(2) 2007.
MacDonald, L.H. and J.D. Stednick. 2003. Forests and Water: A State-of-the-Art Review for Colorado. Colorado
Water Resources Research Institute, CSU, Fort Collins, CO. pp21-29. At
http://welcome.warnercnr.colostate.edu/~leemac/publications.htm.
McGlynn, B.L., J.J. McDonnell, J.Seibert, and C.Kendall. 2004. Scale Effects on Headwater Catchment Runoff
Timing, Flow Sources, and Groundwater-Streamflow Relations. Water Resources doi: 10.1029/2003WR002492.
Montana Department of Environmental Quality, 2008. State of Montana 2008 Integrated 303(d)/305(b) Water Quality
Report. http://www.deq.mt.gov/CWAIC/wq_reps.aspx?yr=2006qryId=0
Montana Department of Environmental Quality. Updated 8/2000. Montana Surface Water Quality Standards and
Procedures. Administrative Rules of Montana 17.30.6 (17.30.601 through 17.30.641).
http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Laws.asp
Montana Numeric Water Quality Standards, September 1999. Circular WQB-7.
http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Standards/CompiledDEQ-7.pdf
Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation 2008. Montana Forestry Best Management Practices
Monitoring, 2008 Forestry BMP Audit Report. Forestry Division, Missoula, Montana. 76 pp.
Montana Streamside Management Zones. Updated 2005. Montana Code Annotated. Title 77 State Lands, Chapter 5
Timber Resources, Part 3 Streamside Management Zones. http://data.opi.mt.gov/bills/mca_toc/77_5_3.htm
Montana Stream Protection Act. 1991. http://dnrc.mt.gov/permits/stream_permitting/mspa.asp
Montana Water Quality Act. 1999. Title 75, Chapter 5, Montana Code as revised October 1999.
http://www.deq.state.mt.us/wqinfo/Laws/WQA2003.pdf
Norris, RH., and A. Georges. 1992. Analysis and Interpretation of Benthic Surveys. Pages 234-286 in D.M.
Rosenberg and V.H. Resh (editors). Freshwater Biomonitoring and Benthic Macroinvertebrates. Chapman and Hall,
New York.
Reid, D.J, J.M. Quinn, A.E. Wright-Stow. 2010. Responses of Stream Macroinvertebrate Communities to Progressive
Forest Harvesting: Influences of Harvest Intensity, Stream Size, and Riparian Buffers. Forest Ecology and
Management 260 (2010) 1804-1815.
Resh, V.H. and J.K. Jackson. 1993. Rapid Assessment Approaches to Biomonitoring Using Benthic
Macroinvertebrates. Pages 195-233 in D.M. Roseberg and V.H. Resh (debtors). Freshwater Biomonitoring and
Benthic Macroinvertebrates. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Robinson, J.S., M. Sivapalan, and J.D. Snell. 1995. On the Relative Roles of Hillslope Processes, Channel Routing,
and Network Geomorphology in the Hydrological Response of Natural Catchments. Water Resources 31 (12):30893101.
Rosgen, D.L. 1996. Applied River Morphology. Wildland Hydrology, Pagosa Springs, Colorado.
30

Ryan, P.A., 1991. Environmental Effects of Sediment on New Zealand Streams: A Review. New Zealand J. Mar.
Freshwater Res. 25, 207–221.
USDA Forest Service. 1990. Forest Service Manual; Series 2000, National Forest Resource Management; Section
2500, Watershed and Air Management; Chapter 2530, Water Resource Management, (Amended 1990); Sections
2532.02, 2532.03. http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/directives/html/fsm2000.shtml
USDA Forest Service. 1995. Decision Notice and Finding of No Significant Impact for the Inland Native Fish
Strategy. USDA Forest Service, Northern, Intermountain, and Pacific Northwest regions, Inland Native Fish
Strategy, Idaho Panhandle National Forests, 3815 Schrieber Way, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814.
USDA Forest Service. February 1995. Inland Native Fish Strategy, Environmental Assessment. Intermountain,
Northern and Pacific Northwest Regions. Attachment A—Inland Native Fish Strategy Selected Interim Direction. 15
p.
USDA Forest Service. 1995. Soil Survey of Kootenai National Forest Area, Montana and Idaho. 24 p.
USDA Forest Service, July 2010. The Forest Service National Core Best Management Practices. Nonpoint Source
Pollution Control for Water Quality Management on National Forest System Lands (FSH 2509.22).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. Report of the Federal Advisory Committee on the Total Maximum
Daily Load (TMDL) Program: The National Advisory Council for Environmental Policy and Technology, EPA 100R-98-006, 97p. 7 appendixes.
Wemple, B.C. and J.A. Jones. 2003. Runoff Production on Forest Roads in a Steep, Mountain Catchment. Water
Resources Research 39(8), 1220, doi:10.1029/2002WR001744, 2003.
Westbrook, C.J., D.J. Cooper, and B.W. Baker. 2006. Beaver Dams and Overbank Floods Influence Groundwater
Surface Water Interactions of a Rocky Mountain Riparian Area. Water Resources Research 42, W06404,
doi:10.1029/2005WR004560.
Winget, R.N. and F.A. Mangum, 1979. Biotic Condition Index: Integrated Biological Physical and Chemical Stream
Management. Report 40-84 M8-8-524, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Economic Literature Cited
Morgan, Todd A. and Charles E. Keegan III. 2009. Montana’s Forest Products Industry: Current Conditions and 2009
Forecast. Montana Business Quarterly/Spring 2010.
Russell, John C., and Peggy A. Adams-Russell, Ellen Frament, and Mike Niccolucci. 2006. Conditions and Trends:
Social and Economic Systems for the Kootenai and Idaho Panhandle Plan Revision Zone. Report to USDA

Forest Service.

31

Appendix H:

Forest Plan Standards and Guidelines

Kootenai National Forest Plan/INFS
Prior to 1995 the Forest Plan contained only qualitative direction, which could be used to measure existing
fisheries habitat conditions or possible effects of management activities on populations or habitat (discussed
below). In 1995 standards and guidelines were developed through the Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS).
This strategy is intended to provide interim direction for forest management on National forests, including
the Kootenai. The purpose of INFS is to maintain options for native fish by reducing the risk or loss of
populations and reducing potential negative impacts to aquatic habitat.
Goals and Objectives (II -1 thru II-12)
The goals outlined in the Forest Plan include; Construct and reconstruct roads only to the minimum
standards necessary to prevent soil loss and maintain water quality. Meet or exceed State water quality
standards.
In order to accomplish these goals the following objectives were identified:
Timber
The amount of timber harvest allowed will depend on the rate of hydrologic recovery after timber has been
removed. The soil and water conservation practices specified in FSH 2509.22 will be applied during Forest
Plan implementation to ensure that Forest water quality goals are met.
Soil and Water
Ground disturbing activities such as road construction, road reconstruction, and timber harvest will be
accompanied by mitigating measures to prevent or reduce increases in sedimentation and stream channel
erosion. The amount of timber harvest allowed will depend on the rate of hydrologic recovery after timber
has been removed. Soils and water conservation practices as outlined in the Soil and Water Conservation
Practices Handbook (FSH 2509.22) or those activities or standards, which will prevent or reduce stream
sedimentation will be implemented. Examples include; location of roadbeds out of stream bottoms, design
of stream crossing structures to allow water to freely pass, rock surfacing of roads at stream crossings,
keeping equipment from operating in or alongside streams, and maintenance of roads to allow proper
drainage. These practices will be implemented in order to maintain water quality. Each project plan for
which the use of heavy equipment is required shall evaluate the effect of operating that equipment on soil
productivity.
Riparian Areas
Site specifically identify and map all riparian areas on the Forest before project activity.
Forest Plan Standards
Protect and maintain important riparian zone features, marshes, and water bodies.
Soil and water conservation practices as outlined in the Soil and Water Conservation Practices Handbook
(FSH 2509.22) will be incorporated into all land use and project plans as a principal mechanism for
controlling non-point pollution sources and meeting soil and water quality goals and to protect beneficial
uses. Activities found not in compliance with the soil and water conservation practices or State standards
will be brought into compliance, modified or stopped.
A floodplain/wetlands analysis will be made for all management actions involving wetlands, streams, or
bodies of water.
Each project plan for which the use of heavy equipment is required shall evaluate the effect of operation
that equipment on soil productivity as described in the Soil and Water Objectives portion of the KNFP.
Projects involving significant vegetative removal will, prior to including them on implementation
32

schedules, require a watershed cumulative effects feasibility analysis to ensure that water yield or sediment
will not increase beyond acceptable limits. The analysis will also identify opportunities, if any exist, for
mitigating adverse effects on water-related beneficial uses.
Riparian Areas (II-28 thru II-33)
The goal for riparian area management is to manage the vegetation to protect the soil and water resources
and to provide high quality water and fisheries habitat.
Riparian Area Standards
Assure that there are streamside timber stands to provide for log and debris recruitment necessary for
sufficient pool development and organic energy (organic debris) into the aquatic ecosystem.
Identify the riparian areas in each allotment that domestic livestock can use. Prevent livestock use of other
than permitted segments of riparian areas.
Simultaneous openings resulting from timber harvest on both sides of a stream are not permitted, unless the
results can be shown to be an enhancement for the riparian area.
Dozer scarification and landings are not permitted in riparian areas unless the results can be shown to be an
enhancement of the riparian area.
Special uses, rights of way and cost share roads are permitted and riparian area management objectives will
be incorporated into all agreements and permits.
Roads that parallel streams will be located at a distance determined by sediment transport models, and
outside the 100-year floodplain.
When funds for road maintenance are limited, roads and drainage structures in riparian zones will be a top
priority.
Necessary stream course crossings will insure fish passage, non-erosive water velocities and channel
stability, and insure erosion control on cuts, fills and road surfaces.
Road closures will be used to protect the riparian habitat and values.
Inland Native Fish Strategy (INFS)
INFS includes eight riparian goals listed below that establish the characteristics of healthy, functioning
watersheds, riparian areas, and associated fish habitats. Also included in INFS are interim riparian
management objectives (RMO's) (discussed on page 8 of this report) that are indicators of ecosystem health,
are quantifiable, and are subject to accurate repeatable measurements. In order to reach the goals of INFS
standards and guidelines (Appendix 1 of this report) are outlined which apply to riparian habitat
conservation areas (RHCA's) and to projects and activities in areas outside RHCA's that would degrade
RHCA's. All activities occurring on Forest Service lands are required to meet the standards and guidelines
outlined in INFS.
Since the quality of water and fish habitat in aquatic systems is inseparably related to the upland and
riparian areas within watersheds, these goals were established to maintain or restore watershed, riparian and
stream channel conditions including:
1. Water quality
2. Stream channel integrity, channel processes, and the sediment regime under which the riparian and
aquatic ecosystems developed.
3. Instream flows to support healthy riparian and aquatic habitats, the stability and effective function of
stream channels and the ability to route flood discharges.
33

4. Natural timing and the variability of the water table elevation in meadows and wetlands.
5. Diversity and productivity of native and desired non-native plant communities in riparian ecosystems.
6. Riparian vegetation to: provide an amount and distribution of large woody debris characteristic of natural
aquatic and riparian ecosystems; provide adequate summer and winter thermal regulation within the
riparian and aquatic zones; help achieve rates of surface erosion, bank erosion, and channel migration
characteristics of those under which the communities developed.
7. Riparian and aquatic habitats necessary to foster the unique genetic fish stocks that evolved within the
specific geo-climatic region.
8. Habitat to support populations of well distributed native and desired non-native plant, vertebrate and
invertebrate populations that contributes to the viability of riparian dependent communities.
Riparian Management Objectives (RMO's)
The Inland Native Fish Strategy identifies 6 parameters (RMO's) using stream inventory data for pool
frequency, large woody debris, bank stability and lower bank angle, width to depth ratio, and water
temperature. These objectives have been determined to be good indicators of ecosystem health and
represent a good starting point to describe the desired condition for fish habitat. These RMO's for stream
channel conditions provide the criteria against which attainment or progress toward attainment of the
riparian goals are measured. Actions that reduce habitat quality, whether existing conditions are better or
worse than objective values, would be inconsistent with the purpose of this interim direction (INFS EA, pg
E-3).
# of Pools - Pool frequency has been identified as the key feature in meeting the life history requirements of
fish communities inhabiting a watershed. Pools are the least common stream habitat component in a
watershed. They are also sensitive to non-point land use effects. Most fish species use pools at some stage
in their lifecycle, and pools are particularly important as extreme low-flow refuge habitat. Pools are bowl
shaped depressions in the stream channel where the stream surface is nearly flat. The desired pool
frequency varies by channel width with larger stream channels having fewer pools.
# Pieces Large Woody Debris - large woody debris (LWD) in forested streams is critical to habitat
composition and cover for fish populations. It is important in pool formation, channel bank stability, fine
sediment and gravel storage, and organic nutrient storage (USDA Forest Service, 1994b). A decrease in
LWD can have major effects on these physical habitat parameters. Channel and bank instability resulting
from decreases in LWD can have a direct effect on survival of some juvenile salmonids during peak flow
events (Reimer and McIntyre 1993). Loss of habitat formed by LWD reduces overwinter survival of fish.
LWD also creates structure for storing spawning gravel. Reduction in LWD could result in less spawning
area and decreased natural production. In addition, nutrient stored in the fine sediment trapped by the LWD
and the wood itself is used by macroinvertebrates which are a food source for fish (USDA Forest Service,
1994b).
LWD is the tree stems that are (or will be) part of the stream channel structure. Woody debris comes in four
varieties, fine particulate matter being transported by the streamflow, coarse particulate matter that is
temporarily stored on the stream bottom (leaves and stem fragments), small woody debris (stems) that are
larger than 4" at its largest end and large woody debris that is larger than 6" at its largest end. The desired
situation and that which was used to measure large woody debris would be 1 piece, >12" in diameter, and
greater than 35' long, every 250 feet of stream length.
Bank (channel) Stability - bank stability looks at the stability of streambanks rather than the whole
channel. This is different than the Pfankuch channel stability procedure used for many years in determining
water yield increases on the Kootenai, although the relative condition of the stream channel would be
considered similar with either measurement. Fisheries research has found that the channel stability survey
has enough bias and variability in it that fish abundance is not related to that estimate. A variety of species
use streambanks as cover at some time of the year. By measuring this habitat element, we directly measure
hiding cover availability and indirectly approximate the availability of other types of cover that disappear as
34

streambanks erode and send sediment downstream. Stream channel stability is determined from observation
of a series of channel parameters and given a numerical rating based on those observations. Channel
stability for a given stream reach for that particular set of parameters is then determined as fair, good or
poor. By using both bank and channel stability measurements we are able to identify weak links in the
stream system. The percent stable banks has a desired level of 80 percent.
Stream Temperature - temperature is a major factor affecting fish survival, distribution, production, and
community composition in forest streams of the Pacific Northwest0 (Beschta et al. 1987). Elevated
temperatures from exposed riparian areas are expected to increase summer daily temperatures. What we
want to know is whether a stream is near or above the thermal maximum for coldwater biological
communities or whether there is an extreme range in temperatures over the course of several days. INFS
recommends no measurable increase in maximum water temperature (7 day moving average of daily
maximum temperature measured as the average of the maximum daily temperature of the warmest
consecutive 7 day period). Maximum water temperatures below 59 degrees within adult holding habitat and
below 48 degrees within spawning and rearing habitats.
Width/Depth Ratio - There are two Rosgen channel types that naturally meet the standards identified in
INFS for this parameter. Types B and C have a width/depth ratio greater than 12. These RMO standards
need to be adjusted to match geomorphic stream types and not attempt to make all streams fall into a single
category this will better match conditions on the Kootenai National Forest.
Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCA's)
RHCA's are portions of watersheds where riparian dependent resources receive primary emphasis and
management activities are subject to specific standards and guidelines. RHCA's include traditional riparian
corridors, wetlands, intermittent streams and other areas that help maintain the integrity of aquatic
ecosystems by (1) influencing the delivery of coarse sediment, aquatic matter, and woody debris to streams,
(2) providing root strength for channel stability, (3) shading the stream and (4) protecting water quality
(Naiman et al. 1992). In order to reach the goals of INFS, standards and guidelines are outlined which apply
to RHCA's and to projects and activities in areas outside RHCA's that would degrade them.

35

APPENDIX I:

EAST RESERVOIR MONITORING PLAN

RESOURCE

OBJECTIVE

TIMING

Forest
Vegetation

Monitor
silvicultural
prescription
implementation
Ensure
reforestation
success
Ensure
compliance with
R1 soil quality
standards
Ensure the fuel
treatments are
effective
Ensure viability
for sensitive
plants,
particularly
Taper-tipped
onion
Collect reserve
tree and snag
numbers

After project
implementation

Check all units following harvest to
document existing condition, and
recommend future stand treatment needs

Silviculturist

After project
implementation

Monitor all regeneration units for
reforestation success.

Silviculturist

During the life
of the timber
sale

Monitor harvest units for compliance with
R1 soil quality standards as described in
the KNF Plan Monitoring and Evaluation
Report for Fiscal Year 2011 (Project File).
Monitor the fuel treatments on a minimum of
10% of the units to ensure objectives are met.

Soil Specialist

Botanist

Wildlife
#2

Monitor snag
retention

Wildlife
#3

Monitor reserve
tree retention
within those
regeneration
harvest units
surveyed in
#1 (above).

Maintenance of reserve trees insures that
future cavity-nesting habitat and down
woody recruitment are available to help
provide future denning, feeding, and nesting
habitat. Work would be completed
concurrent with reforestation surveys.

Silviculture Crew

Wildlife
#4

Monitor the
changes created
by vegetative
treatments
on the attributes
of old
growth in
treatment units

After harvest
and sitepreparation has
occurred, but
generally within
five years from
end of harvest.
After harvest
and sitepreparation
have occurred,
but generally
within five
years from the
harvest.
Pre-treatment
surveys. Two
post-treatment
surveys, at one
and five years.

Monitor the effect of weed control and
burning on rare plant populations.
Monitor overall weed control efforts.
Monitor status of sensitive plants within
the project area during and after
treatments.
Conduct a representative sample of units
within each VRU (2 units in each VRU
represented in the Analysis Area). This item
would provide baseline numbers for
monitoring items #2 and #3 below.
The timber marking crew would tally snag
and reserve tree numbers during marking,
and only in those regeneration harvest
units with leave tree marking.
Within those regeneration harvest units
surveyed in #1(above) to determine if snag
management strategies are meeting Forest
Plan cavity habitat direction. Work would be
completed concurrent with reforestation
surveys.

Conduct pre- and post-treatment surveys to
collect vegetation data on a representative
sample of units. Data must, at a minimum,
include snags, coarse woody debris, large
trees, basal area, canopy closure, and
structural layers (Green et al 1992). Conduct
these surveys to collect vegetation data using
the common stand exam process. Data
collected by the Common Stand Exam has
broader application both forest and region
wide.
36

District Silviculturist,
Fire Management
Officer

Forest
Vegetation
Soils

Fuels

Botany

Wildlife
#1

After project
implementation
Through the
prescribed
burning covered
in project

During the
marking of the
regeneration
units that
require leave
tree marking

METHODOLOGY

RESPONSILBLITY

Fuels Specialist

Timber/Pre-Sale
Marking Crew

Silviculture Crew

RESOURCE

OBJECTIVE

TIMING

METHODOLOGY

Hydrology

Ensure continued
stream function,
stability, and
high water
quality
Implementation
and effectiveness
of applicable
BMPs.

After project
implementation

Resurvey all Rosgen Level II and KNF Level
III Fish Habitat sites in East Reservoir
analysis area.

Hydrologist

During and
immediately
following
project
activities.
On going

BMP inspection reports and/or Timber Sale
Inspection Reports. Inspection reports would
be completed as part of the annual district
BMP effectiveness monitoring program.

Timber Sale
Administrator,
Engineering
Representative/COR,
Hydrologist, IDT.
Hydrologist

During
implementation
of activities that
occur in or near
riparian areas or
wetlands.

This monitoring would occur as a
fundamental component of timber sale
administration.

Timber Sale
Administrator,
Engineering
Representative/COR,
District Hydrologist

During initial
seeding and the
years following

Field inspection of seeded sites at the close
of the sale and 2 to 3 years after the sale.
Additional seeding would then be done if the
success rate is low.
Field collection of stream flow, temperature,
and suspended sediment samples, following
USGS protocols
Repeated cross-section and channel
geometry surveying in designated and
monumented reaches

Timber Sale
Administrator,
District Hydrologist

Monitor/survey the project area for new
invader weed species. Monitor weed
population levels in treated areas, with
particular emphasis on haul routes, stored
roads, and landings. Pre- and post-activity
surveys for areas scheduled for burning
Bi-annual monitoring of motorized vehicle
closure devices and effective closure of ATV
trespass trails.

Weed Specialist,
Botanist

Hydrology

Hydrology

Hydrology

Hydrology

Hydrology

Hydrology

Weeds

Recreation

Ensure continued
stream function,
stability and high
water quality.
Monitor
protection and
management of
stream channels,
riparian areas,
and riparian
habitat
conservation
areas during
timber harvest
and road
reconstruction.
Monitor success
of revegetation
efforts on
disturbed sites.
Water quantity
and quality
monitoring.
Channel
geometry
monitoring to
assess trends in
channel
condition
Noxious weed
control

Ensure
compliance with
road/trail
closures.

On going

Every three to
five years for
sites within the
planning
subunit
On going

On going

Monitor TSS and discharge at the USGS site.

37

RESPONSILBLITY

District Hydrologist

District Hydrologist

Recreation Specialist

Appendix J:

Dunn Creek Sedimentation Investigation Report
- 2011-

Sediment source within the Canyon Reach of Dunn Creek

US Department of Agriculture
Kootenai National Forest
Libby Ranger District

July 26, 2011

38

Dunn Creek Sediment Investigation Report
- 2011 –
Prepared For:
USDA Forest Service
Libby Ranger District
East Reservoir E.I.S.

Prepared By:
Josh Boyd
USFS Hydrologic Technician
Libby Ranger District
12557 Hwy 37
Libby, MT 59923

39

Dunn Creek Sediment Investigation Report
Hydrology
Dunn Creek is located in the Middle Kootenai Basin approximately 2 miles downstream of Libby Dam.
This watershed is 33.85 sq. miles in size and is composed of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th order drainages. There is
one dominant perennial channel to this system, the mainstem of Dunn Creek with other tributaries feeding
into it. These include Snag Gulch, Wyoma Creek and a sizable unnamed tributary.
Aspects throughout the basin are predominantly low energy, low elevation with the main basin draining to
the northwest. Upland slopes of 35 -40% exist on the south side of the drainage and 15-20% on the north
side. Elevations in the area vary from 6,000’ to 2,120’ at the mouth of Dunn Creek.
A bankfull flow of 125 cubic feet per second (cfs) has been validated at a permanent gaging station at the
mouth of the drainage. The estimated Q2 return interval has been estimated at roughly 143 cfs using USGS
Flood Frequency and Basin- Characteristic Data.
Climate
Like most of the Kootenai National Forest, the contemporary climatic conditions for Dunn Creek are a
combination of continental and maritime influences. The maritime patterns originate primarily from the
flow of warm, moist air masses from the west and the Pacific Ocean. One result is the gentle, steady,
"soaking" rains in the fall and winter which are typically accompanied by cloudy skies with small diurnal
temperature changes. The summers are typically warm and dry, with significant cooling at night. The
predictable summer dry season, usually occurring sometime in July and August, is a defining characteristic
of the local, temperate climate. Continental effects are reflected in occasional cold periods in the winter,
typically associated with northerly or arctic weather systems, and the hot, dry summer periods associated
with high-pressure systems. These overlapping climatic provinces often create "rain-on-snow" events in the
late fall and winter, when two to three days of continuous rain falls on a snowpack causing flooding. The
precipitation for Dunn Creek ranges from 14 to 40 inches annually. At the upper elevations, the majority of
this precipitation comes in the form of snow between late October and late March.
Bank Erosion and Sediment Loading
The bank condition evaluation utilized the BEHI method (Rosgen, 2008) and data including bank length,
average bank height, bank condition, bank materials (clay, sand, gravel, cobbles, and boulders), vegetation
type and density, Near Bank Stress (NBS) and land use were collected. The BEHI method incorporates this
data into numerical ratings such as bank height/bankfull height ratio, root depth/bank height ratio, root
density percent, bank angle, and percent surface protection. Combined, these ratings generated a cumulative
rating that provides a qualitative erosion severity assessment (very low to extreme). Actual measured bank
erosion rates within the Blackfoot River drainage were used to calibrate these ratings (based on similar
geology and stream types), and allowed the formulation of current bank erosion within the Dunn Creek
Watershed (Table 1).
Table 1. Bank retreat rates and erodibility variables applied to Dunn Creek derived from data collected in
the Blackfoot River drainage (MT). The yearly bank retreat rates in Table 1 as well as the field obtained
BEHI data were input into the RIVERMorph Software™ where annual sediment loads by site and reach
were derived.
ERODING
BANK
CONDITION
RATING

BANK
RETREAT
RATE
(feet/year)

BANK
HEIGHT/BANKFULL
HEIGHT

ROOT
DEPTH/BANK
HEIGHT

ROOT
DENSITY
(%)

BANK
ANGLE
(DEGREES)

SURFACE
PROTECTION
(%)

Very Low
Low
Moderate
High
Very High
Extreme

0.10
0.17
0.23
0.31
0.39
0.47

1.0 - 1.1
1.11 - 1.19
1.2 - 1.5
1.6 - 2.0
2.1 - 2.8
> 2.8

1.0 - 0.9
0.89 - 0.5
0.49 - 0.3
0.29 - 0.15
0.14 - 0.05
< 0.05

100 - 80
79 - 55
54 - 30
29 - 15
14 - 5
<5

0 - 20
21 - 60
61 - 80
81 - 90
91 - 119
> 119

100 - 80
79 - 55
54 - 30
29 - 15
14 - 10
< 10

40

Bank Erosion Hazard Index (BEHI)
Streambank erosion can be traced to two major factors: stream bank characteristics (erodibility potential)
and hydraulic/gravitational forces (Rosgen 1996). The principal processes of stream bank erosion within
Dunn Creek include: surface erosion, soil-fall and rotational mass failure (cutbank), and fluvial entrainment
(particle detachment by flowing water, generally at the bank toe). The banks represented here are not a total
of all banks within the watershed. It is a combination of active yet stable banks combined with the most
unstable banks within the Dunn Creek drainage.
-Snag Gulch ReachThe Snag Gulch Reach is located in the headwaters of the mainstem of Dunn Creek. It is a Valley Type II
with moderate relief, stable side slopes, and floor slopes of less the 4% (Rosgen, 1996). The middle of the
reach has a very flat slope with sinuous channel types of C4 and E4. The upper flat valley bottom is held in
place with a high gradient section with boulders and bedrock intrusions with associated channel types of B3
and B2a. The reach break is at the confluence of the mainstem of Dunn Creek and a major unnamed
tributary.
Bank erosion was calculated at 4 different sites within the Snag Gulch Reach. All BEHI and NBS were
rated at Low to Moderate. The sites measured banks ranging from 3 - 4.5 ft in height contributing 0.035
tons/year/linear ft. The principal process of stream bank erosion within the Snag Gulch Reach is fluvial
entrainment. With adequate vegetative cover and sufficient bank armor these are not a significant source of
sediment in the basin.
Table 2. Bank erosion by site within the Snag Gulch Reach of Dunn Creek.
BANK
NUMBER

1
2
3
4
TOTAL

BEHI
NUMERIC
RATING

BEHI
ADJECTIVE
RATING

NBS
ADJECTIVE
RATING

16.6
15.3
34
29.6

Low
Low
High
Moderate

Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate

LENGTH
(FT)

LOSS
CU YDS/YR

LOSS
TONS/YR

29
33
10
23
95

0.64
0.91
0.42
0.63
2.6

0.83
1.18
0.55
0.82
3.38

Map 1. Snag Gulch Reach of Dunn Creek.

-Wyoma ReachThe Wyoma Reach is located downstream of the confluence of the mainstem of Dunn Creek and the largest
unnamed tributary. It ends at a natural narrowing of the valley mid-way down the drainage. It is a Valley
41

Type II with moderate relief, stable side slopes, and floor slopes of less the 4% (Rosgen, 1996). The entire
reach consists of moderately flat slopes with channel types of B4 and B4c.
Bank erosion was calculated at 21 different sites within the Wyoma Reach. The BEHI and NBS ratings
range between Moderate and Extreme. The measured banks range from 1.5 - 11 ft in height contributing
0.071 tons/year/linear ft. The principal process of stream bank erosion within the Wyoma Reach is fluvial
entrainment with some surface erosion. With adequate vegetative cover and sufficient bank armor most of
these banks are not a significant source of sediment in the basin. Bank 19 is the ranked the highest in
sediment contribution within the reach. This bank at 74 ft long has very little surface protection over
stratified layers.
Table 3. Bank erosion by site within the Wyoma Reach of Dunn Creek.
BANK
NUMBER

BEHI
NUMERIC RATING

BEHI
ADJECTIVE RATING

NBS
ADJECTIVE RATING

LENGTH
(ft)

LOSS
cu yds/yr

LOSS
tons/yr

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
TOTAL

26
33.2
24.7
22.2
25
33.4
30.6
44.3
31.3
43.7
39.1
40
37
43.4
46
41.9
38
44.3
39.1
35.7
40

Moderate
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
Very High
High
Very High
High
High
High
Very High
Extreme
Very high
High
Very High
High
High
High

Extreme
High
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Moderate
Very high
Extreme
Low
Extreme
High
High
High
Moderate
High
High
High
High
Moderate

35
44
43
48
80
57
37
32
101
44
100
152
75
48
74
57
1
83
49
31
57
1,248

0.89
1.26
0.62
0.61
1.36
1.96
1.4
1.62
2.55
1.65
4.36
5.58
3.70
3.61
12.62
9.06
0.1
8.99
2.08
1.96
2.42
68.40

1.16
1.64
0.81
0.79
1.77
2.55
1.82
2.11
3.32
2.15
5.67
7.25
4.81
4.69
16.41
11.78
0.13
11.69
2.70
2.55
3.15
88.95

Map 2. The Wyoma Reach of Dunn Creek.

42

-Middle Dunn ReachThe Middle Dunn Reach is located upstream of the steep canyon section of Dunn Creek and starts at the
natural narrowing of the valley mid-way down the drainage. It is a Valley Type II with moderate relief,
stable side slopes, and floor slopes of less the 4% (Rosgen, 1996). The entire reach consists of moderately
flat slopes with channel types of B4 and B4c.
Bank erosion was calculated at 6 different sites within the Middle Dunn Reach. The BEHI and NBS ratings
range between Moderate and Very High. The measured banks range from 4.5 - 13 ft in height contributing
0.115 tons/year/linear ft. These erosion rates are not much higher than the rates in the Wyoma Reach. The
principal process of stream bank erosion within the Middle Dunn Reach is fluvial entrainment with some
surface erosion.
Table 4. Bank erosion by site within the Middle Dunn Reach of Dunn Creek.
BANK
NUMBER

BEHI
NUMERIC RATING

BEHI
ADJECTIVE RATING

NBS
ADJECTIVE RATING

LENGTH
(ft)

LOSS
cu yds/yr

LOSS
tons/yr

26
27
28
29
30
31
TOTAL

39.5
37.9
38.5
39.3
31.3
43.4

High
High
High
High
High
Very High

Moderate
Very High
Moderate
High
Moderate
High

69
28
35
35
38
61
266

5.39
4.21
3.30
2.81
3.93
4.05
23.69

7.01
5.47
4.29
3.65
5.11
5.27
30.8

Map 3. The Middle Dunn Reach of Dunn Creek.

-Canyon ReachThe Canyon Reach is located in the lower third of Dunn Creek. It starts at the natural narrowing of the
valley at the bottom of the Middle Dunn Reach. It is a Valley Type I with steep landforms, bedrock
intrusions, and floor slopes greater than 4% (Rosgen, 1996). The reach consists of steep stream slopes with
43

channel types of A2, B2a, and B3a. Typical A2/B2 channels are high energy and low sediment supply.
Forest Road 334 encroaches within the floodprone and bankfull areas in several places constricting the
channel and destabilizing banks throughout the reach. Bank erosion was calculated at 7 different sites
within the Canyon Reach. The BEHI and NBS ratings range between High and Extreme. The measured
banks range from 4.5 - 34 ft. in height contributing 0.451 tons/year/linear ft.
Bank 32 has a BEHI rating of Extreme and a NBS of Very High. This bank is estimated to contribute 168
tons of sediment per year and is the single largest sediment source in the drainage. The principal processes
of erosion on this bank are surface erosion, soil-fall / rotational mass failure, and fluvial entrainment.
Suspected causes are road encroachment into the floodprone area and slope de-stabilization from vegetation
removal.
Bank 33 has a BEHI rating of High and a NBS of Very High. It contributes an estimated 25 tons of
sediment per year to Dunn Creek. This is the 2nd largest sediment source in Dunn Creek. The principal
processes of erosion on this bank are surface erosion, soil-fall / rotational mass failure, and fluvial
entrainment. Suspected causes are road encroachment into the floodprone area and slope de-stabilization
from vegetation removal.
The total sediment contributions of Banks 32 and 33 (193 tons) are more than all other measured banks
combined (169 tons).
Table 5. Bank erosion by site within the Canyon Reach of Dunn Creek.
BANK
NUMBER

BEHI
NUMERIC RATING

32
33
34
35
36
37
38
TOTAL

52.8
38.9
35
0
40.9
42.8
45.4

BEHI
ADJECTIVE RATING

NBS
ADJECTIVE RATING

Extreme
High
High
Very Low
Very High
Very High

Very High
Very High

4. The Canyon Reach of Dunn Creek.

Moderate

High
High
High
High

Very High

44

LENGTH
(ft)

LOSS
cu yds/yr

LOSS
tons/yr

216
101
25
35
17
33
45
472

129.72
19.71
5.17
0.60
1.33
3.77
3.58
163.88

168.64
25.62
6.72
0.78
1.73
4.90
4.65
213.04

-River ReachThe River Reach starts at the natural widening of the valley below the Canyon Reach. It is a Valley Type III
that is primarily a deposition reach (Rosgen, 1996). It is an alluvial-fan landform with moderate relief and
slopes of 2%. The reach consists of stable channel types of B4 and B4c and unstable D4 and F4 types.
Bank erosion was calculated at 4 different sites within the River Reach. The BEHI and NBS ratings range
between Moderate and Extreme. The measured banks range from 4 - 7 ft in height contributing 0.097
tons/year/linear ft. These erosion rates are similar to the rates in the Wyoma Reach and slightly lower than
the Middle Dunn Reach. The principal process of stream bank erosion within the River Reach is fluvial
entrainment with some surface erosion
Table 6. Bank erosion by site within the River Reach of Dunn Creek.
BANK
NUMBER

BEHI
NUMERIC RATING

BEHI
ADJECTIVE RATING

NBS
ADJECTIVE RATING

LENGTH
(ft)

LOSS
cu yds/yr

LOSS
tons/yr

39
40
41
42
TOTAL

32.5
47.7
38
45.7

High
Extreme
High
Very High

High
High
Moderate
High

56
48
39
75
218

3.54
5.85
2.69
4.33
16.41

4.60
7.61
3.50
5.63
21.34

Map 5. The River Reach of Dunn Creek.

45

Summary
The findings presented in this report are designed to display the existing condition in terms of bank
instability and subsequent sedimentation. This report will hopefully aid in supplementing future restoration
planning and design, whether that be strictly riparian revegetation, total channel reconstruction or a
combination of both. The data can be used to prioritize where to begin restoration and to shed light on
specific contributions and the downstream impacts. The current instabilities of Banks 32 & 33 and their
immediate effects downstream may warrant a “top-down” approach to future restoration.
References:
Rosgen, D.L. and H.L. Silvey. 1996. Applied River Morphology. Printed Media Companies, Minneapolis,
MN. 365 pp.
Rosgen, D.L. 2008. River Stability Field Guide. Color House Graphics, Grand Rapids, MI. 270 pp.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

APPENDIX K:

MONTANA AIRSHEDS and IMPACT ZONES

46

MONTANA AIRSHED 1 and 2 BOUNDARY DESCRIPTIONS
1) Airshed 1 contains all of Lincoln County and the NW tip of Sanders County. The area of Sanders
County included is bordered on the north and east by Lincoln County, on the west by the Idaho border, on
the south by the southern edge of the Beaver Creek drainage, through Noxon Reservoir, and the southern
edge of the Vermillion River drainage.
a. The Libby Impact Zone, within Airshed 1, includes all land within the following described areas:
Beginning at Kootenai Falls (1), going SE to Scenery Mountain (2), then south to Indian Head (3), then
south to Treasure Mountain (4), then south to Mount Snowy (5), then east to Double N Lake (6), then
across Highway 2 going NE to McMillan Mountain (7), then north to Swede Mountain (8), then NE
across Highway 37 to the Vermiculite Mine (9), then west to Sheldon Mountain (10), then WNW to
Flagstaff Mountain (11), then SW to Kootenai Falls (1), the point of the beginning.
2) Airshed 2 contains all of Flathead and Lake Counties and all of Sanders County except for the NW tip
(described in paragraph 1), which is part of Airshed 1. Airshed 2 also contains the northern portions of
Missoula and Powell Counties, which lies in the Swan River drainage, and the South Fork of the Flathead
River drainage. The boundary here is the divide between the Swan River and the Clearwater River
drainages in Missoula County and the divide between Monture Creek and the South Fork of the Flathead
River drainage in Powell County. Also, the northern half of Mineral County (that portion north of
Superior) is included in Airshed 2. This line runs east and west between T16N and T17N, M.P.M., then
north along Mineral County to Sanders County line.
a. The Kalispell Impact Zone, within Airshed 2, includes all land within the following described area:
Beginning in the town of Hungry Horse, cross the Flathead River and head NW to Teakettle Mountain,
then WSW to a point on Trumbull Creek between sections 24, 25 in T31N, R21W. Go directly West to
the corner of sections 20, 21, 28, and 29 in the same Township and Range, then head North to the
corner of sections 16, 17, 20, and 21, same T and R. Now head West to the line that divides R21W and
47

R22 W, then North to Big Mountain, then SW down Big Mountain Ridge face toward Whitefish Lake
at a point just SE of where Hell Roaring Creek enters the lake. Cross the lake to a point called “Vista”
in section 9, T31N, R22W, and then generally follow the higher points, through Woods Lake, Murray
Lake, crossing Highway 93 in section 24, T31N, R23W. Continue through Little Bootjack Lake and
follow the high points generally WSW to a point on Tally Lake where Logan Creek enters the lake. The
boundary crosses the lake generally SSW to Talley Mountain, then generally South to Reid Point
Lookout, then South along the 39
“Reid Divide” to the boundary between T30N, T29W, and R23W, and R24W. Turn SE and follow the ridge
to a point on Big Lost Creek in section 16, T29N, R23W, then follow the ridge around to “McMannamy
Draw” in section 26, T29N, R23W, then generally following the ridges South to Boorman Peak and then
South along the Pack Trail to a point where “Dower Draw” enters Ashley Creek. Cross Ashley Creek to a
point at the foot of the ridge in section 19, T27N, R22W, then follow this ridge up to Wild Bill Mountain,
then straight to Eagle Mountain, then straight to Blacktail Mountain, then generally NW to Lion Mountain,
then head straight SE through Baldy Mountain, and on to the Flathead/Lake County line on Highway 93 in
section 33, T26N, R20W. Boundary now head directly East across Flathead Lake to Highway 35 and then
follows the shore line North along the Flathead/Lake County line to the corner of sections 4,5,8 and 9 in
T26N, R19W, then directly North to Hash Mountain, then straight to Doris Mountain then straight to
Columbia Mountain and finally straight back to the start point in the town of Hungry Horse, the point of the
beginning.

48

