 The KC-46A will provide decades of mission support from the First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) and a Formal Training Unit (FTU). 1.0 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR KC-46A FORMAL TRAINING UNIT AND FIRST MAIN OPERATING BASE BEDDOWN The United States (U.S.) Congress authorized and appropriated funds supporting the U.S. Air Force’s (USAF’s) selection of the KC-46A as the newest aerial refueling aircraft to replace a portion of the aging fleet of KC-135 Stratotankers. Beginning in 2012, the deployment of new USAF aircraft and missions must follow Air Force Instruction (AFI) 10-503, “Strategic Basing.” Per this AFI, the USAF must perform an enterprise-wide evaluation of Air Force Bases (AFBs) that could be considered as basing locations for the KC-46A. This Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is being prepared to provide the decision maker and the public the information required to understand the future potential impacts of the decisions that may be made regarding beddown of the Formal Training Unit (FTU) and the First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) missions for the KC-46A. This Draft EIS analyzes USAF proposals to beddown the FTU and the MOB 1 missions for the KC-46A at active-duty AFBs in the continental United States (CONUS). The FTU action would include the basing of up to eight Primary Aerospace Vehicles Authorized (PAA) under Air Education and Training Command (AETC), and the MOB 1 action would include the basing of 36 PAA under Air Mobility Command (AMC). The first four KC-46A aircraft will arrive at the MOB 1 base in 2016 to undergo Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E). During IOT&E, which will only occur at the MOB 1, aircraft will begin arriving at both of the bases selected to host the FTU and MOB 1 missions, with up to eight delivered by 2021 for the FTU mission and 36 delivered by 2019 for the MOB 1 mission. The USAF used the Strategic Basing Process outlined in AFI 10-503 to identify the alternative bases indicated below. Although individual bases may be considered for both the FTU and MOB 1 missions, no base would be selected to host both missions. . FTU Scenario Alternative Bases o Altus AFB, Oklahoma o McConnell AFB, Kansas . MOB 1 Scenario Alternative Bases o Altus AFB, Oklahoma o Fairchild AFB, Washington o Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota o McConnell AFB, Kansas Basing actions for the KC-46A mission would follow the 2008 Secretary of Defense Total Force Integration (TFI) policy concept. This policy was enacted into law through the passage of the 2008 National Defense Authorization Act. TFI associations pair two USAF component units (host and associate) together to operate as one. The host unit is assigned responsibility of the physical resources for accomplishing a mission (aircraft, equipment, facilities) and the associate unit shares those resources. Currently, there are three types of TFI associations: classic, active, and Air Reserve Component. The KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 missions will utilize the classic association of crews. Per AFI 90-1001, “Responsibilities for Total Force Integration,” classic associations pair active-duty host units with a reserve component associate unit to improve operational synergies and add capacity during surge operations at a reduced cost. For over 50 years, the KC-135 served as the aerial refueling backbone to project global reach and combat power. The new KC-46A will provide updated technology designed to enhance operations and increase mission effectiveness to support USAF, Navy, Marine Corps, and allies who rely on tanker range and flexibility to strengthen the coalition mission. AMC is the lead Major Command (MAJCOM) responsible for maintaining the air mobility mission, including command and control (C2) of airlift and aerial refueling. AMC will operate the MOB 1 mission with fully trained combat aircrews providing aerial refueling and mission support for regional conflicts, conventional global strike, and nuclear deterrence operations. Integration of this new aircraft into the USAF inventory requires trained aircrews (pilots, copilots, boom operators [BOs], and support personnel). AETC is the MAJCOM responsible for training KC-46A pilots, copilots, BOs, and support personnel at the FTU base. In addition, personnel will be trained to support the new C2 core function that will have the capability to provide connectivity among tactical network partners. The USAF will accommodate growth in understanding the KC-46A program by incorporating an adaptive management approach. Training and operational understanding of the KC-46A weapons system will evolve as the aircraft are integrated into the USAF inventory. As program understanding and requirements mature, adaptive management will allow for continuous improvement in the management effectiveness and reduction of environmental impacts. The National Guard Bureau is preparing a separate EIS that will support an independent decision to beddown 12 KC-46A aircraft at a Second Main Operating Base (MOB 2), to be operated by the Air National Guard (ANG). The locations being considered for MOB 2 include Forbes Field (FOE), Kansas; Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey; Pease Air National Guard Station, New Hampshire; Pittsburgh Airport, Pennsylvania; and Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Ohio. This action is separate and independent from the FTU and MOB 1 decisions that will result from this Draft EIS. Following the first two beddown actions, the USAF will plan additional beddown actions for the remaining KC-46A aircraft. 1.1 PURPOSE OF THE FORMAL TRAINING UNIT AND FIRST MAIN OPERATING BASE BASING The proposed actions to establish the FTU and MOB 1 are intended to (1) effectively train required crew and support personnel at the FTU and (2) provide a fully capable, combat operational KC-46A aerial refueling force at the MOB 1 to accomplish aerial refueling and related missions. The mission-ready KC-46A squadrons will allow immediate and effective employment in exercises, peace-keeping operations, contingencies, and combat. Bedding down and operating the KC-46A will allow the USAF to maintain combat capability and mission readiness as U.S. military resources become increasingly committed to missions throughout the world. 1.2 NEED FOR THE FORMAL TRAINING UNIT AND FIRST MAIN OPERATING BASE BASING The KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 beddowns are needed to support the recapitalization of the USAF’s aging refueling aircraft fleet. The USAF needs bases to accomplish the required training and to field a fully operational force. FTU and MOB 1 bases are needed to achieve a high state of operational mission readiness. The effective training and qualification of crewmembers and support personnel at the FTU will transition to mission-ready MOB 1 KC-46A squadrons. The basing locations will require facilities, infrastructure, and airspace where KC-46A aircraft can be located with the capability for crews and aircraft to perform all the activities and training necessary to maintain a robust aerial refueling capability for the USAF and other U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) branches as legacy KC-135 tankers are withdrawn from the inventory. 1.3 BACKGROUND FOR MEETING THE PURPOSE AND NEED In April 2006, the USAF completed an Analysis of Alternatives to determine the most appropriate strategy to recapitalize the existing KC-135 aircraft fleet. Based on this analysis, the USAF concluded that a commercial derivative replacement tanker would result in the best value. Although Section 1.4.2 details the technological improvements of the KC-46A, the following points are examples of capabilities that are currently lacking or are very limited with the existing KC-135 fleet. . Receiver Capable. The ability to receive fuel from other tanker aircraft is considered a force multiplier. Currently, this capability is only available on a small number of KC-135 aircraft. This lack of capability limits persistence over the battlefield and results in inefficient use of aerial refueling assets . Night Vision Imaging System (NVIS). The fleet lacks a standard NVIS for tanker cockpits and BOs. External aircraft lighting is currently not NVIS-compatible. The lack of this capability degrades effectiveness for special operations support and limits the use of these aircraft for covert operations . Multi-point Refueling. Only a small number of KC-135 aircraft are equipped for simultaneous multi-point refueling. The lack of this capability severely limits the aircraft’s functionality to support multiple simultaneous refueling operations, as well as boom and drogue refueling on the same mission . Command and Control (C2) Network. Lacks connectivity to C2 assets and aircraft have no secure tactical datalink and limited connectivity to other combat support and mobility aircraft . Defensive Protection. Not normally equipped with aircraft defensive systems, which limits aircraft from operating in anything other than a low-threat environment Congressional authority funded a total aircraft inventory of up to 179 KC-46A aircraft by 2028 to correct deficiencies, update the fleet, enhance operations, and increase mission effectiveness. Most of the total aircraft inventory will be assigned to combat units but would be operated by units assigned to AMC, U.S. Air Force in Europe, Pacific Air Forces, ANG, and Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC). 1.4 AIRCRAFT CHARACTERISTICS This section compares the aircraft characteristics of the KC-46A and the existing KC-135. Some key specifications of the KC-135 and the KC-46A are compared in Table 1-1.   KC-135 Table 1-1. Aircraft Comparison Specification KC-135 KC-46A Length 136 feet, 3 inches 165 feet, 6 inches Height 41 feet, 8 inches 52 feet, 10 inches Wingspan 130 feet, 10 inches 156 feet, 1 inch Power Plant 4 F108-CF-100 2 Pratt Whitney 4062 Takeoff Thrust 21,634 pounds per engine 62,000 pounds per engine Speed 530 miles per hour (mph) at 30,000 feet 530 mph at 30,000 feet Ceiling 50,000 feet 40,100 feet Maximum Takeoff Weight 322,500 pounds 415,000 pounds Maximum Fuel Capacity 200,000 pounds 212,000 pounds Pallets/Palletized Cargo Weight Capacity 6/36,000 pounds 18/65,000 pounds Crew 3 crewmembers 3 crewmembers Receiver Fuel Transfer Very limited Yes Fuel Jettison Yes Yes NVIS No Yes Multi-point Refueling Very limited Yes C2 Network No Yes Defensive Protection Very limited Yes Aeromedical Evacuation Limited Yes 1.4.1 Aircraft Characteristics of the KC-135 The KC-135 Stratotanker was developed in 1954 as the USAF’s first jet-powered refueling tanker to replace the KC-97 Stratotanker and is derived from a commercial Boeing 367-80 commercial passenger plane. Between 1956 and 1966, 820 KC-135 aircraft of many different variations were built. Over the last 50 years, the KC-135 fleet has undergone substantial modifications to add capability. The KC-135 was originally developed to refuel strategic bombers. It was used in the Vietnam War and in all conflicts up to and including Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. For this EIS, all KC-135 models, including the current R model, are referred to as KC-135. Originally all KC-135s were equipped with four Pratt & Whitney J-57-P-59W turbojet engines capable of producing approximately 13,000 pounds of thrust each. The current R models were upgraded to use the CFM56-2B1 (Military designation F108-CF-100) turbofan engines, which are capable of generating approximately 21,634 pounds of thrust per engine. The KC-135 has a maximum takeoff weight of more than 322,500 pounds and the ability to off-load in excess of 150,000 pounds of fuel. In addition, the KC-135 is capable of transporting up to 36,000 pounds of palletized cargo and/or ambulatory patients during aeromedical evacuations. A cargo deck above the refueling system can hold a mixed load of passengers and cargo depending on the fuel storage configuration. The KC-135 pumps fuel through the flying boom, but some aircraft have been specially fitted with wing pods to allow a multi-point aerial refueling drogue system. As noted previously, the aircraft is limited by not possessing the capability for receiver fuel transfer, NVIS, defense protection, and C2 capabilities.  KC-46A 1.4.2 Aircraft Characteristics of the KC-46A The KC-46A is derived from a commercial Boeing 767-200ER series aircraft and will be powered by two Pratt & Whitney 4062 engines (thrust reversers removed). Each engine will have the capability to provide approximately 62,000 pounds of thrust. The aircraft will be Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-certified for worldwide operations. The KC-46A is a fully provisioned version of the Boeing 767-2C, FAA Amended Type Certified aircraft. It is required to meet the FAA Part 36 Stage 4 (most restrictive commercial aircraft noise level standard) and the International Congress of Aeronautical Organizations, Committee of Environmental Protection (CAEP)/6 air contaminant emission limits. Three crewmembers, (pilot, copilot, and BO) will operate the aircraft with permanent seating for an additional 12 aircrew members. With new technology and a maximum fuel capacity expected to be over 212,000 pounds, the KC-46A is capable of accomplishing all current AMC refueling missions. The KC-46A will be able to refuel any certified fixed-wing receiver-capable aircraft on any mission both day and night. The aircraft will be equipped with a modernized KC-10 refueling boom integrated with proven fly-by-wire control system and will have the ability to deliver fuel through a centerline hose and drogue system, which adds additional mission capability independent of the boom system. This aircraft will be capable of accomplishing multi-role missions. By trading fuel for cargo, it will be able to carry up to 18 standard cargo pallets with a total palletized cargo payload of up to 65,000 pounds. With a far greater cargo area contour than the KC-135, KC-46A centerline pallet positions 1 through 8 can be built to carry full height (96-inch-high) cargo without the need for contouring, compared to KC-135 pallets, which are typically restricted to 65-inch-high cargo and must be contoured on the right-hand side starting at 50 inches off the top pallet surface. In normal operations, the KC-46A can be configured to carry 58 passengers and will be capable of providing urgent Aeromedical Evacuation, transporting up to 50 medical patients (24 litters/26 ambulatory). Additional features include a flush-mounted air refueling receptacle, wing air refueling pods capability, boom air refueling camera and computer control systems, defensive and communication systems, NVIS/covert lighting, and military radio/navigation receivers. The BO will control the refueling systems from the crew compartment via the Air Refueling Operating Station. A series of cameras mounted on the tanker’s fuselage provide a 185-degree field of view under day and night lighting conditions. Imaging may be captured in three-dimensional or two-dimensional high-definition video. Fuel is automatically transferred within the aircraft to maintain center of gravity in all axes. The flow of fuel in, out, and within the aircraft can be manually or automatically controlled by the aircraft and can be manually controlled by the aircrew via control display units at the appropriate duty station. In addition to fuel and cargo transport, each KC-46A aircraft will possess a secure airborne communications capability, which will provide beyond-the-line-of-sight messaging and line-ofsight tactical datalink multi-modal communications via secure networks. Hosting a suite of network-centric communications equipment, the KC-46A will function with most current C2 systems. The KC-46A will also support the C2 core function as a communications “gateway” when equipped with a roll-on gateway system to provide connectivity between tactical network partners in theater. This aircraft will have self-defense and protection (both active and passive) capabilities and the necessary operational environment awareness to mitigate threats, but will not be operated in areas of high threats without requesting suppression of enemy air defenses and air support. This aircraft is capable of ferrying fuel into semi-austere airfields. By following Forward Area Refueling Point procedures, the aircraft can off-load fuel into fuel pits, bladders, trucks, or other aircraft, with or without the engines running, without the need for special equipment. The aircraft will be able to operate at certain night vision goggle (NVG) and/or defensive system-required airfields with a minimum of 7,000 feet of paved runway available for takeoff/landing. The aircraft will be capable of operating in day-night and adverse weather conditions over vast distances to enable deployment, employment, sustainment, and redeployment of U.S., joint, allied, and coalition forces. 1.5 PUBLIC AND AGENCY INVOLVEMENT The primary purpose of this EIS is to describe the actions being proposed by the USAF, along with the potential consequences associated with implementation of those actions. Potential impacts associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios were evaluated during the planning stages of the project. These potential impacts are presented in this Draft EIS. The USAF has evaluated all reasonable alternatives to ensure that informed decisions are made after review and consideration of the potential environmental consequences. The Environmental Impact Analysis Process (32 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 989) is the process by which the USAF implements the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA implementing regulations. This EIS documents the detailed study of these potential environmental consequences. Compliance with the NEPA process involves several steps to ensure public and agency involvement. 1.5.1 Scoping Process The public scoping period for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 EIS began on 26 March 2013 with publication of the notice of intent in the Federal Register. During the following weeks, notification letters were mailed to Federal, state, and local agencies; elected officials; federally recognized tribes (tribes);1 nongovernmental organizations; and interested individuals as a part of Interagency/Intergovernmental Coordination for Environmental Planning (IICEP). 1 Per Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 4710.02, DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes, “tribe” refers to a federally recognized Indian or Alaska Native tribe, band, nation, pueblo, village, or community that the Secretary of the Interior acknowledges (DoDI 4710.02, Section 3.5). IICEP is a federally mandated process for informing and coordinating with other governmental agencies regarding proposed actions. Through the IICEP process, concerned Federal, state, and local agencies are notified and allowed sufficient time to evaluate potential environmental impacts of a proposed action. The USAF determined, through informal consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and state wildlife agencies, that there are no Federal or state threatened or endangered species in the areas in which either of the KC-46A scenarios would take place; therefore, no further consultation is required. Appendix A provides sample notification letters, the notification mailing lists, and the comments and concerns received by the USAF during the public scoping period. Newspaper advertisements announcing the intent to prepare an EIS and hold public scoping meetings were published in 10 different local daily and weekly newspapers. These advertisements were published in the weeks preceding each of the scheduled public scoping meetings. Four public scoping meetings were held between 9 and 18 April 2013 in communities near the four alternative bases (see Table 1-2). The meetings were held in an open house format where citizens could review display boards about the proposed missions and speak individually with USAF personnel. During these meetings, USAF personnel presented information on the proposed action through the use of display boards and fact sheets and answered questions posed by those in attendance. Table 1-2. KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 Beddown Public Scoping Meetings Date Time Location 9 April 2013 5:00 - 8:00 P.M. Southwest Technology Center 711 West Tamarack Road; Altus, OK 735213 11 April 2013 5:00 - 8:00 P.M. Eugene M. Hughes Metropolitan Complex Room 180 5015 E. 29th Street; North Wichita, KS 67260 16 April 2013 5:00 - 8:00 P.M. The Lincoln Center, Lincoln Ballroom 1316 North Lincoln Street; Spokane, WA 99201 18 April 2013 5:00 - 8:00 P.M. Grand Forks Ramada Inn 1205 North 43rd Street; Grand Forks, ND 58203 The scoping meetings were attended by 578 people, which included residents, elected officials, local business leaders, military affairs committee members, congressional staffers, base employees, and others. The scoping period closed on 17 May 2013, and approximately 200 comments were received. The majority of the comments were supportive, with only a few requesting certain resource area information to be presented in this EIS. During scoping, the public and agencies were primarily interested in understanding the operational and economic factors associated with bringing the KC-46A to their base. Although some of the comments related to concerns about the environmental consequences of the new missions, more than 80 percent of the comments received expressed support for bringing the KC-46A mission to the local base. Other than the expressions of support, the key issues identified during initial scoping are summarized in Table 1-3. Table 1-3. Public and Agency Scoping – Summary of Key Issues for KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 Beddown Issue/Concern/Comment Base Concern Expressed by Agency Public Tribe Concern related to impact on National Park Service units All X   Concern related to groundwater plume from USAF operations Altus  X  Concern related to the West Pattern and how flying impacts Quartz Mountain Regional Airport Altus  X  Comment stating that actions should be taken to prevent surfacewater and groundwater contamination Altus X   Recommend that the USAF provide cultural resource surveys for review Altus   X Concern related to undesirable noise from Spokane Airport Fairchild  X  Concern related to job impacts on the Spokane area Fairchild  X  Concern related to air quality Fairchild X   Table 1-3. Public and Agency Scoping – Summary of Key Issues for KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 Beddown (Continued) Issue/Concern/Comment Base Concern Expressed by Agency Public Tribe Noise that could disrupt fasting and tribal prayers Grand Forks   X Protection of wetlands, water resources from sediment and spills Grand Forks X   Noise effects on a state park Grand Forks X   Base traffic should use the gate accessed from U.S. Highway 2 interchange Grand Forks X   Contaminated sites near the base McConnell X   EIS should detail infrastructure necessary and consider Installation Restoration Program sites and the institutional control plan that covers 21 sites McConnell X   Request for project plans to determine project-specific recommendations McConnell X   Request cultural resource surveys and National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) compliance McConnell   X Concurrence that Building 1129 may warrant NHPA Section 110 consideration McConnell X   1.5.2 Public Review The USAF released the Draft EIS to the public and agencies for review and comment in early October 2013. Notification of availability was made through the Federal Register, newspaper display advertisements, press releases, public service announcements, flyers, and letters accompanying the direct mailing of the Draft EIS document. The Draft EIS document was posted on a publicly available website at http://www.KC-46A-Beddown.com. Copies of the Draft EIS document were sent to Federal, state, and local agencies, tribes, and special interest groups. The document was also sent to citizens or entities that requested a copy and was made available at libraries throughout the region of influence (ROI). The public comment period extends from 11 October through 25 November 2013. All substantive comments received during the comment period will be considered during preparation of the Final EIS. Generally, substantive comments are regarded as those comments that challenge the analysis, methodologies, or information in the Draft EIS as being factually inaccurate or analytically inadequate; that identify impacts not analyzed or develop and evaluate reasonable alternatives or feasible mitigations not considered by the agency; or that offer specific information that may have a bearing on the decision, such as differences in interpretations of significance, scientific, or technical conclusions. Non-substantive comments, which do not require an agency response, are generally considered those comments that express a conclusion, an opinion, or a vote for or against the proposal itself, or some aspect of it; that state a position for or against a particular alternative; or that otherwise state a personal preference or opinion. 1.6 TRIBAL CONSULTATION In an ongoing effort to identify cultural resources or other issues of interest to tribes and as part of the NEPA scoping process, notification letters were submitted to tribes. These letters (see Appendix A, Section A.3) were transmitted with a focus on inviting tribes to participate in the NEPA scoping process. Response summaries are reflected in Table 1-3 (see Appendix A, Sections A.3, for complete responses). Refer to Table A-1 in Appendix A, Section A.3, for a list of the tribes consulted. Also, following the NEPA notification, tribes were contacted separately to initiate National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 consultation (see Appendix A, Section A.4, for complete responses). Explanation of the Section 106 consultation is provided for each alternative base in the respective Chapter 3 Cultural Resources section. Following standard USAF practice, consultation was initiated by base commanders or other senior leaders who represent key leadership points of contacts for formal government-to-government correspondence. Additional direct communication efforts (phone calls and emails) are ongoing with tribes who have not responded to USAF mailings. All communications with tribes are in accordance with Executive Order (EO) 13175 “Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments” and Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 4710.02. To support this EIS through the life of the project, the USAF continues to consult on a government-to-government basis with the respective tribes attaching historical, cultural, and/or religious significance to lands or sites in the project areas, including but not limited to areas around auxiliary airfields where FTU aircrews would operate. 1.7 ORGANIZATION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT This EIS is designed to analyze the potential environmental impacts associated with the FTU and MOB 1 basing of KC-46A aircraft. The basing will include facilities, personnel, and flight operations at selected bases. The alternative bases are identified in Chapter 2. Chapter 1 provides information on the purpose and need for the proposed FTU and MOB 1 KC-46A beddown. This section includes an overview of the KC-46A capabilities and explains that the FTU and MOB 1 bases would need to provide facilities, infrastructure, and personnel to assist with KC-46A operations and training. In addition, Chapter 1 addresses public and agency involvement and tribal consultation. Chapter 2 describes the process for selecting bases and explains the USAF proposed action, the Preferred Alternative for each mission, the reasonable alternatives, and the No Action Alternative. Because the proposed aircraft is the same for the FTU and the MOB 1, this chapter presents general project features applicable to any of the four bases. This chapter also includes a more detailed explanation of requirements for the FTU and the MOB 1 beddowns in terms of base-specific personnel, facility, and operational elements, and lastly describes the project requirements for each base alternative. This chapter also includes a comparison of the potential environmental consequences across the alternatives, a discussion on mitigation measures, and a discussion on unavoidable impacts. Chapter 3 is organized by each of the four bases and presents the environmental baseline or affected environment at each base selected as alternatives for the FTU or MOB 1 mission. Chapter 4, also organized by base, presents the analysis of potential environmental impacts associated with implementation of the FTU or MOB 1 mission identified for that base. The analysis in this chapter results from overlaying the mission-specific requirements from Chapter 2 upon the affected environment from Chapter 3 to present the context and intensity of environmental consequences by resource area. Chapter 5 identifies past, present, and reasonably foreseeable regional projects and describes potential cumulative effects of the proposed beddown in combination with other regional actions at each base. Chapter 5 also identifies irreversible or irretrievable commitments of resources. References, contacts made during the EIS development, and a list of the preparers of this EIS, including a summary of their educational accomplishments, are included following Chapter 5. Appendix A provides notification letters, notification mailing lists, comments and concerns received by the USAF, and correspondence with tribes. Appendix B describes the environmental resources being considered in this Draft EIS, including the applicable regulations, permits, and appropriate agencies involved in the determination of environmental consequences. This appendix also describes the methodology followed for each environmental resource area to evaluate the environmental consequences of basing KC-46A aircraft. The methodology for impact analysis for each resource area, as described in Appendix B, is consistent for each resource area at each of the four bases. Appendix C includes effects on some specific resources that may not be affected by regularly scheduled KC-46A training operations (e.g., noise impacts on manatees). Discussion of impacts on a wide variety of resource types provides additional perspective and context for those resources impacted by regular operations. This appendix provides a general noise primer to educate the reader on what constitutes noise, how it is measured, and the studies that were used in support of how and why noise is modeled. Appendix D includes air quality background information for each of the four bases under consideration for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios. This background information includes regional climate information, along with the spreadsheets used to complete the air quality analysis contained in Chapter 4. Appendix E summarizes the buildings that would be affected by the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 beddown-related demolition, renovation, or alteration; their years of construction; and their potential to contain toxic substances (asbestos-containing material [ACM], lead-based paint [LBP], and polychlorinated biphenyls [PCBs]). 2.0 DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ACTION AND ALTERNATIVES 2.1 OVERVIEW This section presents a description of the activities and implementing actions associated with the KC-46A Formal Training Unit (FTU) and First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) missions. The FTU mission involves basing of up to eight Primary Aerospace Vehicles Authorized (PAA) KC-46As in one training squadron to establish the KC-46A FTU at an active-duty continental United States (CONUS) Air Force Base (AFB). The MOB 1 mission involves the basing of 36 KC-46A aircraft in three squadrons of 12 PAA to establish the MOB 1 at an active-duty CONUS AFB. For identified alternatives, this section provides a detailed description of the activities and implementing actions associated with establishing both the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1. Each squadron requires infrastructure, facilities, airfield operations, training activities, personnel, and airspace to support missions. This section identifies the operational requirements that would be involved at any of the alternative bases. Table 2-1 provides an overview of key elements associated with the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 beddown with the potential to affect environmental resources at the base or under the training airspace. Table 2-1. Overview of KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 Beddown Proposal The proposal for the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 beddown involves implementing several related elements at a selected base. Elements Affecting the Base . For the FTU, the beddown of up to eight KC-46A aircraft in one squadron in accordance with the aircraft delivery schedule . For MOB 1, the beddown of 36 KC-46A aircraft in three squadrons in accordance with the aircraft delivery schedule . Depending on mission, conduct sorties at each base for pilot, copilot, and boom operator (BO) training/certification, aerial refueling operations, and global reach missions . Renovate, construct, and manage facilities and infrastructure necessary to support the mission . Implement personnel changes (increases or decreases) at the base to conform to mission requirements Depending on the base and the mission proposed for that base, the proposed action would either add to current missions or replace the current KC-135 mission. Implementation of the proposed action would occur in two stages: a beddown stage and an operational stage. The beddown stage involves construction/retrofit of required facilities, infrastructure, and prepared surfaces, which includes renovation, alteration, and demolition. The beddown stage also includes preparing support facilities for new personnel and students to support the mission. The operational stage involves conducting day-to-day activities (operational missions, maintenance, etc.) of squadrons at the base, including base flight operations, training in the regional airspace, and use of auxiliary airfields. Section 2.4 provides a detailed description of each of the alternative bases under consideration. The description of each alternative carried forward as a reasonable alternative contains specifics about how the beddown and mission would be implemented at the alternative base and within the regional airspace. In conformance with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1502.14[d]), this section also describes a No Action Alternative, which consists of not bedding down a KC-46A mission. 2.2 NARROWING PROCESS FOR ALTERNATIVE BASES The narrowing process used to identify alternatives for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 basing locations is described below. The process applied operational and other criteria to identify reasonable alternatives for the beddown of KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 missions. 2.2.1 Alternative Identification Process Methodology This section describes the U.S. Air Force (USAF) Strategic Basing Process and then describes the application of the Strategic Basing Process to identify KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenario basing locations included in this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). In general, the USAF uses the Strategic Basing Process outlined in Air Force Instruction (AFI) 10-503 to select locations to beddown USAF missions. The process begins by identifying all the bases that could reasonably support a given mission. This enterprise of bases is then evaluated using objective criteria to screen the top candidate bases. Major Command (MAJCOM)-led site surveys are then conducted at each candidate location to determine if the base could reasonably support the mission in question. The Strategic Basing Executive Steering Group oversees the process and reports findings directly to the Secretary of the Air Force (SecAF) and Chief of Staff of the Air Force. This process was mandated by the SecAF to ensure basing decisions were made using a deliberate, repeatable, and standardized process. In September 2011, Air Mobility Command (AMC) presented the Lead Command Intent for the KC-46A to the SecAF. This Lead Command Intent described the proposed basing action tenets, force structure mix, basing timelines, and the critical information that would be used to shape and inform decisions made throughout the USAF Strategic Basing Process. The following planning conventions were derived from the Lead Command Intent: 1. Identify the number of KC-46A aircraft scheduled to be delivered between 2014 and 2018. This time period corresponded to the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) Future Years Defense Program, which is the program and financial plan approved by the Secretary of Defense, and provides a basis for USAF planning. Planning beyond this time period is speculative due to the indeterminacy of availability of resources. 2. Identify the number of KC-46A aircraft to be allocated to training and to operations based on then-current national strategic considerations. 3. Determine the number of bases minimally needed to support receipt of these aircraft for training and operations by dividing the amount allocated to training and to operations by the number of squadrons based on two different squadron configurations: one squadron of up to eight PAA for the FTU and three squadrons of 12 PAA each (36 PAA total) for MOB 1 operations. PAA are those aircraft assigned to meet the primary aircraft authorization and reflect the number of aircraft flown by a unit in performance of its mission. 4. Recognize additional factors of Plans and Guidance and Global Positioning, which include strategic considerations but do not provide meaningful distinction among bases for USAF training within the United States and its territories. An additional Logistics Supportability factor equates to Boeing’s support capacity set forth in its contract with the USAF. This factor does not distinguish among bases and is not included in the identification of reasonable FTU and MOB 1 beddown alternatives. Consideration of the planning conventions above led to an initial screening of all active-duty AFBs against the following standards for the FTU and MOB 1 missions: (1) a runway of at least 7,000 feet in length, (2) the presence of an active-duty wing on the base, and (3) a location in the CONUS. The initial screening yielded a defined enterprise of 54 bases to be evaluated for the FTU and MOB 1 beddowns. In 2012, AMC presented objective screening criteria to the SecAF. The approved screening criteria were used to screen the enterprise of 54 bases to identify those bases’ capacity to successfully support the FTU and MOB 1 missions. The objective criteria included mission, capacity, environmental considerations, and cost and are described in more detail below: . Mission criteria: For the FTU, proximity to aircraft available to support aerial refueling training, capacity for training and student throughput, existing or space for the required aircrew training system facility and a Fuselage Trainer (FuT) Facility, airfield and airspace availability, fuel system capabilities, and the potential to establish an association to the FTU mission criteria. For the MOB 1, proximity to refueling receiver demand, airfield and airspace availability, fuel system capabilities, and the potential to establish an association to the MOB 1 mission criteria . Capacity criteria: For the FTU, basic mission facility capacity or space; Base Operating Support (BOS) facilities; base runway length and bearing capacity; available ramp space; squadron operations (Squad Ops) facilities with Aircraft Maintenance Units (AMUs), aircrew, and fuselage training capabilities; and communication infrastructure capacity. For the MOB 1, hangar capacity; runway length and bearing capacity; ramp space; base operation support capacity; Squad Ops facilities with aircraft maintenance units (AMUs); aircrew, maintenance, and fuselage training capabilities; and communications infrastructure . Environmental criteria: For both the FTU and the MOB 1, meet Clean Air Act (CAA) attainment status, local community’s adoption of zoning or other land use controls to reduce encroachment and preserve the base’s flying operations, waivers or absence of incompatible development in the clear zone (CZ) and/or accident potential zone (APZ), absence or limited incompatible development within noise contours above 65-decibel (dB) day-night average sound levels (DNL) . Cost factor criteria: For both the FTU and MOB 1, favorable area construction factor based on DoD facilities Pricing Guide, dated June 2007 (DoD 2007), as updated by the June 2009 draft Office of the Secretary of Defense Pricing Guide (DoD 2009); favorable area locality cost factors The SecAF considered the objective screening results, as well as subjective operational factors, in determining the candidate bases for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 missions. The subjective operational factors, also known as military judgment factors, included the following: . Plans and Guidance . Global and Regional Coverage . Combatant Commander Support . Total Force . Beddown Timing . Force Structure . Training Requirements and Efficiencies . Logistic Supportability . Resources/Budgeting Missions and Scenarios For the purposes of discussion in this EIS, the words scenario and mission are used interchangeably. The Strategic Basing Process described above resulted in the identification of two alternative bases for consideration for the KC-46A FTU mission and four alternative bases for the MOB 1 mission (see Figure 2-1). Although Altus AFB and McConnell AFB were identified as alternative bases for both the FTU and MOB 1 missions, neither base would be selected to host both missions because of the inherent conflicts and capacity issues associated with beddown of both training and operations squadrons at a single base. . FTU Scenario Alternative Bases o Altus AFB, Oklahoma o McConnell AFB, Kansas . MOB 1 Scenario Alternative Bases o Altus AFB, Oklahoma o Fairchild AFB, Washington o Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota o McConnell AFB, Kansas   Figure 2-1. Alternative FTU and MOB 1 Basing Locations 2.3 KC-46A MISSION-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS Although the objective criteria described above specify the general requirements for both the FTU and MOB 1 missions, this section describes the specific details and requirements of each mission. Various factors influence siting of facilities within a developed cantonment area. These factors involve operational functionality, safety, and compliance with regulations and policies (Federal, state, or local). The process of planning the beddown for a new aircraft and mission considers facility requirements that can be partially or wholly fulfilled by existing facilities on the base. The siting process for new construction is iterative, applying factors described below, to identify suitable sites relative to existing space and facilities that provide a reasonable operational efficiency/costbenefit value. All construction contracts for the FTU and MOB 1 scenarios would require the use of Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 3-101-01, Best Management Practices, and attainment of a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certificate level of silver. Construction and renovation projects within the 65 dB noise contour would include acoustical design considerations for façade elements and interior design requirements per UFC 3-101-01. Land use should comply with Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 4165.57 and Air Force Handbook 32-7084. As part of the selection process described above, candidate bases were evaluated based on their ability to: (1) provide basic infrastructure and (2) meet the physical mission requirements with existing infrastructure and facilities (with minor renovation or additions and alterations). For this beddown, the USAF intends to use as many existing facilities as possible but recognizes that some new facilities would be required. In addition to the infrastructure requirements, both the FTU and MOB 1 scenarios have different manpower requirements for the active-duty and reserve or guard component responsibilities. The manpower requirements for each base are different due to the expected aircraft numbers and the different reserve or guard components (Air National Guard [ANG] and Air Force Reserve Command [AFRC]) that apply to each of the candidate bases. 2.3.1 KC-46A FTU Mission-Specific Requirements The basic requirements for the KC-46A FTU mission include the physical infrastructure, land, air, water, energy assets, and personnel needed to support the training mission. This section describes the requirements necessary for the siting of facilities and infrastructure allocated for mission support functions, personnel authorized to execute work related to the mission, and the flying operations for the assigned FTU base. 2.3.1.1 FTU Facility and Infrastructure Requirements The basic allocation and physical requirements to support the FTU mission are listed below: . One (1) General Maintenance/Corrosion Control/Wash Rack Hangar . One (1) Fuel Cell Maintenance Hangar . One (1) Squad Ops Facility . One (1) AMU Facility . One (1) Flight Training Center (FTC) consisting of: o Six (6) Weapon System Trainers (WST) o Five (5) Boom Operator Trainers (BOT) o Four (4) Pilot Part Task Trainers (P-PTT) o Three (3) Boom Operator Part Task Trainers (BO-PTT) . Two (2) FuTs . One (1) Maintenance Operations Center . One (1) Aircrew Flight Equipment (AFE) Facility . Runway: minimum 147-feet wide by 7,000-feet long with a weight-bearing capability of 415,000 pounds . Eight (8) parking spots with Fuel Pit Type III Fuel Hydrant System on the parking ramp . Appropriate fuel supply, storage, and distribution system to support the aircraft . Radar Approach Control (RAPCON), Instrument Landing System (ILS), Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) Aid and Airfield Navigational Aid System (NAVAIDS) that can support the KC-46A . One (1) or more auxiliary airfields to support training activities . Crash Recovery Shop with adequate vehicle parking . A variety of shop areas (welding, hydraulics, composite repair, sheet metal, etc.) required for the mission . Adequate housing, dormitory space, visiting quarters, and associated base support operations and personnel Depending on location, a variety of other service-type facilities and infrastructure could be required to support the FTU mission. These could include child development centers (CDCs), utilities, roads, taxiways, overruns, dining facilities, and fitness centers. Hangars, Aircraft Maintenance Unit (AMU), Squadron Operations (Squad Ops). The number of hangars required at a base is dependent on the PAA for that base. Based on Air Force Manual (AFMAN) 32-1084, eight PAA would require one general maintenance hangar, one corrosion control hangar, and one fuel cell hangar. In addition, eight PAA would drive the need for up to two additional hangar spaces either in existing facilities or in a newly constructed or modified facility. The general maintenance hangar would function primarily as an inspection hangar and secondarily as a repair hangar for scheduled and unscheduled maintenance. The corrosion control hangar would include a self-contained paint booth for touch-ups and would also function as a wash rack. The fuel cell maintenance hangar is primarily used to remove, repair, and replace fuel cell tanks from aircraft. Hangars must be appropriately sized based on the dimensions and clearance requirements of the KC-46A aircraft unless a waiver is granted. The FTU mission would also require one Squad Ops facility and one AMU facility. These facilities are typically combined in a two-story facility, with the AMU function on the first floor and office space for command, administration, mission planning, briefing, and support on the second floor. The AMU space serves as a home base for technicians working on the flightline and also houses the administrative functions for the flightline. The USAF has determined that the life support functions, previously included in the Squad Ops facilities, would become a stand-alone AFE facility. All facilities would be designed based on the Total Force Integration (TFI) concept. Flightline Development. To support the KC-46A FTU mission, a 7,000-foot-long, 147-foot-wide runway capable of handling aircraft with a takeoff weight of 415,000 pounds is needed. The KC-46A FTU would require a minimum of eight parking spaces, plus additional space for taxiways. In addition, the FTU mission would require an available and functioning RAPCON, ILS, TACAN Aid, and NAVAIDS capable of supporting day-night landing. The flightline would also require an Intrusion Detection and Surveillance System capable of supporting the additional aircraft. Fuels Infrastructure. To support the FTU mission, the base must be able to receive up to 190,000 gallons of jet fuel per day from commercial sources to maintain adequate supply. Fuels storage at the base selected would include storage facilities with a minimum of 946,000 gallons of capacity and would be able to dispense fuel through a Type III hydrant system to support KC-46A refueling (at a rate of 2,400 gallons per minute). Flight Training Center (FTC) and Fuselage Trainer (FuT). New aircraft like the KC-46A require a combination of an FTC with full WST simulators, BOT simulators, P-PTTs, classroom space, instructor accommodations/staff, command and control (C2), and administrative space/staff to receive and train aircrews and an FuT Facility with fuselage trainers, classroom space, and cargo loading training yards. This training is composed of three elements of learning: . Academics, designed to provide essential aircraft system knowledge, procedural memorization for safe operation, and tactical employment theory for combat operations . Virtual and P-PTTs, BO-PTTs, BO simulators, and flight simulators to bridge academics and actual flying with hands-on manipulation of the aircraft and associated systems . Actual aircraft operation to build flight-specific habit patterns, develop situational awareness, acclimate the aircrew to the high-performance environment, and achieve sufficient levels of required proficiency Formal training involves classroom work; virtual and P-PTTs/BO-PTTs and flight simulators such as WST, FuT, and/or BOT sessions; and flight time in the aircraft. All cargo operations training would be performed in the FuT or in a parked aircraft. The FTC requires space to house six bays for WSTs, five BOTs, four P-PTTs, three BO-PTTs, and adjoined or adjacent classroom and office space. The two FuTs require administrative and academic space, two open bays, and two cargo yards adjacent to the flightline. Housing and Support Facilities. Housing for eligible permanent-party military personnel associated with the FTU mission would include privatized base housing or housing available in the local market off base. All eligible unaccompanied enlisted permanent-party personnel would be housed in dormitories under the FTU mission. Visiting Quarters are required for all unaccompanied officer and enlisted students. Civil servant and contractor personnel supporting the FTU would not be authorized for on-base housing or lodging. 2.3.1.2 FTU Personnel Requirements Basing of the KC-46A FTU mission would require sufficient personnel to operate and maintain the aircraft and to provide necessary support services. Depending on the existing personnel, including the reserve component of the mission at the selected FTU base, the requirement would be between 300 and 450 full-time personnel. These requirements would also be influenced by the reserve or guard component of the mission. Personnel would include active-duty and reserve (both full- and part-time), officer, enlisted, DoD civilian, contractor support personnel, and BOS personnel. In addition to the personnel required to support the mission, the family members or dependents of full-time military personnel are also included in the analysis. Family members and dependents were estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of the full-time military personnel. School-age dependents of full-time military personnel were estimated at 1.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel. 2.3.1.3 FTU Flight Operations  KC-46A flight operations at the FTU base would focus on training aircrews to develop the capability needed for all mission requirements. Training events would include such skills as formation flying, advanced aircraft handling, and tactics related to the different missions expected of the multi-role KC-46A. Aircrews would train at a home base and at auxiliary airfields, and the majority of training would be completed in simulators. Flight training activities are described below. Training activities may be categorized as a sortie and/or an operation. The majority (99 percent, or 1,800) of annual sorties departing from the home base at the FTU would be training sorties and would include a variety of prescribed skills that the crew must complete. A small number (1 percent, or 26) of annual sorties from the home base would be mission sorties where the aircraft departs the base to complete a given mission (e.g., refueling another aircraft). All sorties involve one takeoff and landing from the home base location. The terms sortie and operation are used to describe flight activities. Each has a different meaning and applies to a different set of flight activities. These terms are also used to quantify flight activities for the purpose of environmental impact analysis. A sortie consists of a single military aircraft flight from the initial takeoff through the final landing and includes all activities that occur during that mission. For this EIS, the term sortie is used when referring to the quantity of aircraft operations from the airfield. A sortie can include more than one operation. The term operation consists of a single activity such as a landing or a takeoff. During a single sortie, one KC-46A could perform several operations; therefore, the number of operations could exceed the total number of sorties. Flight operations could include takeoff, closed pattern (a closed pattern consists of two portions: a takeoff/departure and an approach/landing, and is therefore considered two operations), and landing. Additional flight operations for KC-46A training events are described below. A typical KC-46A training sortie would be similar to a KC-135 training sortie and would involve students and instructors departing from the base, climbing to altitude for aerial refueling training, and accomplishing a variety of different flight operations. Training sorties typically depart from and return to the home base on the same day (mission sorties may return to the home base on a different day). Flight training in local patterns would be completed at the home base or by using an auxiliary airfield, either military or civilian, depending on the availability of suitable facilities, within a convenient range of the home base. Existing associated air refueling (AR) tracks would be used for tanker and receiver training. Much like the KC-135 student pilots, KC-46A students would use the auxiliary airfields for various landings, such as a straight-in landing, an overhead break (overflying the airfield, then maneuvering within visual sight of the runway to get in a position to safely land), touch-and-go landings, conventional landings, or closed patterns. Mirroring the current KC-135 FTU, KC-46A training would take place 240 days annually (following a standard 5-day training week). The KC-46A FTU average sortie would be around 5 hours in duration. The current training plan for the KC-46A FTU is an average of 7.5 sorties per day. During training activities, aircrews would use two types of landing and takeoff profiles, a standard profile and a tactical profile. Standard profiles use a typical straight-in or straight-out landing or takeoff. Tactical landings and takeoffs are a more rapid spiral-in or spiral-out maneuver. About 10 percent of training takeoffs would use a standard profile and about 90 percent would use a tactical profile. About 20 percent of training landings would use a straight-in landing profile and about 80 percent would use tactical profiles. Each training sortie would perform an average of approximately 10.5 closed patterns (which equates to about 21 airfield operations). About 60 percent of daytime sorties would fly in local patterns near the home base and about 40 percent would be flown at the auxiliary airfields outside the local area. All nighttime operations (between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.) would be conducted at the FTU base only. 2.3.1.4 FTU Airspace Use Aircrews associated with the FTU would use a combination of existing airspace to perform training missions. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has designated airspace within the United States as Controlled, Special Use, Other, or Uncontrolled. A sortie-operation is the use of one airspace unit by one aircraft. The number of sortie-operations is used to quantify the number of times a single aircraft uses an airspace unit and is not a measure of how long an aircraft uses an airspace unit. Special Use Airspace (SUA) identified for military and other governmental activities is charted and published by the FAA. SUA is designated airspace within which flight activities are conducted that requires confinement of participating aircraft or may place operating limitations on nonparticipating aircraft. SUA includes Military Operations Areas. The KC-46A would be operated in existing airspace, and the types of flight operations would mirror the existing or historical KC-135 operations. The KC-46A would use existing AR tracks and fuel jettison areas, if necessary. FTU sorties involving refueling training and practice would primarily take place in designated AR tracks. 2.3.2 KC-46A MOB 1 Mission-Specific Requirements The basic requirements for the three KC-46A MOB 1 squadrons (12 aircraft per squadron) include the physical infrastructure, land, airspace, personnel, and water and energy assets needed to support the MOB 1 mission. This section presents the criteria that apply to the MOB 1 siting, facilities for mission and mission support functions, and personnel authorized to execute work related to the mission and flying operations required as part of the MOB 1 mission. 2.3.2.1 MOB 1 Facility and Infrastructure Requirements The basic allocation and physical requirements necessary to support three squadrons of 12 KC-46A are listed below. . Four (4) General Maintenance Hangars . One (1) Fuel Cell Hangar . One (1) Corrosion Control/Wash Rack Hangar . Three (3) Squad Ops Facilities . Three (3) AMU Facilities . One (1) FTC consisting of: o Three (3) WSTs o Two (2) BOTs o One (1) P-PTT . One (1) FuT . One (1) Maintenance Training Facility (MTF) . Supply Warehousing, Flightline Support Facility and Aircraft Parts Storage . Aerospace Ground Equipment (AGE) storage and parking . Aerial Port Cargo Facility/Processing Yard and Passenger Terminal . Crash Recovery Shop with adequate vehicle parking . Alternate Mission Equipment (AME) Storage and Maintenance Facility (pallets, etc.) . Runway: minimum 147-feet wide by 7,000-feet long with a weight-bearing capability of 415,000 pounds . Twenty-three (23) parking spots with Fuel Pits and a Type III Fuel Hydrant System on the parking ramp . Appropriate fuel supply, storage, and distribution systems to support 36 PAA . RAPCON, ILS, TACAN Aid, and NAVAIDS that can support the KC-46A . A variety of shop areas (welding, hydraulics, composite repair, sheet metal, etc.) required for the mission Depending on the location, a variety of other service-type facilities and infrastructure could be required to support the MOB 1 mission. These could include CDCs, utilities, roads, taxiways, overruns, dining facilities, fitness center, visiting quarters, dormitories, and possibly new housing. Hangars, Aircraft Maintenance Units (AMUs), Squadron Operations (Squad Ops). The number of hangars required at a base is dependent on the PAA for that base. Based on AFMAN 32-1084, 36 PAA would require four general maintenance, one fuel cell hangar, and one corrosion control hangar. The general maintenance hangar would function primarily as an inspection hangar and secondarily as a repair hangar. The corrosion control hangar would include a self-contained paint booth for touch-ups and would also function as a wash rack. The fuel cell hangar would primarily be used to remove, repair, and replace fuel cell tanks from aircraft. The MOB 1 mission would also require three Squad Ops facilities and three AMU facilities. These would be two-story facilities, as described in the FTU section. The USAF has determined that the life support functions, previously included in the Squad Ops facilities, would become a stand-alone AFE facility. All facilities would be designed based on the TFI concept. Flightline Development. To support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission, a 7,000-foot-long, 147-foot-wide runway capable of handling aircraft with a takeoff weight of 415,000 pounds is needed. The 36 PAA would require 23 parking spaces, plus additional space for taxiways. In addition, the MOB 1 mission would require an available and functioning RAPCON, ILS, TACAN Aid, and NAVAIDS capable of supporting day-night landing. The flightline would also require an Intrusion Detection and Surveillance System capable of supporting the additional aircraft. Fuels Infrastructure. To support the MOB 1 mission, the base must be able to receive up to 360,000 gallons of jet fuel per day from commercial sources to maintain adequate supply. Fuels storage at the base selected would include storage facilities with up to 1.8 million gallons of capacity and would be able to dispense fuel through a Type III hydrant system. Flight Training Center (FTC) and Fuselage Trainer (FuT). New aircraft like the KC-46A require a combination of a formal training center with full system trainers, part task trainers, simulators, classroom space, instructor accommodations/staff, C2, and administrative space/staff to receive and train aircrews. Although the MOB 1 scenario’s primary mission would not be training, some training would be required. Formal training involves classroom work; virtual and P-PTTs and flight simulators such as WST, FuT, and BOT sessions; and flight time in the aircraft. All cargo operations training would be performed in the FuT or in a parked aircraft. The FTC requires three bays for the WSTs, two BOTs, one P-PPT, an adjoined or adjacent classroom, and office space. The FuT requires administrative and academic space, one open bay, and one cargo yard adjacent to the flightline. Housing and Support Facilities. Housing for eligible permanent-party military personnel associated with the MOB 1 mission would include privatized base housing or housing available in the local market off base. For the MOB 1 mission, dormitories would be used for all unaccompanied enlisted students and for permanently assigned, unmarried first-term Airmen. Adequate child care, medical, fitness center, and other BOS/force support must also be available. 2.3.2.2 MOB 1 Personnel Requirements Basing of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission would also require basing sufficient personnel to operate and maintain the aircraft and to provide necessary support services. Depending on the existing personnel, including the reserve or guard component of the mission at the selected MOB 1 base, the requirement would be between 1,700 and 1,800 full-time personnel. This would include both active-duty and reserve (both full- and part-time), officer, enlisted, contractor support personnel, and BOS personnel. In addition to the personnel required to support the mission, the dependents or family members of full-time military personnel are also included in the analysis. Family members and dependents were estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of the full-time military personnel. School-age dependents of full-time military personnel were estimated at 1.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel. 2.3.2.3 MOB 1 Flight Operations KC-46A aircrews associated with the MOB 1 mission would complete mission sorties and local training sorties to maintain proficiency in the aircraft. These sorties would originate at the home base, and no auxiliary airfields would be required for the MOB 1 beddown. The majority of proficiency training would occur in simulators. For those tasks that require in-flight training, a typical training sortie is described below. A typical KC-46A proficiency training sortie would be similar to a KC-135 training sortie and would include a takeoff from the home base, climb to altitude for aerial refueling training, accomplishing takeoff, landing, and closed pattern training and then a return to the home base for a landing. Proficiency training sorties typically depart from and return to the home base on the same day. A mission sortie typically departs the home base and returns on a later day. All sorties involve one takeoff and landing from the home base. The following information describes sorties for most bases, but could vary depending on the MOB 1 location. Typically, training sorties would depart to an existing AR track or other training area and return to the home base. About 75 percent of training takeoffs would use a standard profile, while about 25 percent would use a tactical profile. Upon arrival, about 60 percent of these sorties would use a straight-in landing profile, while about 40 percent would use varied approach profiles. Most training sorties would perform about six closed patterns (which equates to about 12 airfield operations). Any sorties between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. local time would be considered environmental night. The majority of annual sorties departing from home base would be training sorties to maintain aircrew proficiencies. A minority of sorties departing from home base would be mission sorties. Training sorties are normally performed 6 days a week, or 312 days per year. Mission sorties could occur 365 days a year. About 90 percent of all sorties are during the day and 10 percent are at night. Mission sorties generally use a standard takeoff profile, and 80 percent are nonheavyweight (takeoff weight of 253,000 pounds or less). Mission sorties normally arrive back at the home base using a standard final approach, with the aircraft coming to a full stop on landing. 2.3.2.4 MOB 1 Airspace Use The MOB 1 squadrons would use a combination of existing airspace to perform their missions. The FAA has designated the airspace within the United States as Controlled, Special Use, Other, or Uncontrolled. SUA identified for military and other governmental activities is charted and published by the FAA. SUA is designated airspace within which flight activities are conducted that requires confinement of participating aircraft or may place operating limitations on nonparticipating aircraft. The KC-46A would be operated in existing airspace, and the types of flight operations would mirror the existing or historical KC-135 operations. The KC-46A would use existing AR tracks and fuel jettison areas. Flight activities involving refueling training and practice would primarily occur in designated AR tracks. 2.3.3 Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) Four production-representative KC-46A aircraft, to be used during Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E), would arrive at the MOB 1 in early 2016. During IOT&E, the Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center would test the capabilities of the KC-46A under realistic operational conditions. The MOB 1 would provide that realistic operational environment. Activities evaluated would include basic flight operations, sortie generation, aircraft maintenance, refueling system performance, supply support, and basing requirements. KC-46A aircraft operations during IOT&E would be very similar to the existing KC-135 operations occurring at the base. Until specific operational procedures are developed for the KC-46A, the USAF would use operational procedures developed for the KC-135 aircraft. During IOT&E, expected operations include single ship and formation launches and recoveries at varying fuel weights to include maximum performance takeoffs, simulated combat tactical maneuvering, and formation surge operations (launching all test aircraft in a minimum amount of time) during the day and night. The intent for IOT&E is that the KC-46A would be operated similar to the KC-135, utilizing the local base and global operating procedures. The USAF anticipates that, as more knowledge is gained about the new aircraft and crewmember needs, some adjustments would occur using an adaptive management approach to achieve the most streamlined and sustainable operational and training programs. 2.4 DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVE BASING LOCATIONS Depending on available infrastructure, facilities, and to some degree, personnel, available for the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 mission, proposed construction, demolition, renovations, and incoming personnel numbers vary between alternatives. The facility siting analysis for each alternative base took into consideration the functional requirements of the FTU and MOB 1 missions and compared them with the existing infrastructure and environmental constraints at each base. The following subsections provide specifics about the beddown and operations at each of the alternative bases. Table 2-2 provides a summary comparison of the alternatives for each mission, along with the No Action Alternative. Table 2-2. Summary of Alternatives Alternative Components Altus AFB FTU/MOB 1 Fairchild AFB MOB 1 Grand Forks AFB MOB 1 McConnell AFB FTU/MOB 1 No Action Alternative Current KC-135 PAA 18 30 0 44 Varies by location Proposed KC-46A PAA Up to 8/36 36 36 Up to 8/36 0 Facilities and Infrastructure See Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 for the FTU- and MOB 1-specific facilities and infrastructure requirements. None Personnel and Dependent Changea +578/+4,917 +1,095 +4,526 +570b/-291c 0 Aircraft Operations Changed +41,364/+33,710 +18,796 +33,710 +41,364e/+9,189e 0 a Does not include DoD civilians, part-time Reservists or contractors (other base personnel) under the assumption that these are local. b The McConnell AFB FTU personnel and dependent numbers are different from the Altus AFB FTU personnel and dependent numbers because the FTU mission at McConnell AFB would be additive and the MOB 1 mission would be a replacement mission. c The MOB 1 scenario is a replacement mission at McConnell AFB with a net reduction in full-time military personnel. d Aircraft operations change is the difference between the total baseline and total projected for all aircraft types. e Baseline PAA for McConnell AFB is 44 KC-135 aircraft. 2.4.1 Altus Air Force Base (FTU or MOB 1) The USAF is considering two different actions for Altus AFB. One action, for which Altus AFB has been selected as the Preferred Alternative, includes the beddown of one FTU squadron by Air Education and Training Command (AETC) with up to eight KC-46A aircraft. A second action would be the beddown of three squadrons by AMC with 36 KC-46A aircraft for the MOB 1 mission. These are separate actions; Altus AFB could only be selected for the implementation of one of these actions (as described in Section 1.0). The classic association (active led, AFRC supported) would continue if Altus AFB is selected for beddown of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 mission. Section 2.4.1.2 describes the personnel changes, physical and development changes, airfield operations, and changes in use of auxiliary airfields that would occur with implementation of the FTU scenario. Section 2.4.1.3 describes changes that would occur with implementation of the MOB 1 scenario. No auxiliary airfields would be used as part of the MOB 1 scenario. 2.4.1.1 Altus AFB Overview Altus AFB is located in the southwestern corner of Oklahoma, adjacent to the City of Altus (see Figure 2-2). The base is at a field elevation of 1,382 feet and covers an area of approximately 8,016 acres. Two runways (13,440 feet and 9,000 feet in length) and one assault landing zone (3,500 feet in length) are located at Altus AFB. The overall layout of existing facilities and infrastructure at Altus AFB is shown on Figure 2-3. Originally named Altus Army Airfield, the base was constructed in 1942, with military personnel and aircraft arriving in 1943. The primary training aircraft in the early years of Altus AFB were the Cessna AT-17 Bobcat, the Curtiss-Wright AT-9 Jeep, and the C-45 Expeditor. Altus AFB was inactive from May 1945 until August 1953, when many bases were reactivated following the onset of the Korean War. In the early 1960s, under the 577th Missile Squadron, Altus AFB maintained 12 Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile silos within a 40-mile radius of the base. In 1967, Altus AFB became home to the C-141 Starlifter and the C-5 Galaxy under the 443rd Military Airlift Wing of the Military Airlift Command; in the early 1970s, Altus AFB was assigned KC-135 aircraft under the 340th Air Refueling Wing (ARW). The C-17 Globemaster arrived at Altus AFB in 1996. In 2007, both the C-141 and C-5 ceased operating at Altus AFB. Altus AFB is currently home to 97th Air Mobility Wing (AMW) and supports four major units: the 97th Operations Group, the 97th Mission Support Group, the 97th Maintenance Directorate, and the 97th Medical Group. The 97 AMW provides formal initial and advanced specialty training for the C-17 Globemaster and the KC-135 Stratotanker. In 2012, the AFRC’s 730th Air Mobility Training Squadron (AMTS) was reactivated at Altus AFB as part of the USAF’s TFI. The 730 AMTS works side by side with active-duty Airmen in the 97 AMW training C-17 and KC-135 aircrew members. In 2012, Altus AFB employed approximately 4,000 people (2,032 of whom were civilian) and had an annual economic impact of $350 million on the surrounding community. 2.4.1.2 FTU Beddown Specifics The USAF determined that Altus AFB’s infrastructure and base resources could accommodate the basic requirements for the KC-46A FTU mission within the constraints set by the alternative narrowing process described in Section 2.2. This section details the actions that would occur at Altus AFB if the base were selected for the basing of the KC-46A FTU mission. The FTU scenario would be additive to the current mission at Altus AFB, and the first four of up to eight aircraft would be scheduled to arrive in 2016. The current aircraft inventory at Altus AFB includes 17 C-17 aircraft and 18 KC-135 aircraft. 2.4.1.2.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the FTU beddown are described in Section 2.3.1.1. Most of these requirements are met through existing infrastructure and facilities on Altus AFB. However, some modifications and additions to existing facilities and infrastructure would be required at Altus AFB to support KC-46A FTU training operations. Table 2-3 lists the KC-46A FTU-related projects that would take place within the previously disturbed cantonment area of Altus AFB, as shown on Figure 2-4. Existing flight operations and refueling activities associated with the C-17 and KC-135 FTUs would continue during demolition and reconstruction activities. During demolition and construction of the new hydrant systems, additional refueling vehicles would be used to maintain the C-17 and KC-135 missions. Table 2-3. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A FTU Scenario at Altus AFB Project Facility Size (Square Feet) Demolition Building 170 (to make room for new FuT Facility) 25,469 Building 171 (to make room for new Flight Training Facility) 11,264 Total Square Feet 36,733 Renovation Building 87, Group Headquarters and Mission Training 6,237 Building 394, Contractor Supply Storage 7,000 Total Square Feet 13,237 New Construction FTC 36,821 FuT Facility 45,690 Hydrant pit (one pit added to existing system) ~100 Total Square Feet 82,611 Additions/Alterations Building 193, Squad Ops/AMU 29,995 Building 518, Tail Enclosure and Fuel Cell Expansion 12,322 Building 285, Tail Enclosure and Tool Crib Expansion ~12,000 Total Square Feet 54,317 2.4.1.2.2 Personnel The current personnel at Altus AFB and the projected increase necessary to support the KC-46A FTU mission are provided in Table 2-4. Currently, the base has about 4,000 personnel, including military, part-time reserve, government civilians, contractors, and students. The current student population varies depending on training and syllabi schedules, but represents an average daily student load (ADSL) at Altus AFB. The ADSL for the KC-46A FTU would be 200. Because the FTU mission at Altus AFB would be in addition to the existing missions, an increase in personnel would be anticipated. The KC-46A FTU mission would require approximately 144 full-time military (includes 119 active-duty, 12 reserve, and 13 BOS) personnel, approximately 20 part-time reserve personnel, approximately 252 DoD civilian personnel, and approximately 23 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”).  Table 2-4. Altus AFB KC-46A FTU Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baseline KC-46A FTU Scenario Total Military (full-time) 1,379 144 1,523 Military Dependents and Family Members 1,051 234a 1,285 Part-Time Reservists 19 20 39 Students 362 200 562 DoD Civilian 1,243 252 1,495 Other Base Personnel 907 23 930 Total 4,961 873 5,834 a Dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. About 1,051 military dependents, currently associated with the full-time military personnel at Altus AFB, live in communities surrounding the base. Approximately 234 family members and dependents would be anticipated to accompany the full-time military personnel associated with the KC-46A FTU mission. 2.4.1.2.3 Flight Operations Table 2-5 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A FTU mission at Altus AFB to the existing baseline mission. The table shows that the total annual operations at Altus AFB would increase from 109,459 per year to 150,823, resulting in an approximate 38 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. Table 2-5. Altus AFB Baseline and Projected Annual FTU Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/ Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual C-17 240 41.98 10,075 172.78 41,467 214.76 51,542 41.98 10,075 172.78 41,467 214.76 51,542 KC-135 240 16.50 3,960 219.20 52,608 235.7 56,568 16.50 3,960 219.20 52,608 235.70 56,568 Transientc 240 2.84 682 2.78 667 5.62 1,349 2.84 682 2.78 667 5.62 1,349 KC-46Ad 240 0 0 0 0 0 0 15.22 3,653 157.13 37,711 172.35 41,364 Total 61.32 14,717 394.76 94,742 456.08 109,459 76.54 18,370 551.89 132,453 628.43 150,823 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c The primary transient military aircraft types using Altus AFB include C-130, C-17, C-21, and T-38. d The normal flying hours for Altus AFB are 9:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. However, approximately 20 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). 2.4.1.2.4 Auxiliary Airfields The existing KC-135 and C-17 aircraft at Altus AFB currently use four auxiliary airfields. The KC-46A aircraft associated with the FTU would use the same AR tracks, the four auxiliary airfields and, if necessary, fuel jettison areas as are currently used by the KC-135 FTU. A variation to the typical training sortie described above could involve performing closed patterns at an auxiliary airfield. Auxiliary airfields currently used by Altus AFB include Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark (CSM), Lubbock Preston Smith International Airport (LBB), Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport (AMA), and Fort Worth Alliance Airport (AFW). The location of these airfields relative to Altus AFB is shown on Figure 2-5. The KC-46A aircrews would use the same flight tracks that the KC-135 aircraft currently use to access the auxiliary airfields. KC-46A aircrews associated with the FTU would fly a combined estimate of 6,516 annual aircraft operations at the four auxiliary airfields. Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport (AMA). This commercial airport is co-located with the former Amarillo AFB, a former Strategic Air Command (SAC) airfield with a 13,502-foot-long runway (Runway 04/22). This runway is now used primarily for commercial aviation, but still supports a small number of military operations each year. Runway 13/31 is the second runway at AMA measuring 7,901 feet in length. AMA encompasses approximately 3,547 acres and is owned by the City of Amarillo, Texas. There are currently 54,115 annual airfield operations at AMA. Both KC-135 aircraft and C-17 aircraft from Altus AFB currently use the airport for training operations. Clinton Sherman Industrial Airpark (CSM). As a former SAC base, CSM has one of the longest runways in Oklahoma—Runway 17R/35L, measuring 13,503 feet in length and approximately 300 feet wide. This airpark also has a second runway, Runway 17L/35R, measuring 5,193 feet in length. Owned by Oklahoma Space Industry Development Authority, CSM is located approximately 15 miles southwest of Clinton, in Washita County, Oklahoma. The airpark encompasses approximately 2,700 acres and is an ideal site for pilot training because of the size of the runway and the remote nature of the location. CSM is currently being used by KC-135 and C-17 pilots from Altus AFB, as well as by pilots from Vance and Sheppard AFBs. CSM also supports Navy and non-commercial flight operations. CSM currently supports a total of 28,485 annual airfield operations. Lubbock Preston Smith International Airport (LBB). This airfield served a military function during World War II, but has been in commercial service since the 1950s. With three runways, LBB is one of the busiest airports in Texas and supports a hub for Federal Express. The longest runway at LBB is Runway 17R/35L, measuring 11,500 feet in length. The other two runways at LBB are Runways 8/26 and 17L/35R, with respective lengths of 8,003 and 2,891 feet. LBB encompasses approximately 3,000 acres and is owned by the City of Lubbock, Texas. LBB currently supports 67,919 annual operations, including training operations by both the KC-135 and C-17 aircraft from Altus AFB. Fort Worth Alliance Airport (AFW). This airport was developed as a commercial airport in 1989 and served to off-load some of the excess traffic from Dallas-Fort Worth Airport. AFW has two parallel runways; Runway 16L/34R is 9,600 feet in length and Runway 16R/34L is 8,220 feet in length. AFW encompasses approximately 1,198 acres and is owned by the City of Fort Worth, Texas. There are currently 100,756 annual airfield operations at AFW, of which military operations account for about 15 percent. KC-135 aircraft from Altus AFB make up a portion of the military aircraft operations. 2.4.1.3 MOB 1 Beddown Specifics This section details the actions that would occur at Altus AFB if selected to base 36 KC-46A aircraft for the MOB 1 mission. The MOB 1 mission would add to the existing KC-135 and C-17 FTU missions at Altus AFB. 2.4.1.3.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the MOB 1 beddown are described in Section 2.3.2.1. Most of these requirements are met through existing infrastructure. However, the proposed MOB 1 beddown at Altus AFB would require new construction and demolition (C&D) of facilities, as well as modifications to some existing facilities. The projects that would be necessary to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at Altus AFB are listed in Table 2-6. Table 2-6. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario at Altus AFB Project Facility Size (Square Feet) Demolition Building 82 10,663 Building 171 11,264 Building 551 1,319 Building 554 725 Building 557 725 Building 563 144 Building 564 1,968 Building 565 1,968 Ramp Area 480,000 Total Square Feet 508,776 Renovation Renovate Taxiway G and Reconstruct K-I 147,006 Repair Concrete Overrun 351,000 Building 87, Wing Headquarters (Operations Group, ANG, and AFRC) 101,552 Building 170, Aircraft Parts Storage/Contractor Supplies <100 Building 285, Construct Interior Wall and Expand Hydraulic Shop <100 Total Square Feet 599,758 New Construction Ramp Area and AGE Apron 2,500,000 Install Box Culvert in Existing Irrigation Canal 5,000 Refueling Truck Parking Yard 8,325 Hangar Row Road 104,400 Squadrons Operations Facility with AMU (3 buildings) 111,000 Maintenance Hangar with AME (2-bay) 95,768 Fuel Cell Hangar 64,972 Maintenance Hangar (2-bay) 127,728 Install Ramp Lighting SF not applicable Maintenance Training Facility (MTF) 44,300 Fuel Tanks, Pumps, Hydrant System 222,000 FuT Facility 10,600 Weapons System Trainer 26,100 Two Dormitories (96 rooms) 66,366 Visiting Quarters 63,100 Total Square Feet 3,449,929 Additions/Alterations Building 369, Add Vault 7,500 Building 156, Gym Addition 14,400 Total Square Feet 21,900 With the exception of the new ramp, taxiway lighting, refueling truck parking yard, and hangar row road, renovation and additions/alterations of buildings and repairs to existing runway overruns and taxiways would be conducted primarily on existing improved surfaces. The large new ramp area, refueling truck parking yard, and hangar row road would be constructed on unimproved land along the flightline (see Figures 2-6 and 2-7). Demolition of nine structures would involve the removal of about 12 acres of existing structure. Removal of the existing refueling equipment, two fuel storage tanks, and the north ramp hydrant fuel system is also included in the demolition plan. Existing flight operations and refueling activities associated with the C-17 and KC-135 FTUs would continue during demolition and reconstruction activities. A construction transition plan would be implemented for the taxiways, and overrun demolition and construction would be phased so as to not interfere with existing airfield operations. During demolition and construction of the new hydrant systems, additional refueling vehicles would be used to support the C-17 and KC-135 missions. 2.4.1.3.2 Personnel The current personnel at Altus AFB and the projected increase necessary to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission are provided in Table 2-7. As part of the MOB 1 mission, the AFRC would have an association with the active-duty component, as described below. Because the MOB 1 mission at Altus AFB would be in addition to the existing missions, an increase in personnel would be anticipated. The KC-46A MOB 1 mission would require approximately 1,873 full-time military (includes 1,340 active-duty, 305 reserve, and 228 BOS) personnel, approximately 930 part-time reserve personnel, approximately 29 DoD civilian personnel, and approximately 20 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”). Table 2-7. Altus AFB KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baseline KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Total Military (full-time) 1,379 1,873 3,252 Military Dependents and Family Members 1,051 3,044a 4,095 Part-Time Reservists 19 930 949 Students 362 0 362 DoD Civilian 1,243 29 1,272 Other Base Personnel 907 20 927 Total 4,961 5,896 10,857 a Dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. About 1,051 military dependents, currently associated with the full-time military personnel at Altus AFB, live in communities surrounding the base. Approximately 3,044 family members and dependents would be anticipated to accompany the full-time military personnel associated with the KC-46A MOB 1 mission. Depending on the availability of housing in areas surrounding Altus AFB, the additional families associated with the KC-46A MOB 1 mission could need about 1,873 homes. These could either be existing houses in the communities surrounding the base or constructed new off base. To ascertain whether the required number of homes are available in the communities around Altus AFB, the USAF would conduct a Housing Requirements and Market Analysis (HRMA). This analysis would be completed if Altus AFB were selected to receive this mission.  2.4.1.3.4 Flight Operations Table 2-8 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at Altus AFB to the existing baseline mission. The table shows that the total annual operations at Altus AFB would increase from 109,459 per year to 143,169, resulting in an approximate 31 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. Table 2-8. Altus AFB Baseline and Projected Annual MOB 1 Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual C-17 240 41.98 10,075 172.78 41,467 214.76 51,542 41.98 10,075 172.78 41,467 214.76 51,542 KC-135 240 16.50 3,960 219.2 52,608 235.70 56,568 16.50 3,960 219.20 52,608 235.70 56,568 Transientc 240 2.84 682 2.78 667 5.62 1,349 2.84 682 2.78 667 5.62 1,349 KC-46Ad 312e 0 0 0 0 0 0 17.60 5,630 90.00 28,080 107.60 33,710 Totalf 61.32 14,717 394.76 94,742 456.08 109,459 78.92 20,347 484.76 122,822 563.68 143,169 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c The primary transient aircraft types using Altus AFB include C-130, C-17, C-21, and T-38. d Approximately 10 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). e The annual total represents a combination of operations resulting from local training sorties, which occur 312 days per year, and mission sorties, which occur 365 days per year. The expected 475 mission sorties per year would not normally conduct closed pattern operations, whereas training sorties would conduct an average of approximately six closed patterns per sortie. f The total operations in this table are a combination of all aircraft operations and are based on different numbers of flying days. 2.4.1.3.5 Auxiliary Airfields The proposed MOB 1 mission at Altus AFB would not require the use of auxiliary airfields. The KC-46A aircraft would utilize the existing KC-135 flight tracks, fuel jettison areas, and AR tracks. 2.4.2 Fairchild Air Force Base (MOB 1) The USAF is considering Fairchild AFB for the MOB 1 mission of 36 KC-46A aircraft. The classic association (active led, ANG supported) would continue if Fairchild AFB is selected for beddown of the MOB 1 mission. Section 2.4.2.2 describes the personnel changes, physical and development changes, and airfield operations that would occur with implementation of the MOB 1 mission. 2.4.2.1 Fairchild AFB Overview Fairchild AFB is located in Spokane County, Washington approximately 12 miles west of the City of Spokane, Washington (see Figure 2-8). Fairchild AFB hosts one northeast-to-southwest runway that is 13,899 feet long by 200 feet wide. The host unit at Fairchild AFB is the 92 ARW assigned to the 18th Air Force (AF) of AMC. The mission of Fairchild AFB is to “Support America’s War Fighters with Global Reach Airpower and Agile Combat Support” and to “Perform air refueling, airlift, and aeromedical evacuation missions supporting U.S. and coalition conventional operations and United States Strategic Command strategic deterrence missions.” Fairchild AFB covers approximately 4,551 acres of land and is home to a wide variety of units and missions. The most prominent mission is aerial refueling, but others include the USAF Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) School, Washington Air National Guard (WANG), AFRC, the Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA), medical detachments, and others. Fairchild AFB was activated in March 1942 as the Spokane Army Air Depot. The depot served as a major repair center for World War II aircraft (mostly B-17 Flying Fortresses). Shortly after the conclusion of World War II, two bombardment wings (92nd and 98th Bombardment Wing [BMW]) were assigned to the base. These units flew the B-29 Superfortress. In July 1951, the base’s name was changed to Fairchild AFB and the 92 BMW received the B-36 Peacemaker. In October 1957, the base converted to the B-52 Stratofortress and in February 1958, the first KC-135 Stratotanker arrived at Fairchild AFB. In 1960, Fairchild AFB received an Atlas missile launch complex, becoming the first base to have both manned aircraft and intercontinental ballistic missiles. The Atlas mission was deactivated in 1965, but the B-52s continued to fly at Fairchild AFB until 1994. When the B-52s left the base, the 92 BMW was redesignated the 92 ARW. The 92 ARW continues to fly the KC-135. 2.4.2.2 MOB 1 Beddown Specifics This section details the actions that would occur at Fairchild AFB if selected to base 36 KC-46A aircraft for the MOB 1 mission. The MOB 1 mission would replace the existing KC-135 aerial refueling mission at Fairchild AFB and result in a net increase of six PAA. However, the SERE, JPRA, and KC-135 Weapons Instructor Course (WIC) missions would continue. The KC-135 WIC function would temporarily move from Building 2040 to Building 399. The WIC function comprises 23 military instructor/administrative personnel and a student throughput of 16 students per year. This function is responsible for 76 airfield annual sorties at Fairchild AFB and would continue regardless of the final KC-46A MOB 1 basing decision. The USAF determined that Fairchild AFB’s infrastructure and base resources could accommodate the basic requirements for a KC-46A MOB 1 mission within the constraints set by the alternative narrowing process described in Section 2.2. The overall layout of existing facilities and infrastructure at Fairchild AFB is shown on Figure 2-9. 2.4.2.2.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the MOB 1 beddown are described in Section 2.3.2.1. Most of these requirements are met through existing infrastructure. However, the proposed MOB 1 beddown at Fairchild AFB would require new (C&D) of facilities, as well as modifications to some existing facilities. The projects anticipated to be required to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at Fairchild AFB are listed in Table 2-9. The proposed redevelopment would take place within the previously disturbed cantonment area of Fairchild AFB (see Figure 2-10). The proposed apron and fuels upgrade project would be developed on areas of the flightline that are currently paved and unpaved. THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Table 2-9. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario at Fairchild AFB Project Facility Size (Square Feet) Demolitiona Building 1011 32,664 Building 1013 27,747 Building 1015 32,664 Building 1017 27,875 Building 1018 1,881 Building 1019 37,278 Building 2120 28,200 Total Square Feet 188,309 Renovationb Building 1001, FuT 27,749 Building 1003, Cargo Deployment Function 36,664 Building 1025, Vehicle Servicing 26,681 Building 1037, Transitional Wash Rack 39,977 Building 2005, Squad Ops and AMU 38,308 Building 2007, Squad Ops and AMU 38,300 Building 2040, Operations Support Squadron and Aircraft Flight Equipment 15,800 Building 2050, General Maintenance Hangar 474,182 Building 2090, Aircraft Flight Equipment 36,603 Building 2097, Squad Ops and AMU 40,600 Building 2272, Dormitory Conversion 23,755 Building 2245 57,027 Roads and Parking Upgrades 44,882 Repair Taxiways A, B, C, D, E, F, and P (resurfacing of existing pavements) 1,168,788 Total Square Feet 2,068,316 New Construction Corrosion Control and Fuel Cell Hangar 145,626 Maintenance Training Facility 44,355 New Aprons and Fuels Upgrade (decommission of old hydrant loop and installation of new) 1,420,056 Fuel Stand (remove former stand and reconstruct) 3,560 Total Square Feet 1,613,597 Additions/Alterations Building 2045, Logistics Readiness Squadron 20,000 Building 2048, WSTs, BOT 12,500 Total Square Feet 32,500 a Demolition of Buildings 1021 and 1023 are required for new construction. These buildings were evaluated under a previous environmental assessment, are already scheduled for demolition, and would be demolished with or without the KC-46A beddown. b Buildings 1024 and 1026 would be used to house KC-46A personnel, but no renovations are required. 2.4.2.2.2 Personnel The current personnel at Fairchild AFB and the projected increase necessary to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission are provided in Table 2-10. Currently, the base has approximately 6,400 personnel, including military, part-time Guardsmen, DoD civilians, and contractors. The ANG would have an association with the active-duty component, as shown in Table 2-10. The KC-46A MOB 1 mission would require approximately 1,656 full-time military (includes 1,348 active-duty, 288 reserve, and 20 BOS) personnel, approximately 374 part-time Guardsmen, and approximately 20 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”). Table 2-10. Fairchild AFB KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baseline KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario KC-135 Drawdown Change Total Military (full-time) 3,334 1,656 -1,239 417 3,751 Military Dependents and Family Members 3,906 2,691a -2,013a 678 4,584 Part-Time Guardsmen 1,354 374 -339 35 1,389 DoD Civilian 531 25 -24 1 532 Other Base Personnel 621 20 0 20 641 Total 9,746 4,766 -3,615 1,151 10,897 a KC-46A and drawdown KC-135 dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. About 3,900 military dependents are currently associated with the full-time military personnel at Fairchild AFB. In addition, dependents of the non-military personnel live in the surrounding communities. The projected new military personnel are expected to be accompanied by 2,691 dependents. 2.4.2.2.3 Flight Operations Table 2-11 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at Fairchild AFB to the existing KC-135 mission. The table shows that the total annual operations at Fairchild AFB would increase from 30,507 per year to 49,303, resulting in an approximate 62 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. Table 2-11. Fairchild AFB Baseline and Projected Annual MOB 1 Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual KC-135c 260 11.34 2,948 46.02 11,965 57.36 14,914 0 0 0 0 0 0 UH-60 260 10.01 2,603 5.54 1,440 15.55 4,043 10.01 2,603 5.54 1,440 15.55 4,043 UH-1N 260 3.17 824 16.80 4,368 19.97 5,192 3.17 824 16.80 4,368 19.97 5,192 Transientd 365 5.34 1,949 12.08 4,409 17.42 6,358 5.34 1,949 12.08 4,409 17.42 6,358 KC-46Ae 312f 0 0 0 0 0 0 17.60 5,630 90.00 28,080 107.60 33,710 Totalg 29.86 8,324 80.44 22,183 110.30 30,507 36.12 11,006 124.42 38,297 160.54 49,303 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver, such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c A minor number of KC-135 sorties associated with the WIC could continue with the implementation of the MOB 1 scenario. d The primary transient aircraft types using Fairchild AFB include C-12, C-130, C-17, C-9, EA-6B, F-16, F-18A/C, KC-135, and P-3C. There is also some use of Fairchild AFB by helicopters and piston aircraft (types unidentified). e Approximately 10 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). f The annual total represents a combination of operations resulting from local training sorties, which occur 312 days per year, and mission sorties, which occur 365 days per year. The expected 475 mission sorties per year would not normally conduct closed pattern operations, whereas training sorties would conduct an average of approximately six closed patterns per sortie. g The total operations in this table are a combination of all aircraft operations and are based on different numbers of flying days. 2.4.2.2.4 Auxiliary Airfields The proposed MOB 1 mission at Fairchild AFB would not require the use of auxiliary airfields but would utilize the existing KC-135 flight tracks, fuel jettison areas, and AR tracks. 2.4.3 Grand Forks Air Force Base (MOB 1) The USAF is considering Grand Forks AFB for the MOB 1 mission of 36 KC-46A aircraft. Section 2.4.3.2 describes the personnel changes, physical and development changes, and airfield operations associated with implementation of the MOB 1 mission. 2.4.3.1 Grand Forks AFB Overview Grand Forks AFB is located in Grand Forks County near the North Dakota-Minnesota border at the junction of Red Lake River and the Red River of the North (see Figure 2-11). The base is north of and adjacent to the City of Emerado and is 15 miles west of the City of Grand Forks. The City of Grand Forks is approximately 75 miles north of Fargo, North Dakota, and approximately 145 miles south of Winnipeg, Manitoba, in Canada. Grand Forks AFB hosts one north-to-south runway that is 12,350 feet long by 150 feet wide. Figure 2-12 shows an overhead view of the base. The host unit at Grand Forks AFB is the 319th Air Base Wing (ABW) assigned to the Expeditionary Center of AMC. The 319 ABW provides base operating and direct operational support to wing personnel, three tenant units, and nine geographically separated units. Grand Forks AFB trains, deploys, and redeploys more than 1,300 Airmen in support of the Air Expeditionary Force and combatant commander requirements. Tenant groups include the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) operating the MQ-9 Reaper remotely piloted aircraft (RPA), the 69th Reconnaissance Group of Air Combat Command (ACC) unit operating the RQ-4 Global Hawk RPA, the 119 ABW, and the 372nd Training Squadron. In 2012, the annual economic impact of the base on the Grand Forks area was estimated at $203 million (Grand Forks AFB 2012a). Grand Forks AFB was established in 1954, when the USAF announced plans to build an Air Defense Command fighter-interceptor base in eastern North Dakota. In 1956, the USAF announced it would also utilize Grand Forks AFB to support SAC bombers and tankers. In 1960, Air Defense Command stationed the F-101 Voodoo fighter-interceptor squadron at Grand Forks AFB, along with the first KC-135 aerial refueling squadron. In 1962, the B-52 Stratofortress bomber arrived at Grand Forks AFB. In the mid-1960s, SAC organized a strategic missile wing at Grand Forks AFB and began construction on a Minuteman II missile complex, which became operational in December 1966. In 1987, the B-52 aircraft were replaced by the newer and more capable B-1B Lancer strategic bomber, while the KC-135A Stratotankers were replaced by the KC-135R models. Heavy bomber operations at Grand Forks AFB ended with the last B-1B Lancer departing the base on 26 May 1994. The 2005 Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) directed the realignment of all KC-135 aircraft to other AFBs and in 2010, the last KC-135 aircraft departed Grand Forks AFB. This final KC-135 flight marked the end of 50 years of aerial refueling operations at the base and the culmination of 53 years of flying operations. In early 2009, the DHS’s Customs and Border Protection became a tenant organization at Grand Forks AFB and brought its RPA program to the base. In late December 2010, ACC initiated RQ-4 Global Hawk operations and the 119 ABW initiated MQ-1 Predator operations in fulfillment of the 2005 BRAC recommendation for future operations at Grand Forks AFB. The first Global Hawk RPA arrived at Grand Forks AFB in June 2011. 2.4.3.2 MOB 1 Beddown Specifics This section details the actions necessary at Grand Forks AFB if selected for the basing of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission. The MOB 1 mission would be in addition to the three existing RPA missions at Grand Forks AFB. The USAF determined that Grand Forks AFB’s infrastructure and base resources could accommodate the basic requirements for a KC-46A MOB 1 mission within the constraints set by the alternative narrowing process described in Section 2.2. 2.4.3.2.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the MOB 1 beddown are described in Section 2.3.2.1. Grand Forks AFB has the physical real estate and infrastructure to beddown the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario; however, some of the anticipated projects required to support the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB are listed in Table 2-12. Some of the existing facilities, airfield ramp space, and hangars are currently utilized for day-to-day RPA missions. Due to ongoing base operations and the KC-46A aircraft mission requirements, new construction, additions, and renovations would be required to beddown the KC-46A (see Figure 2-13). Table 2-12. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario at Grand Forks AFB Project Project Size (Square Feet) Demolition Building 531 3,731 Building 635a 6,106 Total Square Feet 9,837 Renovation Building 221, Dormitory 26,265 Building 307, ANG Wing Headquarters 2,100 Building 528, Base Operations 2,100 Building 602, RPA Wing 27,172 Building 607, Operation Group/Operations Support Squadron/Aircraft Maintenance Squadron 37,286 Building 629, Squad Ops/AMU 3,359 Building 631, Squad Ops/AMU 3,359 Building 670, Supply Shop Not Applicable - Renovations consist of the installation of a cage for segregated storage. Runway and Overrun Repairs 18,829,628 Roads and Parking Upgrades Undetermined Parking Apron/Fuels Hydrant Upgrade 830,184 Taxiway A, F, G Renovations 596,978 Total Square Feet 20,358,431 Additions/Alterations Building 556, Flight Stimulator (WSTs, BOT) 32,475 Building 622, Composite Shop 8,500 Building 649, General Maintenance Hangar (3-bay)/AME 334,644 Building 661, AGE 28,000 Total Square Feet 403,619 New Construction Fuel Cell/Corrosion Control (2-bay)/General Maintenance Hangar (1-bay) with Apron 216,225 New Taxiway and Parking Apron 542,750 Global Hawk Engine Pad (required for displaced Global Hawk) 38,695 Maintenance Training Facility 47,300 Squad Ops/AMU 40,600 AFE Facility 18,000 Dormitory 33,318 FuT Facility 10,600 Airfield Lighting Vault 4.787 Total Square Feet 952,275 a Demolish building to construct new AGE.   THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK New construction would include a Fuel Cell/Corrosion Control/General Maintenance Hangar; an MTF; an FuT facility; an AFE facility; a new Global Hawk Engine Pad to support the displacement by KC-46A parking; and adequate ramp, taxiway and fuel hydrant systems, as well as repairs required to the taxiways and runway (see Figure 2-13). The proposed redevelopment would take place within the previously disturbed cantonment area of the base. Existing RPA flight operations and missions would need to continue during demolition and reconstruction activities. A construction transition plan would be implemented, where the taxiway demolition and construction would be phased to not interfere with existing airfield operations. 2.4.3.2.2 Personnel The current personnel at Grand Forks AFB and the projected increase necessary to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission are provided in Table 2-13. Currently, the base has about 2,500 personnel, including military, government civilians, and contractors. The ANG would have an association with the active-duty component, as indicated in Table 2-13. Table 2-13. Grand Forks AFB KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baseline KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Total Military (full-time) 1,531 1,724 3,255 Military Dependents and Family Members 1,614 2,802a 4,416 Part-Time Guardsmen 0 659 659 DoD Civilian 303 3 306 Other Base Personnel 679 20 699 Total 4,127 5,208 9,335 a Dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. Because the MOB 1 mission at Grand Forks AFB would be in addition to the existing missions, an increase in personnel would be anticipated. The KC-46A MOB 1 mission would require approximately 1,724 full-time military (includes 1,334 active-duty, 288 reserve, and 102 BOS) personnel, approximately 659 part-time Guardsmen, approximately three DoD civilian personnel, and approximately 20 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”). About 1,614 military dependents currently associated with the full-time military personnel at Grand Forks AFB live in communities surrounding Grand Forks AFB. Approximately 2,802 dependents and family members would be anticipated to accompany the full-time military personnel associated with the KC-46A MOB 1 mission. Depending on the availability of housing in areas surrounding Grand Forks AFB, the additional families associated with the KC-46A MOB 1 mission could need additional homes. These could either be existing houses in the communities surrounding the base or constructed new on or off base. In order to understand if these homes are available in the communities around Grand Forks AFB, the USAF would conduct an HRMA. This analysis would be completed if Grand Forks AFB were selected to receive this mission. 2.4.3.2.3 Flight Operations Table 2-14 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at Grand Forks AFB to the existing baseline mission. The table shows that the total annual operations at Grand Forks AFB would increase from 14,946 per year to 48,656, resulting in an approximate 226 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. Table 2-14. Grand Forks AFB Baseline and Projected Annual MOB 1 Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/ Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Predator (MQ-1) 156 2.00 312 28.00 4,368 30.00 4,680 2.00 312 28.00 4,368 30.00 4,680 Reaper (MQ-9) 260 2.00 520 35.00 9,100 37.00 9,620 2.00 520 35.00 9,100 37.00 9,620 Global Hawk (RQ-4) 130 2.00 260 1.00 130 3.00 390 2.00 260 1.00 130 3.00 390 Transientc 365 0.70 256 0.00 0 0.70 256 0.70 256 0.00 0 0.70 256 KC-46Ad 312e 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 17.60 5,630 90.00 28,080 107.60 33,710 Totalf 6.70 1,348 64.00 13,598 70.70 14,946 24.30 6,978 154.00 41,678 178.30 48,656 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver, such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c The primary transient military aircraft types using Grand Forks AFB include KC-135, C-20, C-21, C-130, KC-10, and C-12. d Approximately 10 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). e The annual total represents a combination of operations resulting from local training sorties, which occur 312 days per year, and mission sorties, which occur 365 days per year. The expected 475 mission sorties per year would not normally conduct closed pattern operations, whereas training sorties would conduct an average of approximately six closed patterns per sortie. f The total operations in this table are a combination of all aircraft operations and are based on different numbers of flying days. Key: CBP – U.S. Customs and Border Protection 2.4.3.2.4 Auxiliary Airfields The proposed MOB 1 mission at Grand Forks AFB would not require the use of auxiliary airfields but would utilize the former KC-135 flight tracks, fuel jettison areas, and AR tracks. 2.4.4 McConnell Air Force Base (FTU or MOB 1) The USAF is considering two different actions for McConnell AFB. One action includes the beddown of one FTU squadron by AETC with up to eight KC-46A aircraft. A second action, for which McConnell AFB has been selected as the Preferred Alternative, would be the beddown of three squadrons by AMC with 36 KC-46A aircraft for the MOB 1 scenario. These are separate actions; McConnell AFB could only be selected for the implementation of one of these actions (as described in Section 1.0). The classic association (active led, AFRC supported) would continue if McConnell AFB is selected for beddown of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario. Section 2.4.4.2 describes the personnel changes, physical and development changes, airfield operations, and changes in use of auxiliary airfields that would occur with implementation of the FTU scenario. Section 2.4.4.3 describes changes that would occur with implementation of the MOB 1 scenario. No auxiliary airfields would be used as part of the MOB 1 scenario. 2.4.4.1 McConnell AFB Overview McConnell AFB is located in Sedgwick County, Kansas, approximately six miles southeast of Wichita, Kansas (see Figure 2-14). The host unit at McConnell AFB is the 22nd ARW assigned to the 18 AF of AMC. The mission of the 22 ARW is to deliver total force mission ready Airmen and KC-135 Stratotanker mobility to combatant commanders through robust installation support anytime and anywhere. In addition to the 22 ARW, McConnell AFB is home to the Kansas Air National Guard (KANG). McConnell AFB covers approximately 2,651 acres of land and is one of only three active-duty KC-135 Stratotanker wings in the USAF. The other two KC-135 Stratotanker wings are located at Fairchild AFB in Washington and MacDill AFB in Florida. McConnell AFB hosts two northeast-to-southwest runways. The primary runway (01L/19R) is under reconstruction and will be 12,000 feet long by 150 feet wide. The second runway is 12,000 feet long by 300 feet wide. The base overview of McConnell AFB is shown on Figure 2-15. McConnell AFB originated with joint municipal-military use of Wichita Municipal Airport in the 1940s. The 127th Observation Squadron of Kansas National Guard was activated in 1941 as the first military unit. The USAF named the airport Wichita AFB in 1951, and later renamed it McConnell AFB in 1954. McConnell AFB has served as home for a variety of missions over the years, including the B-47 Stratojet bomber, the Titan missile mission, F-16, and the B-1 bomber. The B-1 aircraft were transferred to other bases in 2002. As a result of this transfer, the 184th Bomb Wing was redesignated as the 184 ARW. This officially established McConnell AFB as the sole base in the USAF where all three components (Active, Guard, and Reserve) supported the same mission. In April 2008, the 184 ARW was designated the 184 IW, making it the first IW in the ANG (McConnell AFB 2011a). The McConnell AFB PAA consists of 44 KC-135 aircraft. The final budget for fiscal year 2013 downsized the PAA at McConnell AFB from 48 to 44 aircraft. Currently, there is a classic association (active led, AFRC supported) within the existing KC-135 squadrons at McConnell AFB. The 22 ARW includes four major units: the 22nd Maintenance Group, the 22nd Medical Group, the 22nd Mission Support Group, and the 22nd Operations Group. The 931st Air Refueling Group (ARG) of the AFRC is an associate unit and the 184 IW of the KANG is a tenant unit. In addition, the 22 ARW provides administrative, medical, and logistical support for other tenant agencies and the McConnell AFB community. 2.4.4.2 FTU Beddown Specifics The USAF determined that McConnell AFB’s infrastructure and base resources could accommodate the basic requirements for the KC-46A FTU scenario within the constraints set by the alternative narrowing process described in Section 2.2. This section details the actions that would occur at McConnell AFB if the base were selected for the basing of the KC-46A FTU scenario. The FTU scenario would be additive to the current mission at McConnell AFB, and the first four of up to eight aircraft would arrive in 2016. 2.4.4.2.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the FTU beddown are described in Section 2.3.1.1. Although some of the requirements are met through existing infrastructure, some demolition, construction, and modification/additions to existing facilities, and infrastructure modifications would be required to support KC-46A FTU training operations. Table 2-15 lists the KC-46A FTU-related projects that would take place within the previously disturbed cantonment area, as shown on Figure 2-16. Existing flight operations and refueling activities associated with the KC-135 mission would continue during demolition and reconstruction activities. A construction transition plan would be implemented, where the taxiway demolition and construction would be phased to not interfere with existing airfield operations. During demolition and construction of the new hydrant systems, additional refueling vehicles would be used to maintain the KC-135 mission. Table 2-15. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A FTU Scenario at McConnell AFB Project Facility Size (Square Feet) Demolition Building 977a 1,891 Building 978a 25,388 Building 984a 655 Building 985a 400 Building 1110b 7,144 Building 1122b 168 Total Square Feet 35,646 Renovation Airfield/Runway Taxiway D Repaird 125,676 Parking Ramp Apron Type III Fuel Hydrant System Upgrade N/A Building 840, (Squad Ops) and AFEc 24,700 Total Square Feet 152,686 New Construction Fuel Cell and Corrosion Control Maintenance Hangar (2-bay) AMU /Maintenance Back Shops 145,626 FuT Facility 45,690 FTC 51,352 Total Square Feet 242,668 Additions/Alterations Building 1129, Composite Repair Facility (back shops) 8,500 Building 1170, Director of Maintenance Office 560 Total Square Feet 9,060 a Demolition of building is required to locate the new KC-46A hangar. b Demolition of building is required to locate the new FuT Facility. Demolition analyzed under previous Categorical Exclusion. c AFE would also be housed in Buildings 1183 and 1186. d Taxiway F also requires repairs; however, this project was addressed in the 2012 Installation Development Environmental Assessment. 2.4.4.2.2 Personnel The current personnel at McConnell AFB and the projected increase necessary to support the KC-46A FTU mission are provided in Table 2-16. Not counting personnel from the KANG 184 IW or from the 931 ARG, the base has about 4,800 personnel, including military, part-time reserve, government civilians, and contractors. The ADSL proposed for the KC-46A FTU would be 200. Because the FTU mission at McConnell AFB would be in addition to the existing mission, an increase in personnel would be anticipated. The KC-46A FTU mission would require approximately 141 full-time military (includes 119 active-duty, 12 reserve, and 10 BOS) personnel, approximately 20 part-time reserve personnel, approximately 315 DoD civilian personnel, and approximately 23 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”). About 3,220 military dependents, currently associated with the full-time military personnel at McConnell AFB, live in communities surrounding the base. Approximately 229 family members and dependents would be anticipated to accompany the full-time military personnel associated with the KC-46A FTU mission. Table 2-16. McConnell AFB KC-46A FTU Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baselinea KC-46A FTU Scenario Total Military (full-time) 3,408 141 3,549 Military Dependents and Family Members 3,220 229c 3,449 Part-Time Reservist 460 20 480 Students 0 200 200 DoD Civilian 427 315 742 Other Base Personnel 523 23 546 Total 8,038b 928 8,966 a Source of baseline information: McConnell AFB 2012. b Baseline does not include personnel numbers from the ANG 184 IW. c Dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. 2.4.4.2.3 Flight Operations Table 2-17 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A FTU mission at McConnell AFB to the existing baseline mission. The table shows that the total annual operations at McConnell AFB would increase from 38,618 per year to 79,982, resulting in an approximate 107 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. Table 2-17. McConnell AFB Baseline and Projected Annual FTU Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual KC-135 260 21.31 5,541 73.00 18,980 94.31 24,521 21.31 5,541 73.00 18,980 94.31 24,521 Transientc 260 21.83 5,676 21.83 5,676 43.66 11,352 21.83 5,676 21.83 5,676 43.66 11,352 Civiliand 365 7.52 2,745 0 0 7.52 2,745 7.52 2,745 0 0 7.52 2,745 KC-46Ae 240 0 0 0 0 0 0 15.22 3,653 157.13 37,711 172.35 41,364 Total 50.66 13,962 94.83 24,656 145.49 38,618 65.88 17,615 251.96 62,367 317.84 79,982 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c The primary transient military aircraft types using McConnell AFB include KC-135, F-16, T-1, and T-38 (HQ AMC 2012). d Because the Boeing Corporation and Cessna Corporation manufacturing facilities are adjacent to McConnell AFB, Boeing and Cessna aircraft compose the civilian aircraft that use McConnell AFB. The primary transient civilian aircraft types are Boeing 747 and 767 and Cessna 441. e Approximately 20 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). 2.4.4.2.4 Auxiliary Airfields A variation to the typical training sortie described above could involve performing closed patterns at an auxiliary airfield. As part of the FTU mission at McConnell AFB, KC-46A aircraft would use CSM, Forbes Field (FOE), and Wichita Mid-Continent Airport (ICT) airfields, all three of which are currently being used by KC-135 aircrews. The KC-46A aircraft would use the same AR tracks and fuel jettison areas used by the existing KC-135 mission. KC-46A aircrews associated with the FTU would fly a combined estimate of 6,516 annual aircraft operations at the auxiliary airfields. The location of these airfields relative to McConnell AFB is shown on Figure 2-17. Details regarding the auxiliary airfields are described as follows. Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark (CSM). CSM is proposed to be used as an auxiliary airfield for the FTU proposed for Altus AFB and is described in Section 2.4.1.2.4 Forbes Field (FOE). FOE is the former Forbes AFB and is currently a joint-use civil-military airport operated by the Metropolitan Topeka Airport Authority. FOE encompasses approximately 2,854 acres and is located approximately six miles south of Topeka, in Shawnee County, Kansas. It is both an active municipal airport and a KANG base. FOE has two concrete runways: 13/31, measuring 12,802 feet, and 3/21, measuring 7,000 feet. There are currently 24,742 annual operations at FOE. Of this total, approximately 70 percent are military aircraft operations (primarily based KC-135 and H-60 aircraft). Wichita Mid-Continent Airport (ICT). ICT is a commercial airport located in southwest Wichita, in Sedgwick County, Kansas, and is operated by the Wichita Airport Authority. ICT is located approximately 7 miles from downtown Wichita. ICT encompasses approximately 3,248 acres and is the busiest airport in the state of Kansas. ICT contains three concrete runways, the longest of which (1L/19R) is 10,301 feet. Runway 1R/19L is 7,301 feet, and Runway 14/32 is 6,301 feet long. In total, 165,035 aircraft operations are flown per year at ICT. About half of these operations are general aviation, with the remainder being made up in approximately equal parts of transient military and air carrier/taxi operations. 2.4.4.3 MOB 1 Beddown Specifics This section details the actions necessary at McConnell AFB if selected for the basing of a KC-46A MOB 1 mission. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would replace the existing 44 KC-135 aircraft with 36 PAA KC-46A aircraft. The USAF determined that McConnell AFB’s infrastructure and base resources could accommodate the basic requirements for a KC-46A MOB 1 mission within the constraints set by the alternative narrowing process described in Section 2.2. 2.4.4.3.1 Facilities and Infrastructure The overall facility requirements for the MOB 1 beddown are described in Section 2.3.2. The projects anticipated to be required to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at McConnell AFB are listed in Table 2-18. Although some of these requirements are met through existing infrastructure and facilities on McConnell AFB, substantial new construction, renovation, and demolition would be required. However, some demolition/construction and modification/additions to existing facilities and infrastructure would be required at McConnell AFB to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission. New facilities for the FuT, mobility bag storage, and maintenance training would need to be constructed. A series of renovations to existing facilities would also be needed to accommodate the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario. The proposed redevelopment would take place within the previously disturbed cantonment area of the base (see Figure 2-18). Existing flight operations and refueling activities associated with the KC-135 mission would need to continue during demolition and reconstruction activities. A construction transition plan would be implemented, where the taxiway demolition and construction would be phased to not interfere with existing airfield operations. During demolition and construction of the new hydrant systems, additional refueling vehicles would be used to maintain the KC-135 missions. Table 2-18. Facilities and Infrastructure Projects for the KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario at McConnell AFB Project Project Size (Square Feet) Demolition Building 973a 352 Building 977a 1,891 Building 978a 25,388 Building 984a 655 Building 985a 400 Building 1101a 273 Building 1102a 6,500 Building 1106a 101,690 Building 1110b 7,144 Building 1122b 168 Total Square Feet 144,461 Renovation Building 1108, Air Transportable Galley/Latrine/Seat Pallet Facility 7,216 Building 1094, 2/3 WSTs and 2 BOT 14,659 Building 1129, Composite Shop 8,500 Building 840, (Squad Ops)/AFE 1,798 Building 1183, (Squad Ops)/AFE 1,798 Building 1185, (Squad Ops) 1,798 Building 1186, (Squad Ops)/AFE 1,798 Building 850, AFRC Wing Headquarters No change Building 1218, Operations Group Headquarters 27,749 Building 1107, AME Storage and Maintenance No changec Taxiway D Repaird 125,676 Parking Ramp Apron Type III Fuel Hydrant System Upgrade N/A Apron Fill-In 13,200 Roads and Parking Upgrades N/A Total Square Feet 178,648 Additions/Alterations Building 1092, 1 WST 4,025 Building 1220, Mobility Bag Storage Addition 8,000 Building 852, Maintenance Training Facility 24,375 Apron Fuels Hydrant Upgrade 23 hydrants Total Square Feet 36,400 New Construction Corrosion Control, Fuel Cell and Maintenance Hangar (2-bay) 214,425 General Maintenance Hangar (3-bay) + (1-bay); Maintenance Shops, E/E Shop 174,297 FuT Facility 10,600 Dormitory 19,174 Total Square Feet 418,496 a Demolish building to construct new KC-46A hangars. b Demolish building to construct new KC-46A FuT Facility. Demolition analyzed under previous Categorical Exclusion. c Renovations to Building 1107 only include the installation of a telephone system and fiber optic data drops. d Taxiway F also requires repairs; however, this project was addressed in the 2012 Installation Development Environmental Assessment. 2.4.4.3.2 Personnel The current personnel at McConnell AFB and the projected personnel necessary to support the KC-46A MOB 1 mission are provided in Table 2-19. Not counting personnel from the ANG 184 IW, the base has about 4,800 personnel, including military, part-time reserve, government civilians, and contractors. The ANG would have an association with the active-duty component. Table 2-19. McConnell AFB MOB 1 Scenario Personnel and Dependent Changes Personnel Baselinea KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario KC-135 Drawdown Change Total Military (full-time) 3,408 1,809 -1,920 -111 3,297 Military Dependents and Family Members 3,220 2,940c -3,120c -180 3,040 Part-Time Reservists 460 1,053 -626 427 887 DoD Civilian 427 52 -38 14 441 Other Base Personnel 523 20 0 20 543 Totala 8,038b 5,874 -5,704 170 8,208 a Source of baseline information: 2012 McConnell AFB Economic Impact Analysis (McConnell AFB 2012c). b Baseline does not include personnel numbers from the ANG 184 IW. c KC-46A and drawdown KC-135 dependents estimated at 2.5 times 65 percent of full-time military personnel only. The KC-46A MOB 1 mission at McConnell AFB would eventually replace the existing KC-135 mission. The KC-46A MOB 1 mission would require approximately 1,809 full-time military (includes 1,345 active-duty, 451 reserve [air reserve technicians] and 13 BOS) personnel, approximately 1,053 part-time reserve personnel, approximately 52 DoD civilian personnel, and approximately 20 contractors (categorized as “other base personnel”). About 3,220 military dependents, currently associated with the full-time military personnel at McConnell AFB, live in communities surrounding McConnell AFB. The projected new military personnel are expected to be accompanied by 2,940 dependents. 2.4.4.3.3 Flight Operations Table 2-20 provides a comparison of the number of annual airfield operations anticipated with the beddown of the KC-46A MOB 1 mission at McConnell AFB to the existing baseline mission. The table shows that the total annual operations would increase from 38,618 per year to 47,807, resulting in an approximate 24 percent increase in annual aircraft operations. 2.4.4.3.4 Auxiliary Airfields The proposed MOB 1 mission at McConnell AFB would not require the use of auxiliary airfields. The KC-46A aircraft would utilize the existing KC-135 flight tracks, fuel jettison areas, and AR tracks.  Table 2-20. McConnell AFB Baseline and Projected Annual MOB 1 Scenario End-State Airfield Operationsa Aircraft Unit Flying Days/Year Baseline Projected Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Landings and Takeoffs Closed Patternb Total Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annualf Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annual Avg. Busy Day Annualf KC-135 260 21.31 5,541 73.00 18,980 94.31 24,521 0 0 0 0 0 0 Transientc 260 21.83 5,676 21.83 5,676 43.66 11,352 21.83 5,676 21.83 5,676 43.66 11,352 Civiliand 365 7.52 2,745 0 0 7.52 2,745 7.52 2,745 0 0 7.52 2,745 KC-46Ae 312f 0 0 0 0 0 0 17.60 5,630 90.00 28,080 107.60 33,710 Totalg 50.66 13,962 94.83 24,656 145.49 38,618 46.95 14,051 111.83 33,756 158.78 47,807 a An operation is the accomplishment of a single maneuver such as a takeoff/departure, an arrival/landing, or half of a closed pattern. b A closed pattern consists of two operations: one takeoff and one landing. The numbers presented are operations. c The primary transient military aircraft types using McConnell AFB include KC-135, F-16, T-1, and T-38 (HQ AMC 2012). d Because the Boeing Corporation and Cessna Corporation manufacturing facilities are adjacent to McConnell AFB, Boeing and Cessna aircraft compose the civilian aircraft that use McConnell AFB. The primary transient civilian aircraft types are Boeing 747 and 767 and Cessna 441. e Approximately 10 percent of the total KC-46A operations would occur during environmental night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). f The annual total represents a combination of operations resulting from local training sorties, which occur 312 days per year, and mission sorties, which occur 365 days per year. The expected 475 mission sorties per year would not normally conduct closed pattern operations, whereas training sorties would conduct an average of approximately six closed patterns per sortie. g The total operations in this table are a combination of all aircraft operations and are based on different numbers of flying days. 2.5 NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE Section 1502.14(d) of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires the analysis of a No Action Alternative. Analysis of a No Action Alternative provides a benchmark, enabling decision makers to compare the magnitude of the environmental effects to the proposed action or alternatives. No action means that an action would not take place, and the resulting environmental effects from taking no action would be compared with the effects of allowing the proposed activity to go forward. No action for this EIS reflects the status quo, where the KC-46A beddown would not occur at any base at this time. No KC-46A aircraft would arrive, and all existing aircraft would remain in place. No construction, renovation, or demolition of any structure or other infrastructure would occur. No KC-46A personnel changes or construction would occur, and no changes to existing flight operations would occur. Taking no action could negatively affect the overall program for integrating the KC-46A into the USAF inventory and delay fielding the KC-46A for operations and deployment. Delaying the action could also add cost to the program. At each base, there are ongoing and currently planned activities and programs that would continue, whether or not the basing of KC-46A would be implemented. These activities have been approved by the USAF and supported by existing NEPA documentation. The No Action Alternative is described for each resource area in Section 4.5 2.6 PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE The USAF identified Altus AFB as the Preferred Alternative for the FTU scenario and McConnell AFB as the Preferred Alternative for the MOB 1 scenario. Fairchild and Grand Forks AFBs were identified as reasonable alternatives for the MOB 1 scenario; these bases are evaluated for the MOB 1 scenario in this EIS. The USAF selected the FTU and MOB 1 Preferred Alternatives using operational analysis, the results of site surveys, and military judgment factors. 2.7 COMPARISON OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 2-21 summarizes the potential environmental consequences from Chapter 4 where the FTU and MOB 1 mission requirements from Chapter 2 are overlaid on the baseline conditions from Chapter 3. The consequences are presented for each environmental resource area and are described for each EIS alternative. This summary comparison of environmental consequences provides an overview of the consequences associated with implementation of the FTU and MOB 1 missions at each base. The following NEPA activities have been completed to ensure that decision makers have a comprehensive understanding of the potential environmental consequences of their decision. . Scoping. Four public scoping meetings were conducted over a 2-week period, with public and agency input identifying important environmental resources. . Documentation of existing environmental conditions for each alternative base. The existing conditions for these resources relied heavily on recent environmental materials and Federal and state databases prepared at and near each base. . Base-specific assessments of environmental consequences of the beddown of the KC-46A missions. Each assessment overlaid the project details upon the existing conditions to estimate potential base-specific environmental consequences. THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Table 2-21. Comparative Summary of Environmental Consequences (Continued) Resource Area Altus AFB Fairchild AFB Grand Forks AFB McConnell AFB No Action FTU MOB 1 MOB 1 MOB 1  FTU MOB 1 Safety The basing of KC-46A aircraft under either the FTU or MOB 1 scenario is not anticipated to increase the risk of aircraft accidents due to wildlife strikes. Ongoing elements of the respective base-specific bird/wildlife aircraft strike hazard (BASH) plans would continue. Special briefings and modifications to the BASH plans addressing KC-46A operations and the potential for wildlife strikes would be provided to pilots whenever the potential exists for greater bird strikes within the airspace. KC-46A pilots would be subject to these procedures. Therefore, no significant impact would occur related to bird/wildlife-aircraft strike hazard issues. No unique construction practices or materials would be required as part of any of the renovation, addition, or construction projects associated with the KC-46A beddown scenarios. All renovation and construction activities would comply with all applicable U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations to protect workers. In addition, the newly constructed buildings would be built in compliance with antiterrorism/force protection requirements. The USAF does not anticipate any significant safety impacts as a result of construction, demolition, or renovation if all applicable Air Force Occupational and Environmental Safety, Fire Protection, and Health (AFOSH) and OSHA requirements are implemented. Proposed construction, renovation, and infrastructure-improvement projects related to the KC-46A aircraft scenarios would be consistent with established APZs at each base. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each of base would remain as is. No additional impacts would occur to flight or ground safety. Soil and Water Resources The total disturbed area would be less than five acres. The total disturbed area would be less than 80 acres. The total disturbed area would be less than 40 acres. The total disturbed area would be less than 35 acres. The total disturbed area would be less than six acres. The total disturbed area would be less than 11 acres. The addition to Building 1220 would impact a floodplain. A Finding of No Practicable Alternative (FONPA) would be prepared should this alternative be selected. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. None of the KC-46A proposed construction would occur and there would be no additional impacts to soil and water resources. Relevant stormwater and land disturbance permits would be required and stormwater plans would be updated. During the design phase, a variety of stormwater controls could be incorporated into construction plans. These could include planting vegetation in disturbed areas as soon as possible after construction; constructing retention facilities; and implementing structural controls such as interceptor dikes, swales (excavated depressions), silt fences, straw bales, and other storm drain inlet protection, as necessary, to prevent sediment from entering inlet structures. Biological Resources No impacts on biological resources or wetlands are anticipated to result from implementation of the KC-46A scenarios. Approximately 2 acres of potentially jurisdictional wetlands would be impacted. Section 404 and 401 permits and mitigation would be required should this alternative be selected. No impacts on biological resources or wetlands are anticipated to result from implementation of the KC-46A scenarios. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. No vegetation or wildlife habitat would be disturbed as a result of implementing either of the KC-46A scenarios. No additional impacts to biological resources would be anticipated.  Table 2-21. Comparative Summary of Environmental Consequences (Continued) Resource Area Altus AFB Fairchild AFB Grand Forks AFB McConnell AFB No Action FTU MOB 1 MOB 1 MOB 1 FTU MOB 1 Cultural Resources No adverse effect on one historic property. Oklahoma State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) has concurred with the USAF’s determination that modifications proposed for Building 285 as part of the KC-46A undertaking will not adversely affect the building’s National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility (letter from SHPO to USAF dated 29 July 2013), concluding the Section 106 consultation process.  No adverse Section 106 impacts to tribal resources are anticipated. As of 4 September 2013, initial responses have been received from three tribes. Two tribes requested copies of the EIS and one requested copies of any survey documents that may be produced as a result of the project. A third tribe requested a follow-up telephone meeting. Consultation through direct communication with tribes is ongoing. Adverse impact on one NRHPeligible architectural resource (letter from SHPO to USAF dated 25 June 2013). USAF has initiated National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 consultation with Washington SHPO. If Fairchild is selected to host the MOB 1 scenario, Section 106 consultation would be completed, including resolution of adverse impacts on Building 2050 (hangar). This consultation would be completed prior to finalization of the ROD.  No adverse Section 106 impacts are anticipated to tribal resources. Section 106 consultation has been initiated; however, as of 4 September 2013, no tribal responses have been received. Consultation through direct communication is ongoing. NHPA Section 106 SHPO consultation has been completed and includes no impacts on architectural resources. The North Dakota SHPO has concurred with the USAF’s finding of no historic properties would be affected (letter from SHPO to USAF dated 8 July 2013).  No adverse Section 106 impacts to tribal resources are anticipated. Consultation with tribes is ongoing. As of 4 September 2013, initial responses have been received from nine tribes. Varying responses have included confirmation of no resources in the area to concerns over potential adverse impacts to sacred sites, properties of cultural and religious significance to tribes, traditional cultural properties, cultural resources, and fasting and prayers. No adverse effects are anticipated on architectural resources or other historic properties. The Kansas SHPO has concurred with the USAF’s finding (letter from SHPO to USAF dated 18 June 2013).  No adverse Section 106 impacts to tribal resources are anticipated. As of 4 September 2013, initial responses have been received from one tribe. The tribe expressed interest in obtaining a copy of the Draft EIS. Section 106 consultation is ongoing through direct communication with the tribes. Adverse effect on NRHP-eligible Building 1106; no adverse effect on historic properties for modifications to Buildings 1107 and 1218 (letter from SHPO to USAF dated 26 August 2013). Prior to the USAF’s final decision regarding the KC-46A proposed action, Section 106 consultation with the Kansas SHPO would be completed regarding appropriate impact mitigation.  No adverse Section 106 impacts to tribal resources are anticipated. As of 4 September 2013, initial responses have been received from five tribes. The tribes’ responses varied from statements of no issues to requests for copies of the Draft EIS. Section 106 consultation is ongoing through direct communication with the tribes. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. No additional impacts to historical buildings or other cultural resources would occur. Impacts on archaeological resources are not expected. All project areas have been surveyed. Inadvertent discovery of previously unrecorded cultural resources would be managed in compliance with Federal and state laws and USAF regulations. Impacts on traditional cultural resources are unlikely; there are no known tribal traditional cultural properties or traditional cultural resources at any base. USAF has initiated consultation with tribes on a government-togovernment basis; consultation is ongoing. Refer to Appendix A, Section A.3 for consultation detail. Land Use All new construction would occur in the appropriate base land use areas with no incompatible development planned. No impacts on land use on base from construction projects or noise from air operations are anticipated. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. No changes would occur to planning noise contours surrounding the bases and no land use changes would occur within the base boundaries. Implementation of the FTU scenario would increase the off-base area affected by noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater by 580 acres, which is mostly agricultural land and existing low-density residential land. There would be no significant effects on land use at any of the four auxiliary airfields as a result of the slight increase in aircraft operations noise. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the off-base area affected by noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater by 155 acres, which is mostly agricultural land and existing low-density residential land. No significant effects are anticipated on land use resources. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the off-base area affected by noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater by 53 acres, while there would be a reduction of the affected area on base. The offbase area is primarily vacant and no residential areas would be affected. There would be a minor impact from the increased number of aircraft operations because of existing incompatible residential land use within the northern APZ II. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the on- and off-base areas affected by noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater by 62 acres. Surrounding areas are agricultural and low-density residential and were previously exposed to KC-135 aircraft operations from Grand Forks AFB. Because the FTU scenario is additive to the existing KC-135 mission, an additional 273 acres off base and 594 people would be exposed to noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater. The affected area includes mixeddensity residential areas in Eastridge to the north and some homes in residentially zoned land to the southwest of the airfield. There would be an adverse impact on existing incompatible residential, commercial, and industrial land in the CZs and APZs from the increased number of operations at the airfield. Recommend continued coordination with local jurisdictions to provide more compatible land use zoning surrounding the airfield. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in a net benefit to surrounding land (-386 acres) and people (-199) due to the net decrease in acres and estimated residents exposed to noise levels of 65 dB DNL or greater.  Table 2-21. Comparative Summary of Environmental Consequences (Continued) Resource Area Altus AFB Fairchild AFB Grand Forks AFB McConnell AFB No Action FTU MOB 1 MOB 1 MOB 1 FTU MOB 1 Infrastructure Implementation of the FTU scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 30 to 37 percent of base system capacity and peak demand from 51 to 59 percent. Daily discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 4 to 6 percent of base system capacity and peak discharge would increase from 6 to 8 percent. Daily demand for electricity would increase from 12 to 16 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 15 to 18 percent. Daily demand for natural gas would increase from 9 to 14 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 23 to 28 percent. Implementation of the FTU scenario would disturb less than 5 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the FTU scenario would result in approximately 1,937 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 1,292 tons to be transported to the City of Altus Landfill or other landfills in the region. Regarding on-base transportation systems, on-base mission personnel vehicle trips would potentially increase by 12 percent and no levelof-service impacts are anticipated. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 30 to 82 percent of base system capacity and peak demand from 51 to 103 percent of contracted amount. Daily discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 4 to 19 percent of base system capacity and peak discharge would increase from 6 to 21 percent. Daily demand for electricity would increase from 12 to 35 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 15 to 37 percent. Daily demand for natural gas would increase from 9 to 43 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 23 to 57 percent. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would disturb less than 80 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in approximately 29,417 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 19,611 tons to be transported to the City of Altus Landfill or other landfills in the region. Regarding on-base transportation systems, on-base mission personnel vehicle trips would increase by 54 percent and no level-of-service impacts are anticipated. However, this would increase congestion and queuing at the Main Gate and Commercial Gate during peak morning and evening traffic Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 16 to 18 percent of base system capacity and peak demand from 44 to 46 percent. Daily discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 39 to 45 percent of base system capacity and peak discharge would increase from 70 to 77 percent. Increases in electrical use and natural gas associated with new facilities and increases in personnel and dependents are anticipated to be less than 1 percent of state-wide residential electrical/natural gas usage. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would disturb less than 40 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in approximately 13,763 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 9,175 tons to be transported to landfills in the region. On-base mission personnel vehicle trips would increase by 7.5 percent. No level-of-service impacts are anticipated. This could increase congestion and queuing at the Main Gate and Thorpe/Rambo Gate during peak morning and evening traffic. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 16 to 41 percent of base system capacity. Daily discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 42 to 94 percent of base system capacity. Daily demand for electricity would increase from 17 to 43 percent of base system capacity. Daily demand for natural gas would increase from 11 to 31 percent of base system capacity. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would disturb less than 35 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in approximately 28,738 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 19,159 tons to be transported to landfills in the region. On-base mission personnel vehicle trips would increase by approximately 70 percent. No levelof-service impacts are anticipated. However, this would increase congestion and queuing at the Main Gate and Commercial Gate during peak morning and evening traffic Implementation of the FTU scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 10 to 15 percent of base system capacity and peak demand from 14 to 19 percent. Daily discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 7 to 9 percent of base system capacity and peak discharge would increase from 27 to 29 percent. Daily demand for electricity would increase from 47 to 56 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 60 to 69 percent. Daily demand for natural gas would increase from 16 to 23 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 36 to 43 percent. Implementation of the FTU scenario would disturb less than 6 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the FTU scenario would result in approximately 2,217 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 1,478 tons to be placed in the Brooks or Construction, Demolition & Recycle (CDR) Landfill or a combination of both. On-base mission personnel vehicle trips would increase by 10 percent. No level-of-service impacts are anticipated. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would increase the average daily demand for potable water from 10 to 11 percent of base system capacity and peak demand from 14 to 15 percent. The peak discharge to the wastewater system would increase from 27 to 28 percent of base system capacity, but average daily discharge would remain unchanged at 7 percent. Daily demand for electricity would increase from 47 to 48 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 60 to 61 percent. Daily demand for natural gas would increase from 16 to 17 percent of base system capacity and peak demand would increase from 36 to 38 percent. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would disturb less than 11 acres of land. Construction activities would be conducted in accordance with the applicable stormwater discharge permit to control erosion and prevent sediment, debris, or other pollutants from entering the stormwater system. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in approximately 7,673 tons of C&D debris to be recycled or reused and approximately 5,115 tons to be placed in the Brooks or CDR Landfill or a combination of both. On-base mission personnel vehicle trips would decrease by approximately 2 percent. No levelof-service impacts are anticipated. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. No new construction would occur and no new personnel would arrive or decrease at any of the bases. No additional impacts to the infrastructure system at any of the bases would occur. Table 2-21. Comparative Summary of Environmental Consequences (Continued) Resource Area Altus AFB Fairchild AFB Grand Forks AFB McConnell AFB No Action FTU MOB 1 MOB 1 MOB 1 FTU MOB 1 Hazardous Materials and Waste The types of hazardous materials and wastes are consistent with those currently being utilized and generated by the KC-135 mission, but the quantities of hazardous materials used and wastes generated would increase. The quantities and types of hazardous materials used and wastes generated would increase relative to the current RPA missions, but would be consistent with those utilized and generated by the previous KC-135 mission. The types of hazardous materials and wastes are consistent with those currently being utilized and generated by the KC-135 mission, but the quantities of hazardous materials used and wastes generated would increase. The quantities and types of hazardous materials and wastes are consistent with those currently being utilized and generated by the KC- 135 mission. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. Each base would continue to use hazardous materials and dispose of hazardous waste as described for each base’s baseline conditions. The systems engineering process has eliminated halon and minimized the use of the hazardous materials hexavalent chromium and cadmium. Other hazardous materials such as trichloroethane have available alternates and would not be required for the KC-46A. The preference would be to use the least hazardous material when alternatives are available. Any structures proposed for upgrade or retrofit would be inspected for asbestos-containing materials (ACM) and lead-based paint according to established procedures. Modifications and/or additions to existing buildings would occur in proximity to existing Environmental Restoration Program (ERP) sites. Formal construction waivers are not required, but the USAF requires the review of excavation and/or construction siting and compatibility with environmental cleanup sites to be conducted and documented in accordance with current environmental impact analysis processes. During the design phase for each development project, proximity to the various types of ERP sites will be evaluated to determine if additional costs will need to be included in project estimates to maintain the proper land use controls and the groundwater monitoring well networks and to incorporate proper health and safety precautions into construction plans. Socioeconomics (all numbers are approximated) Population Overall increase in population to Jackson County from incoming military personnel, students, and family members (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors): 578 (2.2 percent increase in region of influence [ROI]). Economic Activity Total increase on-base full-time military personnel, students, DoD civilians, and contractors: 619 (15.9 percent increase of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $52 million and operating and maintenance (O&M) costs of $11 million could generate 909 jobs and $4 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing Assuming all 144 incoming fulltime military personnel would require off-base housing, the housing market in the ROI would be anticipated to support the incoming personnel. Adequate facilities on and off base are available to support the incoming students. Education An estimated 140 military dependents of school age would enter any of the six school districts in Jackson County.  Population Overall increase in population to Jackson County from incoming military personnel and family members (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors): 4,917 (18.6 percent increase in ROI). Economic Activity Total increase on-base full-time military personnel, DoD civilians, and contractors: 1,922 (49 percent increase of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $400 million could generate 5,628 jobs and $24 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing The housing market in the ROI and surrounding communities within adjacent counties would be anticipated to support the incoming personnel. An HRMA would be required. Education An estimated 1,826 military dependents of school-age would enter any of the six school districts in Jackson County or surrounding communities based upon where incoming military personnel reside. Public Services Although this scenario would increase the demand for public services, because of the need for additional housing, some of the incoming personnel might reside in surrounding counties where additional public services are available. Population Overall increase in population to Spokane County from incoming military personnel and family members associated with the KC- 46A MOB 1 scenario and the drawdown of military personnel and family members associated with the KC-135 (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Guardsmen, or contractors): 1,095 (0.2 percent increase in ROI). Economic Activity Total increase on-base full-time military personnel, DoD civilians, and contractors: 438 (9.7 percent increase of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $292 million could generate 3,022 jobs and $65.5 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing Assuming all 1,656 incoming fulltime military personnel associated with KC-46A would require offbase housing, and all 1,239 outgoing full-time military personnel associated with KC-135 would depart from off-base housing, the housing market in the ROI would be anticipated to support the change in personnel. An HRMA would be required. Education An estimated 407 military dependents of school age would be anticipated to enter the Spokane Public School District. Population Overall increase in population to Grand Forks County from incoming military personnel and family members (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Guardsmen, or contractors): 4,526 (6.8 percent increase in ROI). Economic Activity Total increase on-base full-time military personnel, DoD civilians, and contractors: 1,747 (69 percent increase of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $345 million could generate 4,326 jobs and $51 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing Assuming all 1,724 incoming fulltime military personnel would require off-base housing, the housing market in the ROI would be anticipated to support the incoming personnel. An HRMA would be required. Education Approximately 1,681 military and non-military dependents of school age would enter any of the nine public school districts in Grand Forks County. Public Services The increase in the county population would slightly impact police, fire, or other services and could require additional manpower to support the incoming population. Population Overall increase in population to Sedgwick County from incoming military personnel and family members and students (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors): 570 (0.2 percent increase in ROI). Economic Activity Total increase on-base full-time military personnel, DoD civilians, students, and contractors: 679 (15.6 percent increase of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $150 million and O&M costs of $16 million could generate 2,182 jobs and $35 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing Assuming all 141 incoming fulltime military personnel would require off-base housing, the housing market in the ROI would be anticipated to support the incoming personnel. Adequate facilities on and off base are available to support the incoming students. Education Approximately 137 military dependents of school age would enter any of the 10 public school districts in Sedgwick County. Public Services Public services would be anticipated to support the incoming population. Population Overall decrease in population to Sedgwick County from incoming military personnel and family members associated with the KC- 46A MOB 1 scenario and the drawdown of military personnel and family members associated with the KC-135 (does not include DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors): -291 (0.1 percent decrease in ROI). Economic Activity Total change of on-base full-time military personnel, DoD civilians and contractors: -77 (1.8 percent decrease of on-base jobs). Total construction costs of $260 million could generate 3,404 jobs and $54 million in indirect and induced income for the duration of the construction activity. Housing Assuming all 1,809 incoming fulltime military personnel associated with KC-46A would require offbase housing, and all 1,920 outgoing full-time military personnel associated with KC-135 would depart from off-base housing, the housing market in the ROI would be anticipated to support the change in personnel. An HRMA would be required. Education Approximately 108 military dependents of school age would no longer attend the county schools.  Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions would remain as is. No new personnel increases or decreases would occur at any of the bases and none of the bases would receive the benefits of a population increase. No construction would occur and therefore no construction related beneficial expenditures would occur. Table 2-21. Comparative Summary of Environmental Consequences (Continued) Resource Area Altus AFB Fairchild AFB Grand Forks AFB McConnell AFB No Action FTU MOB 1 MOB 1 MOB 1 FTU MOB 1 Socioeconomics (Continued) (all numbers are approximated) Public Services Demand for public services in Jackson County has increased for several years and would continue to increase with incoming population. Base Services There are adequate infrastructure and staffing to support incoming military populations. Base Services Several Base services would require additional manpower and facilities to accommodate the incoming personnel. Public Services Public services would be anticipated to support the incoming population. Base Services Base services have adequate capacity in the CDC, housing, fitness, and dining facilities under the existing infrastructure to support the proposed MOB 1 scenario due to the drawdown of the KC-135 mission. Base Services There is adequate infrastructure and capacity to support incoming military populations. Base Services There are adequate infrastructure and staffing to support incoming military population. Public Services Public services would be anticipated to support the change in population. Base Services There are adequate infrastructure and staffing to support incoming military, particularly with the KC- 135 drawdown.  Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children Implementation of any of the scenarios at any of the bases is not anticipated to disproportionately impact any minority, low-income, or off-base children populations. Under the no action alternative, baseline conditions at each base would remain as is. There would be no environmental justice impacts or impacts to populations of children at any of the bases.  2.8 MITIGATION Mitigation measures avoid, minimize, remediate, or compensate for environmental impact. CEQ regulations (40 CFR 1508.20) define mitigation to include the following: 1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action. 2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action, and its implementation. 3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment. 4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action. 5. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments. Avoiding, minimizing, or reducing potential impacts has been a priority guiding the development of the KC-46A scenarios and aircraft operations. Mitigation measures are either built or designed into the proposed action and alternatives; applied to construction, operation, or maintenance involved in the action; or implemented as compensatory measures. Depending on which base is selected to host the FTU and MOB 1 scenarios, a variety of mitigation actions could be required. These mitigation actions would be carried forward in implementing the selected actions and would also be clearly defined in the Record of Decision (ROD). The ROD will specify the entities responsible for implementing mitigations, the timing of any mitigation, and the source of funds to implement any mitigation. Listed below are the potential mitigations that could be required at Fairchild, Grand Forks and McConnell AFBs. No mitigation actions have been identified for Altus AFB. If Fairchild AFB is selected to host the MOB 1 scenario, mitigation for adverse impacts to cultural resources could be required. The Washington State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) (Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation [DAHP]) has concurred that Building 2050, constructed in 1943, is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Should Fairchild AFB be selected to host the MOB 1 scenario, the USAF would develop an agreement with the DAHP to minimize and mitigate adverse effects. Such resolution of adverse effects usually takes the form of a Section 106 Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), which would need to be finalized prior to signature of the ROD. Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB could impact wetlands. Should Grand Forks AFB be selected for MOB 1, the USAF would work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and North Dakota State Water Commission to determine if any of the impacted wetlands are subject to regulation under Sections 401/404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). The USAF would work with regulators to determine any permit conditions, including mitigation requirements (as appropriate). Tribal consultation is ongoing and would be completed prior to signature of the ROD. If McConnell AFB is selected to host the MOB 1 scenario, mitigation for adverse impacts to cultural resources could be required. Building 1106 is proposed for demolition under the MOB 1 scenario and this building has been determined to be eligible for listing on the NRHP. The demolition of Building 1106 cannot be avoided by any reasonable modifications to the proposed alternative. Consultation with the SHPO is ongoing and the SHPO recently concurred with McConnell AFB’s eligibility and adverse effect determinations. Should this alternative be selected, McConnell AFB would enter into a MOA with the SHPO, in accordance with 36 CFR 800.6(c), to resolve those adverse effects (i.e., the demolition) and determine mitigation. The Section 106 MOA would need to be finalized prior to signature of the ROD. Following signature of the ROD, a Mitigation Plan will be prepared in accordance with 32 CFR 989.22(d). The Mitigation Plan will address specific mitigations identified and agreed to during the environmental impact analysis process. 2.9 UNAVOIDABLE IMPACTS At a few locations near the four bases, KC-46A development and aircraft operations could result in disturbance and/or noise in areas that are not currently or have not recently been subjected to these effects. Some of these impacts could be considered adverse or annoying to potentially affected individuals. Potential impacts that could occur and cannot be mitigated include the following: . With the exception of the MOB 1 scenario at McConnell AFB, an increase in the number of acres and estimated number of residents exposed to noise levels equal to or greater than 65 dB DNL would occur. . The existing capacity of regional landfills would be reduced due to the solid waste generated. . Although anticipated to be similar to what is currently or what was recently being generated at all four bases, hazardous and nonhazardous waste would be generated as a result of maintenance functions associated with the new aircraft. . Individual species would be affected by land disturbance and air operations. . Stormwater runoff and associated erosion would increase due to construction. . The level of service on a number of roadway segments could decrease. . There is potential for an increase in the number of bird/wildlife-aircraft strikes and aircraft mishaps resulting from the increased number of annual operations.  5.0 CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AND IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) regulations stipulate that the cumulative effects analysis in an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) should consider the potential environmental consequences resulting from “the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency (Federal or non- Federal) or person undertakes such other actions” (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1508.7). Actions that have a potential to interact with the KC-46A beddown scenarios at each of the four bases are included in this cumulative effects analysis. This approach enables decision makers to have the most current information available so that they can evaluate the range of environmental consequences that would result from the beddown of KC-46A aircraft, infrastructure, and personnel at these locations. Although known construction and upgrades are a part of the analysis contained in this document, potential future requirements of the KC-46A beddown cannot be predicted. As those requirements surface, future National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) analysis would be conducted, as required. In this chapter, the U.S. Air Force (USAF) has identified past and present actions in the region of each of the four bases that have been selected as alternatives to host either the Formal Training Unit (FTU) or First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) scenarios. In addition, this analysis also evaluated reasonably foreseeable future actions that are in the planning phase in the regions surrounding Altus Air Force Base (AFB) in Oklahoma, Fairchild AFB in Washington, Grand Forks AFB in North Dakota, and McConnell AFB in Kansas. Although auxiliary airfields have been identified for use by KC-46A aircrews associated with the FTU scenario at Altus and McConnell AFBs, no construction, ground disturbance, or other activities beyond flight operations are proposed for those locations; therefore, cumulative effects are not evaluated for any of the auxiliary airfields. The assessment of cumulative effects begins with defining the scope of other project actions and the potential interrelationship with the proposed action (CEQ 1997). The scope of the analysis must consider other projects that coincide with the location and timetable of implementation of the proposed KC-46A beddown scenarios at each base. Cumulative effects can arise from single or multiple actions and through additive or interactive processes acting individually or in combination with each other. Actions that are not part of the proposal, but that could be considered as actions connected in time or space (40 CFR 1508.25) (CEQ 1997) could include projects that affect areas on or near any of the four bases identified as alternatives for either the FTU or MOB 1 KC-46A scenarios. This EIS analysis addresses three questions to identify cumulative effects: 1. Does a relationship exist such that elements of the proposed action or alternatives might interact with elements of past, present, or reasonably foreseeable actions? 2. If one or more of the elements of the alternatives and another action could be expected to interact, would the alternative affect or be affected by impacts of the other action? 3. If such a relationship exists, does an assessment reveal any potentially significant impacts not identified when the alternative is considered alone? For the scenarios under consideration to have a cumulatively significant impact on an environmental resource, two conditions must be met. First, the combined impacts of all identified past, present, and reasonably foreseeable projects, activities, and processes on a resource, including the impacts of the proposed action, must be significant. Second, the proposed action must make a substantial contribution to that significant cumulative impact. Proposed actions of limited scope do not typically require as comprehensive an assessment of cumulative impacts as proposed actions that have significant environmental impacts over a large area (CEQ 2005). In the sections below, the cumulative significance is based on the context, intensity and timing of the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios, as discussed in Chapter 4, related to the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. For each base, a summary of the cumulative effects is provided in a table, followed by a discussion of the resource areas that have potentially significant cumulative effects based on the above evaluation criteria. 5.1 ALTUS AIR FORCE BASE (FTU OR MOB 1) CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AND IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES 5.1.1 Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions This section provides decision makers with the cumulative effects of the proposed FTU or MOB 1 scenario at Altus AFB, as well as the incremental contribution of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. Altus AFB has been identified by the USAF as the Preferred Alternative for the FTU scenario but also remains an alternative for the MOB 1 scenario. Table 5-1 summarizes past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions within the region that could interact with implementation of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario at Altus AFB. The table briefly describes each identified action, presents the proponent or jurisdiction of the action and the timeframe (e.g., past, present/ongoing, future), and indicates which resources potentially interact with the KC-46A scenarios at Altus AFB. No other actions were identified during the data gathering and field survey phases at Altus AFB for this EIS. Past activities are those actions that occurred within the geographic scope of cumulative effects that have shaped the current environmental conditions of the project area. Originally named Altus Army Airfield, the base was constructed in 1942, with military personnel and aircraft arriving in 1943. Altus AFB is currently home to the 97th Air Mobility Wing and supports four major units: the 97th Operations Group, the 97th Mission Support Group, the 97th Maintenance Directorate, and the 97th Medical Group (Altus AFB 2009c). For most resource areas, such as soils and water, biological resources, infrastructure, and hazardous materials and waste, the impacts of past actions are now part of the existing environment and are incorporated in the description of the affected environment in Chapter 3. Table 5-1. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Altus AFB and Associated Region Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions General Plan, Altus Air Force Base, Oklahoma (Altus AFB 2003) Air Education and Training Command, Altus AFB Present, future The Altus AFB General Plan provides the Base Commander and other decision makers a picture of Altus AFB’s present and future capability to support its mission with its physical assets and delivery systems. It is a concise, stand-alone document, summarizing information from a variety of sources. It serves as a guide for site-specific future development and provides general background information in land use growth patterns. Its illustrative format provides decision makers with an understanding of the character and structure of the base. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Final Environmental Assessment, General Plan-Based Environmental Impact Analysis Process (Altus AFB2009c) Air Education and Training Command, Altus AFB Present, future The 97 Civil Engineer Squadron at Altus AFB has planned future base development based upon the Capital Improvements Program contained within the current Altus AFB General Plan. The purpose of the proposed and alternative actions is to construct, renovate, demolish, and operate facilities and infrastructure to support current and potential future training levels at Altus AFB and to improve the effectiveness of training; enhance quality of life; replace old, inadequate facilities; and correct current deficiencies. The proposed and alternative actions provide a range of construction, renovation, and demolition projects to support a higher level of planned mission activity. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics, Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children Sikorsky Training Academy (Sikorsky 2013) Sikorsky Aerospace Services Present, future Projected to launch in 2013, the academy will initially focus on meeting the needs of foreign militaries using the Black Hawk helicopter as the training platform. Altus, Oklahoma, located near Fort Sill in Lawton, Oklahoma, provides the training academy with access to several hundred square miles of operating space, certified landing areas, and certified night vision routes. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics  Table 5-1. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Altus AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction State and Local Actions City of Altus Comprehensive Plan 2025 (City of Altus 2004) City of Altus, Oklahoma Present, future The Altus Comprehensive Plan provides a framework for longrange planning of Altus and its 3.mile City.County planning area. It provides a broad context in which local decisions may be made to foster a sustainable environment, a prosperous economy, and a high quality of life for all residents. It balances population, housing, and employment growth with the preservation of open space and prime agricultural lands, as well as infrastructure needs. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics Altus AFB Joint Land Use Study (BD&Co 1999) City of Altus and Jackson County, Oklahoma Present, future The Joint Land Use Study (JLUS) is a collaborative land use planning effort involving a military base and adjacent local governments. The study evaluates the planning rationale necessary to support and encourage compatible land use development surrounding the base. Its purpose is to provide support to sustain and provide flexibility to military missions on the base while guiding the long.term land use needs of the neighboring counties and communities. Noise, Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics  5.1.2 Cumulative Effects This section evaluates the cumulative effects from the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (see Table 5-1) and the KC-46A scenarios at Altus AFB. Table 5-2 provides a summary of the cumulative effects. As shown in Table 5-2, air quality, safety, biological resources, cultural resources, land use, hazardous materials and waste, and environmental justice and the protection of children are not anticipated to contribute to cumulative effects. Cumulative effects are discussed for noise, soils and water, infrastructure, and socioeconomics. Table 5-2. Summary of Cumulative Effects for Altus AFB Resource Area KC-46A FTU Scenarioa KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Past, Present, and Foreseeable Actions Cumulative Effects Noise . . . . Air Quality . . . . Safety . . . . Soils and Water . . . . Biological Resources . . . . Cultural Resources . . . . Land Use . . . . Infrastructure . . . . Hazardous Materials and Waste . . . . Socioeconomics . . . . Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children . . . . a KC-46A FTU scenario is considered under the Preferred Alternative. Key: . – not affected or beneficial impacts, . – affected but not significant, short to medium term, impacts that range from low to high intensity, . – significant impacts, that are high in intensity or are long term. 5.1.2.1 Noise Implementation of the FTU or MOB 1 scenario would incrementally increase noise levels on and near Altus AFB. Noise impacts are described in Section 4.1.1. Construction and demolition (C&D) activities in the vicinity of the project locations, in combination with C&D activities proposed as part of the Altus AFB General Plan (GP), are expected to result only in short-term intermittent increases in noise levels during that phase of work (Altus AFB 2009c). Potential additional contributions to cumulative noise effects from Sikorsky Training Academy (STA) operations are also a consideration. Sikorsky Aerospace Services, a subsidiary of United Technologies Company, has announced the establishment of an advanced flight and maintenance-training academy, the STA, in Altus, Oklahoma. Altus AFB has signed a Letter of Agreement (LOA) with Sikorsky Aerospace Services to establish policies and procedures for STA flights from Altus-Quartz Mountain Regional Airport while utilizing airspace in and around Altus AFB. The LOA specifically states that these aircraft will need to deconflict the military training routes near Altus AFB. This academy is expected to begin operating in 2013 with the use of Black Hawk helicopter training outside of Altus AFB in parts of the City of Altus and Jackson County. The academy would focus primarily on training U.S. Army, other agency, and Allied country helicopter pilots. Aircraft associated with the STA could use the same airspace used by KC-46A aircrews; provisions of the LOA, local flying procedures, and Federal Aviation Administration controls would reduce the possibility of the STA resulting in cumulative adverse effects. Although it is anticipated that some level of noise would result from the helicopter training associated with the STA, the number, type, and location of sorties are not known at this time. Therefore, potential additional noise impacts on receptors near Altus AFB due to STA operations alone or STA operations in combination with KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario operations are unknown. Close coordination between the STA, the City of Altus, and the USAF would reduce the potential for cumulative effects. Implementation of the proposed action would not be expected to result in any significant cumulative noise effects in combination with other past, present, or reasonably foreseeable actions. 5.1.2.2 Soils and Water The Altus General Plan Environmental Assessment (GPEA) identified one project (proposed construction activities associated with Runway 17L/35R) that had the potential for minor adverse impacts on floodplains. The GPEA concluded the action would only involve replacing the existing asphaltic cement surface of the runway with granitic concrete. During this activity, the existing elevations and floodplain environment would be preserved, allowing for no impact on the existing floodplain. Any potential impacts on floodplains are not anticipated to be significant and would be reduced to the maximum extent practicable through project design and implementation of environmental protection measures (Altus AFB 2009c). No other projects with potential soils and water impacts were identified at Altus AFB and no cumulative effects associated with soil and water resources are anticipated. 5.1.2.3 Infrastructure The FTU and MOB 1 scenarios would require additional facility C&D when considered in combination with the Altus AFB GP and the associated impacts identified in the Altus GPEA. The FTU would require the construction of new facilities, renovation/ alteration/additions to existing facilities, and demolition of facilities. The MOB 1 scenario would require more development than the FTU scenario. The Altus GPEA analyzed a Potential Development Alternative (PDA) that was selected as the preferred alternative for future development at Altus AFB. The PDA represents a broader approach to base and mission development at Altus AFB. Under the PDA, Altus AFB would be developed up to 75 percent of its potential, which is a level substantially higher than the current development. This would equate to the development of approximately 384 acres of on-base land, resulting in approximately 695,538 square feet of additional facility space and 93 acres of additional impervious cover on the base (Altus AFB 2009c). The potential for cumulative effects associated with conflicts between either of the KC-46A scenarios and proposed Installation Development Plan (IDP) projects at Altus AFB could be offset by coordinating and including the KC-46A mission in the USAF comprehensive planning process with Air Mobility Command (AMC). Not all of the projects proposed under the PDA are approved or funded and would not be completed in the same timeframe as the projects identified for either of the KC-46A scenarios. The total disturbance area associated with the FTU would be less than five acres, but the total disturbance area associated with the MOB 1 would be less than 80 acres. The impervious surface created as part of the FTU scenario would not be significant, but the impervious surface created for the MOB 1 scenario for aircraft parking could be significant if stormwater controls are not included in project designs and construction plans when included with other proposed base development. All C&D activities generally would be expected to result in short-term job creation and materials procurement. These types of short-term, construction-related benefits would occur regardless of project location. Sound engineering and management practices would minimize the potential for cumulative effects during and following construction. 5.1.2.4 Socioeconomics Any present or future actions that would involve an in- or out-migration of people to the area would create a cumulative impact on housing, economic activity (in the form of construction, employment, and earnings), educational facilities and staffing, and public and base services. Construction activities typically provide a beneficial economic impact on the area but are shortterm for the duration of the project. However, many short-term projects occurring throughout the years provide a cumulative beneficial economic impact over the long-term. Regionally, Altus AFB is located in Jackson County adjacent to the City of Altus. These municipalities have comprehensive plans, capital improvement plans, transportation plans, and other plans that guide future development activities, including formal coordination with the base in the form of the Altus AFB Joint Land Use Study (JLUS), approved by the city and county in 1999. In accordance with the JLUS, the communities surrounding Altus AFB seek to avoid encroachment issues with the base through appropriate land use surrounding the base, zoning, building height restrictions, avoiding clear zone (CZ) and accident potential zone (APZ) areas, and minimizing residential and other incompatible development. The Altus GPEA indicated that the PDA for the new development to support the increase in mission activities would also result in beneficial impacts on the local economy. Socioeconomic benefits go beyond the direct change in military personnel and have an extended, or multiplier, effect upon regional employment and economic activity. Any new future missions required to support the FTU or MOB 1 scenario would require separate USAF comprehensive planning and NEPA analysis. Other than the proposed STA, which is expected to create approximately 50 new jobs, no major new or planned development activities were identified in the Altus area that could combine with the KC-46A beddown scenarios to potentially result in cumulative socioeconomic impacts. While it is unknown whether any of these jobs would involve new employees relocating to the Altus area, no significant adverse impacts are expected in combination with the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario. 5.1.3 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources The irreversible environmental changes that would result from implementation of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario at Altus AFB involve the consumption of material resources and energy resources. The use of these resources is considered to be permanent. Irreversible and irretrievable resource commitments are related to the use of nonrenewable resources and the impacts that use of these resources will have on future generations. Irreversible impacts primarily result from use or destruction of a specific resource that cannot be replaced within a reasonable timeframe (e.g., energy and minerals). Irretrievable resource commitments also involve the loss in value of an affected resource that cannot be restored as a result of the action. For the beddown of KC-46A aircraft at Altus AFB for either the FTU or MOB 1 scenario, most resource commitments are neither irreversible nor irretrievable. Most impacts are short term and temporary, such as air emissions from construction, or longer lasting but negligible, such as the construction of new homes to support new KC-46A personnel increases on base or in the local communities. Those limited resources that could involve a possible irreversible or irretrievable commitment would be used in a beneficial manner. Construction and renovation of base facilities and infrastructure would require the consumption of limited amounts of material typically associated with interior renovations (wiring, insulation, windows, drywall) and exterior construction (concrete, steel, sand, mortar, brick, asphalt). An undetermined amount of energy to conduct renovation, construction, and operation of these facilities would be expended and irreversibly lost but would be used in an efficient and sustainable manner over the useful life cycle of the facilities. Training operations would continue to involve the consumption of nonrenewable resources, such as gasoline used in vehicles and jet fuel used in the KC-46A aircraft and other aircraft while in flight. None of these activities are expected to significantly decrease the availability of minerals or petroleum resources. Personal vehicle use by the new personnel and those continuing to support the existing missions would consume fuel, oil, and lubricants. The amount of these materials used would increase slightly; however, this additional use is not expected to significantly affect the availability of the resources in the southwestern Oklahoma region or nationally. THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 5.2 FAIRCHILD AIR FORCE BASE (MOB 1) CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AND IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES 5.2.1 Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions This section provides decision makers with the cumulative effects of the proposed KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Fairchild AFB, as well as the incremental contribution of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. Table 5-3 summarizes past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions within the region that could interact with the implementation of the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Fairchild AFB. The table briefly describes each identified action, presents the proponent or jurisdiction of the action and the timeframe (e.g., past, present/ongoing, future), and indicates which resources potentially interact with the proposed KC-46A MOB 1 scenario. No other actions were identified during the data gathering and field survey phases at Fairchild AFB for this EIS. Past activities are those actions that occurred within the geographic scope of cumulative effects that have shaped the current environmental conditions of the project area. Fairchild AFB was constructed in 1942 and named the Spokane Air Depot while it served as a repair depot for damaged aircraft during World War II. The base has increased more than three times in size since its initial construction, and the facilities and infrastructure have undergone several major periods of construction and reconstruction to accommodate student training loads and new missions and commands (USAF 2012b). For most resource areas, such as soils and water, biological resources, infrastructure, and hazardous materials and waste, the impacts of past actions are now part of the existing environment and are incorporated in the description of the affected environment in Chapter 3. Table 5-3. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Fairchild AFB and Associated Region Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions Fairchild AFB General Plan 2010 (currently in the process of being updated to an Installation Development Plan in accordance with revised USAF Comprehensive Planning guidelines) (Fairchild AFB 2010a) Air Mobility Command, Fairchild AFB Present, future The Fairchild GP has been developed to provide a strategy for the continued physical development of Fairchild AFB in support of the base’s current air refueling mission and prospective additional missions. The GP provides a vision for future development of the base and considers creative solutions, as well as forthcoming challenges. It is a stand-alone document prepared to respond to the USAF’s commitment to planning for future and sustainable development and protecting the environment. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Final Environmental Assessment of Installation Development at Fairchild Air Force Base, Washington (2013) (USAF 2012b) Air Mobility Command, Fairchild AFB Present, future Fairchild AFB seeks to improve its understanding of the potential environmental consequences associated with the continuing base development process. The proposed action is to implement a range of selected projects, such as demolition of aging facilities, new facility construction, facility upgrades, facility repair and renovation, utilities upgrades, community living upgrades, infrastructure improvements, recreational upgrades, natural infrastructure management, and strategic sustainability performance projects, that would be among those proposed to be completed or implemented during the next 5 years (from Fiscal Year 2013 to Fiscal Year 2018). Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics, Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children Environmental Assessment, Demolition of Hangars, Fairchild Air Force Base, Washington (2012) (Fairchild AFB 2012d) Air Mobility Command, Fairchild AFB Present, future The purpose of the proposed action is to comply with a USAF Headquarters directive, requiring bases to “reduce their physical infrastructure by 20 percent by 2020.” Fairchild AFB is working toward this goal by finding excess space that is not economical to restore for other purposes and programming it for demolition. The proposed action will demolish 5 hangars on the airfield, leaving 18 hangars in place. The current missions at Fairchild AFB are authorized 7 hangars, so the proposed action would demolish 5 and leave 11 excess hangars on the airfield for future phases of demolition. Cultural Resources, Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste Environmental Assessment, Demolition of Munitions Area Storage Facilities, Fairchild AFB, Washington (Fairchild AFB 2011h) Air Mobility Command, Fairchild AFB Present, future The purpose of this action is to demolish six facilities in the Munitions Storage Area at Fairchild AFB. These facilities were constructed between 1952 and 1956. Currently, these facilities are not considered mission critical and are empty or underutilized. The unique construction and infrastructure of these facilities, as well as their location in a limited access area, would make it difficult to rehabilitate or renovate these facilities for another purpose. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste  Environmental Assessment, Expansion of RV Storage Lot, Fairchild AFB, Washington (Fairchild AFB 2011i) Air Mobility Command, Fairchild AFB Present, future The purpose of this action is to provide more parking to the RV Storage Lot, run -by Recreational Services. This service provides nearby parking of RVs for Airmen at Fairchild AFB at a lower rate than in the local area. The RV Storage Lot is located on the northwest side of Fairchild AFB behind the Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricants storage area. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste Table 5-3. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Fairchild AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Non-Military Federal Actions Final Environmental Impact Statement, Spokane Tribe of Indians, West Plains Casino and Mixed-Use Development Project, City of Airway Heights, Spokane County, Washington (BIA 2013) Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Spokane Tribe of Indians Future The EIS has been prepared by the BIA as the lead Federal agency pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act to assess the environmental effects of issuing a two-part determination under Section 20 of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (proposed action), and the subsequent proposed development discussed below. The purpose of the proposed action is to advance the BIA’s “Self Determination” policy of promoting the tribe’s self-governance capability, and to promote opportunities for economic development and selfsufficiency of the tribe and its members. The Spokane Tribe of Indians is in the planning stages of developing the West Plains Casino and Mixed-Use Development Project. The tribe has identified a 145-acre site held in Federal Trust for the tribe in the City of Airway Heights, Spokane County, Washington. The proposed project site is located immediately northwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 2 (U.S. 2) and Craig Road. The site is located approximately 1.5 miles east of the main entrance gate of Fairchild AFB on U.S. 2. The proposed project consists of the development of a casino-resort facility, a 300-room hotel, parking structure, site retail, commercial building, tribal cultural center, and police/fire station within the project site. The hotel tower would not exceed 145 feet above ground level. Access to the project site would be provided along U.S. 2 and Craig Road. Noise, Safety, Land Use, Infrastructure  State and Local Actions Fairchild Air Force Base Joint Land Use Study (JLUS) (2009) (Spokane County 2009) Spokane County, Washington Present, future The JLUS is a collaborative land use planning effort involving a military base and adjacent local governments. The study evaluates the planning rationale necessary to support and encourage compatible land use development surrounding the base. Its purpose is to provide support to sustain and provide flexibility to military missions on the base while guiding the long.term land use needs of the neighboring counties and communities. Noise, Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics  Spokane Metropolitan Planning Area 2011–2035 Metropolitan Transportation Plan (City of Spokane 2012) City of Spokane, Washington Spokane Regional Transportation Council Present, future The Metropolitan Transportation Plan is a long-range, multimodal plan that provides a blueprint to address transportation issues and needs through the year 2035. All major transportation modes are incorporated into the plan, including highways and streets, public transportation, airports, freight and goods movement, and bicycle and pedestrian transportation. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics Washington State Department of Transportation 2012–2015 State Transportation Improvement Program (WA DOT 2012) Washington State Department of Transportation Present, future The 2012–2015 State Transportation Improvement Program is a 4-year, fiscally constrained prioritized program of transportation projects, compiled from local and regional plans, along with the Washington Transportation Plan. These projects have been identified through state, regional, and local planning processes as the highest priority for the available funding to preserve and improve the state’s transportation network. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics 5.2.2 Cumulative Effects This section evaluates the cumulative effects from the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (see Table 5-3) and the KC-46A scenario at Fairchild AFB. Table 5-4 provides a summary of the cumulative effects. As shown in Table 5-4, air quality, safety, soils and water, biological resources, hazardous materials and waste, and environmental justice and protection of children are not anticipated to contribute to cumulative effects. Cumulative effects are discussed for noise, cultural resources, land use, infrastructure, and socioeconomics. Table 5-4. Summary of Cumulative Effects for Fairchild AFB Resource Area KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Past, Present, and Foreseeable Actions Cumulative Effects Noise . . . Air Quality . . . Safety . . . Soils and Water . . . Biological Resources . . . Cultural Resources . . . Land Use . . . Infrastructure . . . Hazardous Materials and Waste . . . Socioeconomics . . . Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children . . . Key: . – not affected or beneficial impacts, . – affected but not significant, short to medium term, impacts that range from low to high intensity, . – significant impacts, that are high in intensity or are long term. 5.2.2.1 Noise Under the MOB 1 scenario, noise levels on and near the base would increase slightly. Only short-term, minor, adverse impacts would occur during the construction phase of other military actions identified in Table 5-3. Because the resulting impacts would be low in intensity and short-term, they would not contribute to a significant cumulative effect. 5.2.2.2 Cultural Resources As discussed in Chapter 4, implementation of the MOB 1 scenario at Fairchild AFB would adversely impact one building eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). To minimize the contribution to cumulative effects on cultural resources coordination with the Washington State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) would be required. Additionally, the demolition projects proposed under the Fairchild AFB IDEA would contribute to cumulative effects on cultural resources (Fairchild AFB 2012d; USAF 2012b). Fairchild AFB, in coordination with the Washington SHPO, developed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for the demolition of structures eligible for listing in the NRHP. In accordance with the MOA, the USAF would ensure that stipulations listed in the MOA are implemented for demolition of historic structures to mitigate adverse impacts. Although the demolitions would be an adverse effect, as with the Fairchild AFB IDEA projects, completion of actions required by the MOA would minimize the potential for cumulative effects to cultural resources. 5.2.2.3 Land Use Implementation of the MOB 1 scenario would result in low intensity impacts from increased number of air operations because of existing incompatible residential and unspecified commercial and industrial zoning in the APZs. Continued coordination with local zoning authority to refine land use restrictions in airport overlay district would reduce the potential for cumulative effects therefore there would be no significant cumulative effects on land use. Encroachment by potentially incompatible land use from the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future projects (included in Table 5-3) have potential to additionally contribute to cumulative land use impacts. Fairchild AFB would need to continue coordinating with Spokane County, the Spokane Tribe, and developers to adopt planning and zoning regulations that ensure compatibility between local development and the USAF mission and minimize cumulative land use effects. 5.2.2.4 Infrastructure The new MOB 1 scenario proposed for Fairchild AFB would require additional facility C&D above what was included in the existing Fairchild AFB GP, the associated impacts identified in the Fairchild AFB IDEA, and other recent infrastructure-type NEPA actions proposed for Fairchild AFB in Table 5-3. The projects identified in the Fairchild AFB GP and the other proposed infrastructure projects include new construction, infrastructure improvements, natural infrastructure management, strategic sustainability performance, and demolition of facilities (USAF 2012b). The potential for cumulative effects associated with conflicts between the MOB 1 scenario and proposed IDP projects at Fairchild AFB can be off-set by coordinating and including the proposed mission in the USAF comprehensive planning process with AMC. All C&D activities generally would be expected to result in short-term job creation and materials procurement. These types of short-term, construction-related benefits would occur regardless of project location and are not constraints to base development or contributions to significant cumulative effects. Sound engineering and management practices would minimize the potential for cumulative effects during and following construction. Additional impervious surface on the base from the proposed Fairchild AFB GP and other infrastructure projects would require appropriate stormwater system improvements. The personnel increase during the long-term operational phase, as discussed in Chapter 4, would not contribute to significant cumulative effects because the local and regional road network would have sufficient capacity. Traffic associated with implementation of the West Plains Casino and Mixed-Use Development Project has the potential to combine with the construction and mission personnel traffic and could result in the potential for impacts on vehicular transportation roadway network traffic and circulation patterns in the immediate area of the proposed casino development site and Fairchild AFB. The severity of the impacts would depend on the traffic mix of the base and the casino during peak hour periods. The BIA EIS projected that the casino would result in significant cumulative traffic and circulation impacts on roadways and intersections in the forecast year of 2032 without mitigation measures. The impacts would include the potential to impact traffic to and from the base and traffic in general for all base personnel and their dependents. The BIA EIS identified a number of mitigation measures to reduce significant cumulative traffic and circulation impacts. Based on an Intergovernmental Agreement among the Spokane Tribe of Indians, the City of Airway Heights, and Spokane County, the tribe developed a Traffic Impact Analysis that includes a number of roadway and intersection improvement projects to improve traffic capacity, circulation, flow, and efficiency through the maximum casino complex build-out phase in 2019 (BIA 2013). 5.2.2.5 Socioeconomics Any present or future actions that would involve an in- or out-migration of people to the area would create a cumulative impact on housing, economic activity (in the form of construction, employment, and earnings), educational facilities and staffing, and public and base services. Construction activities typically provide a beneficial economic impact on the area but are shortterm for the duration of the project. However, many short-term projects occurring throughout the years provide a cumulative beneficial economic impact over the long-term. The proposed West Plains Casino and Mixed-Use Development Project has the potential to combine with the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario to result in both beneficial and potential adverse cumulative socioeconomic effects. The BIA EIS estimates that the casino complex would create approximately 2,805 jobs, generate $141.2 million in annual revenues, and attract 2,823,056 patrons annually under full build-out conditions associated with the maximum build alternative (i.e., Alternative 1) (BIA 2013). The KC-46A MOB 1 scenario and West Plains Casino and Mixed-Use Development Project, in combination, would add substantial new direct and indirect revenue-generating capacity to regional municipalities and Spokane County. If a large number of relocations were associated with both the KC-46A beddown and the casino complex, there could be a shortage of suitable housing. Personnel and families associated with the proposed MOB 1 scenario would require on- or off-base housing. However, for the casino complex, it is anticipated that the majority of employees would come from the Spokane County region and that a large relocation of employees would not occur. Therefore, existing housing would be adequate, resulting in no cumulative contribution. Strategies to minimize cumulative effects to socioeconomics could include implementation of comprehensive plans, capital improvement plans, transportation plans, and other plans that guide future development activities, including formal coordination with the base in the form of a JLUS between the base and Spokane County. 5.2.3 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources The irreversible environmental changes and irretrievable commitment of resources that would result from implementation of the new scenario at Fairchild AFB would be similar in nature and have similar characteristics to those identified for Altus AFB in Section 5.1.3. 5.3 GRAND FORKS AFB (MOB 1) CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AND IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES 5.3.1 Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions This section provides decision makers with the cumulative effects of the proposed KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB, as well as the incremental contribution of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. Table 5-5 summarizes past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions within the region that could interact with implementation of the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB. The table briefly describes each identified action, presents the proponent or jurisdiction of the action and the timeframe (e.g., past, present/ongoing, future), and indicates which resources could potentially interact with the proposed new KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB. No other actions were identified during the data gathering and field survey phases at Grand Forks AFB for this EIS. Past activities are those actions that occurred within the geographic scope of cumulative effects that have shaped the current environmental conditions of the project area. Grand Forks AFB was established in 1954 when the USAF announced plans to build an Air Defense Command fighterinterceptor base in eastern North Dakota. The 2005 Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) directed the realignment of all KC-135 aircraft to other AFBs. In December 2010, Air Combat Command initiated RQ-4 Global Hawk operations and the 119th Air Base Wing (ABW) initiated MQ-1 Predator operations in fulfillment of the 2005 BRAC recommendation for future operations at Grand Forks AFB (Grand Forks AFB 2010b). For most resource areas, such as soils and water, biological resources, infrastructure, and hazardous materials and waste, the impacts of past actions are now part of the existing environment and are incorporated in the description of the affected environment in Chapter 3. Table 5-5. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Grand Forks AFB and Associated Region Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions FY 2013–FY 2014 Project List, 319th Civil Engineering Center, Grand Forks AFB (Grand Forks AFB 2013a) Air Mobility Command, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The Fiscal Year 2013–Fiscal Year 2014 Project List includes project number, title, status, and programmed amounts for 76 projects. Infrastructure Capital Improvements Plan, Grand Forks AFB, Fiscal Year 2014–Fiscal Year 2024 (Grand Forks AFB 2013b) Air Mobility Command, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The Capital Improvements Plan for Grand Forks AFB during FY 2014–FY 2024 includes program, title, and scope for 49 projects. Infrastructure Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technology Park and Training Program, Enhanced Use Lease Project at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2013c) Grand Forks Base Realignment Impact Committee, University of North Dakota, University of North Dakota Aerospace Foundation, Northland Aerospace Foundation, and Northrup Grumman Present, future The Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) technology park would support the base’s UAS activities, which are conducted by the USAF, the North Dakota Air National Guard, and the U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Northrop Grumman, which has an office in Grand Forks, manufactures the RQ-4 Global Hawk reconnaissance aircraft system, which is flown from the base. These assets would train in Special Use Airspace (SUA) and utilize R-5401/Camp Grafton South, North Dakota. In order to provide adequate training airspace, new SUA Restricted Areas (RAs) or other suitable airspace as determined by FAA would be established. Noise, Safety, Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics Final Environmental Assessment Addressing the Privatization of Military Family Housing at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2011d) Air Mobility Command, Air Force Civil Engineer Center, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The purpose of the proposed action is to vest responsibility in a private developer for military family housing at Grand Forks AFB. The need for the proposed action is to provide affordable, quality housing and ancillary facilities to military members and their families through demolition of surplus, inadequate units and renovation of existing family housing units so that they meet current USAF standards. The goal of the Northern Military Housing Privatization Initiative is to provide uniformed services members and their families access to safe, secure, quality, affordable, well-maintained housing in a military community where they choose to live. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure,  Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Table 5-5. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Grand Forks AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions (Continued) Final Environmental Assessment of Installation Development at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2010b) Air Mobility Command, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The 319th Air Refueling Wing (ARW) at Grand Forks AFB seeks to improve its understanding of the potential environmental consequences associated with the continuing base development process. The proposed action is to implement a range of selected projects, such as demolition of aging facilities, new facility construction, facility upgrades, facility repair and renovation, utilities upgrades, community living upgrades, infrastructure improvements, recreational upgrades, natural infrastructure management, and strategic sustainability performance projects that would be among those proposed to be completed or implemented during the next 5 years (from Fiscal Year 2010 to Fiscal Year 2014). Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics, Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children  Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Base Realignment and Closure Beddown and Flight Operations for Remotely Piloted Aircraft at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (USAF 2010c) Air Mobility Command, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The EIS analyzes the potential environmental consequences of a proposal to beddown, or locate, remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) at Grand Forks AFB. These assets would train in SUA and utilize R-5401/Camp Grafton South, North Dakota. To provide adequate training airspace, new SUA Restricted Areas would be established.  Noise, Safety, Land Use, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Final Environmental Assessment, Proposed Demolition of 35 Buildings Within the Munitions Storage Area at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2008c) Air Mobility Command, Air Force Civil Engineer Center, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The environmental assessment was prepared to evaluate the potential impacts of demolishing 35 buildings within the munitions storage area at Grand Forks AFB in Grand Forks County, North Dakota. The objective of the proposed action is to reduce the amount of funds currently being spent to maintain these vacant and unused buildings, and remove a potential asbestos risk. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota General Plan (GP) (Grand Forks AFB 2006a) Air Mobility Command, Grand Forks AFB Present, future The Grand Forks AFB GP guides base development according to a plan that maximizes economic, physical, and human resources and fulfills those objectives and offers guidelines for enhancing base land use, transportation, and the quality of life. This plan provides decision makers and technical staff with the best possible guidelines for planning, programming, designing, and constructing base facilities to achieve a well-planned and - constructed base. Conscientious planning ensures efficient use of resources and promotes mission success. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Table 5-5. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Grand Forks AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions (Continued) Final Environmental Assessment, Demolition of Alpha Ramp at Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2006c) Air Mobility Command, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Grand Forks AFB Present, future This environmental assessment was prepared to remove the A-Ramp facilities and infrastructure that are no longer needed; to remove excess buildings and utilities that represent sources of potential contamination; and to remove excess buildings and facilities (including walls) that are in the 7:1 flight envelope, clear zone, and 50:1 approach-departure clearance zone and require flightline waivers. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Hazardous Materials and Waste Non-Military Federal Actions Proposed Action and Air Force Form 813 to relocate CBP personnel and aircraft from Grand Forks International Airport to Grand Forks AFB (Grand Forks AFB 2013d) Department of Homeland Security, Customs and Border Protection Future The U.S. Department of Homeland Security Customs and Border Protection (CBP) has submitted a basing action request to relocate 2 aircraft (1 fixed-wing/ 1 rotary wing) and approximately 24 additional personnel from Grand Forks International Airport to Grand Forks AFB. The current CBP tenant mission is located in Building 541 and includes approximately 32 personnel and use of the MQ-9 Reaper to patrol the northern border. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Infrastructure State and Local Actions Center to Grand Forks 345 kV Transmission Line Project, Minnkota Power Cooperative, Inc. (MPC 2013) Minnkota Power Cooperative, Inc.  Present, future Minnkota Power Cooperative, Inc. has started construction on a new transmission line to meet long-term load growth needs. The Center to Grand Forks Project helps to address the longstanding need to improve voltage support in the northern Red River Valley region. The project consists of approximately 250 miles of new, high-voltage (345-kV) alternating current transmission line from the existing Center 345-kV substation at the Milton R. Young Station located about 4.5 miles southeast of the town of Center, N.D., in Oliver County, to the existing Prairie substation located on the western boundary of the City of Grand Forks, N.D., in Grand Forks County. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics  Table 5-5. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at Grand Forks AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction State and Local Actions (Continued) City of Grand Forks, North Dakota, Year 2040 Land Use Plan (City of Grand Forks 2011) City of Grand Forks, North Dakota Present, future The Year 2040 Land Use Plan is an update to previous plans. The plan addresses Grand Forks’ jurisdictional area in the form of specific land use goals and policies. The goals and policies provide the framework that can be utilized to guide the physical growth of Grand Forks through the next three decades. Also included in the plan is a map depicting the physical growth of the city by the land use types to the year 2040. The entire Year 2040 Land Use Plan includes six sections: Existing Community; Existing Land Use; Goals, Objectives and Policies; Future Land Use; Urban Design; and Land Use and the Implementation Program. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics  Grand Forks-East Grand Forks, 2035 Long-Range Transportation Plan (GFMPO 2007) Grand Forks-East Grand Forks Metropolitan Planning Organization Present, future The Long-Range Transportation Plan is a long-range, multimodal plan that provides a blueprint to address transportation issues and needs through the year 2035. All major transportation modes are incorporated into the plan, including highways and streets, public transportation, airports, freight and goods movement, and bicycle and pedestrian transportation. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics Grand Forks-East Grand Forks, Transportation Improvement Program, North Dakota Side, Fiscal Years 2013–2016 (GFMPO 2013) Grand Forks-East Grand Forks Metropolitan Planning Organization Present, future The Final North Dakota Side Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) for the Grand Forks-East Grand Forks area lists the significant transportation system improvements to be implemented during the next 4 years. The 2013–2016 TIP is submitted under the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics North Dakota Department of Transportation 2012–2015 State Transportation Improvement Program (NDDOT 2012) North Dakota Department of Transportation Present, future The 2012–2015 State Transportation Improvement Plan is a 4-year, fiscally constrained prioritized program of transportation projects, compiled from local and regional plans, along with the North Dakota Transportation Plan. These projects have been identified through state, regional, and local planning processes as the highest priority for the available funding to improve the state’s transportation network. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics North Dakota State Rail Plan, Upper Great Plains Transportation Institute, North Dakota Department of Transportation (NDDOT 2007) Upper Great Plains Transportation Institute, North Dakota Department of Transportation Present, future This document is an update of the North Dakota State Rail Plan that was published in 1998. It provides information and guidance for state and local officials, rail users, and others affected by railroad transportation and serves as a guide for state investments in eligible rail lines and related projects. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics 5.3.2 Cumulative Effects This section evaluates the cumulative effects from the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (see Table 5-5) and the KC-46A scenarios at Grand Forks AFB. Table 5-6 provides a summary of the cumulative effects. As shown in Table 5-6, air quality, safety, soils and water, cultural resources, land use, hazardous materials and waste, and environmental justice and protection of children are not anticipated to contribute to cumulative effects. Cumulative effects are discussed for noise, biological resources, infrastructure, and socioeconomics. Table 5-6. Summary of Cumulative Effects for Grand Forks AFB Resource Area KC-46A MOB 1 Scenario Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions Cumulative Effects Noise . . . Air Quality . . . Safety . . . Soils and Water . . . Biological Resources . . . Cultural Resources . . . Land Use . . . Infrastructure . . . Hazardous Materials and Waste . . . Socioeconomics . . . Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children . . . Key: . – not affected or beneficial impacts, . – affected but not significant, short to medium term, impacts that range from low to high intensity, . – significant impacts, that are high in intensity or are long term. 5.3.2.1 Noise The existing noise environment at Grand Forks AFB includes remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) operations (USAF 2010c). The addition of KC-46A aircraft to Grand Forks AFB is not anticipated to result in significant cumulative noise effects. Noise impacts associated with construction and other actions described in Table 5-5 would be temporary and localized. Although these actions could occur in the same timeframe as actions proposed under the MOB 1 scenario, cumulative noise effects would not be expected to be significant. Other military actions identified in Table 5-5 would have similar contributions to cumulative noise levels. 5.3.2.2 Biological Resources There is the potential for up to 2 acres of wetlands to be impacted by construction activities associated with the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario. Section 404 and 401 permits and mitigation could potentially be required prior to construction. There is the potential for minor, adverse, cumulative effects on wetlands with other proposed actions in Table 5-5. . Final Environmental Assessment of Installation Development at Grand Forks Air Force Base, North Dakota (Grand Forks AFB 2010b) – This action includes minor, direct adverse impacts on wetlands from the proposed projects to construct base civil engineering pavements and maintenance facility/snow barn and to construct an indoor small arms range. However, potential cumulative effects on wetlands would not be considered significant and would be reduced to the maximum extent practicable through project design and implementation of environmental protection measures, permits, and coordination with the appropriate Federal and State of North Dakota natural resource agencies. . Final Environmental Assessment, Proposed Demolition of 35 Buildings Within the Munitions Storage Area – This action required the taking of 1.3 acres of wetlands that were fully mitigated via a regional wetland bank or at a suitable location on base. . Final Environmental Assessment, Demolition of Alpha Ramp – This action required the taking of 3.9 acres of wetlands that were fully mitigated via a regional wetland bank or at a suitable location on base. 5.3.2.3 Infrastructure The proposed KC-46A MOB 1 scenario would require additional facility C&D when considered in combination with the existing Grand Forks AFB GP, the associated impacts identified in the Grand Forks IDEA, and the other infrastructure-type NEPA actions at Grand Forks AFB in Table 5-5. The projects identified in the Grand Forks AFB GP and the other proposed infrastructure projects include new construction, infrastructure improvements, natural infrastructure management, strategic sustainability performance, and demolition of facilities (Grand Forks AFB 2010b). The potential for cumulative effects associated with conflicts between the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario and proposed GP projects at Grand Forks AFB can be offset by coordinating and including the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario in the USAF comprehensive planning process with AMC. Not all of the projects proposed in the GP are approved or funded, and these projects would not be completed in the same timeframe as the projects identified for the KC-46A MOB 1 mission. All C&D activities generally would be expected to result in short-term job creation and materials procurement. These types of short-term, construction-related benefits would occur regardless of project location and are not constraints to base development or contributions to significant cumulative effects. Sound engineering and management practices would minimize the potential for cumulative effects during and following construction. Additional impervious surface on the base from the proposed Grand Forks AFB GP and other infrastructure projects would require appropriate stormwater system improvements. Implementation of the KC-46A scenario would result in short-term, impacts during the construction phase that would be avoided or reduced through the use of a construction management plan for vehicle safety, traffic, and circulation. During the long-term operational phase, the MOB 1 scenario would bring 4,526 additional personnel to Grand Forks AFB, most of whom would be military personnel and their dependents. Regional access roads and the on-base road network have adequate capacity to absorb the additional traffic without major impacts on traffic flow, circulation, or level of service for the proposed personnel increase. Theses shortterm and long-term impacts would therefore not significantly contribute to cumulative impacts. 5.3.2.4 Socioeconomics Any present or future actions that would involve an in- or out-migration of people to the area would create a cumulative impact on housing, economic activity (in the form of construction, employment, and earnings), educational facilities and staffing, and public and base services. Construction activities typically provide a beneficial economic impact on the area but are short-term for the duration of the project. However, many short-term projects occurring throughout the years provide a cumulative beneficial economic impact over the long-term. Strategies to minimize cumulative effects on socioeconomics could include implementation of comprehensive plans, capital improvement plans, transportation plans, and other plans and coordination efforts that guide future development activities (some of which are included in Table 5-5). 5.3.3 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources The irreversible environmental changes and irretrievable commitment of resources that would result from implementation of the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario at Grand Forks AFB would be similar in nature and have similar characteristics to those identified for Altus AFB in Section 5.1.3. 5.4 McCONNELL AIR FORCE BASE (FTU AND MOB 1) CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AND IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENT OF RESOURCES 5.4.1 Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions This section provides decision makers with the cumulative effects of the proposed FTU or MOB 1 scenario at McConnell AFB, as well as the incremental contribution of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. Table 5-7 summarizes past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions within the region that could interact with implementation of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario at McConnell AFB. The table briefly describes each identified action, presents the proponent or jurisdiction of the action and the timeframe (e.g., past, present/ongoing, future), and indicates which resources potentially interact with the KC-46A scenarios at McConnell AFB. No other actions were identified during the data gathering and field survey phases at McConnell AFB for this EIS. Past activities are those actions that occurred within the geographic scope of cumulative effects that have shaped the current environmental conditions of the project area. Military operations at Wichita Municipal Airport, which became McConnell AFB, began in the early 1940s; McConnell AFB became a permanent military base in 1953. Table 5-7. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at McConnell AFB and Associated Region Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions Proposed Action and AF 813 Form to Demolish Building 1110 and repair HVAC in Buildings 1112 and 1166 (McConnell AFB 2013d) Air Mobility Command, McConnell AFB Present, Future This AF 813 Form recommended a Categorical Exclusion (CATEX) for the demolition of Building 1110. This CATEX was based on a determination that according to 32 CFR Part 989 Appendix B, exclusion A2.3.11 states that “actions similar to other actions which have been determined to have an insignificant impact in a similar setting as established in an EIS or EA resulting in a FONSI.” This determination was based on the IDEA conducted in May 2007 examining the demolition of almost 30 buildings, which resulted in a Finding of No Significant Impact. This demolition and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) repair projects were determined to be similar and less likely to result in an environmental impact; therefore, a CATEX was signed. Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Hazardous Materials and Waste Environmental Impact Statement for the Main Operating Base 2 (MOB 2) for the Beddown of the KC-46A Tanker Aircraft (ANG 2013) National Guard Bureau, Air National Guard Present, Future This EIS is evaluating the potential environmental consequences of various alternatives of bedding down KC-46A tanker aircraft, associated infrastructure, and personnel in support of the MOB 2 at existing Air National Guard (ANG) bases within the continental United States (CONUS). The MOB 2 would consist of one squadron of 12 KC-46A aircraft. The KC-46A would continue supporting the mission of providing worldwide refueling, cargo, and aeromedical evacuation support. The proposed basing alternatives for MOB 2 include: . 190 ARW, Forbes Field, Kansas . 108 Wing, Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey . 157 ARW, Pease AGS, New Hampshire . 171 ARW, Pittsburgh AGS, Pennsylvania . 121 ARW, Rickenbacker AGS, Ohio The specific focus of this reasonably foreseeable action is the 190 ARW at Forbes Field, which coincides with both the FTU and MOB 1 scenarios proposed for McConnell AFB. KC-46A aircrews associated with the FTU scenario would also utilize Forbes Field for training exercises. (See Section 2.4.4.2.4, Auxiliary Airfields). Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics, Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children   Table 5-7. Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions at McConnell AFB and Associated Region (Continued) Action Proponent/ Location Timeframe Description Resource Interaction Military Actions (Continued) Installation Development Plan, McConnell AFB (McConnell AFB 2011a) Air Mobility Command, McConnell AFB Present, future The McConnell AFB Installation Development Plan (IDP) has been developed to provide a strategy for the continued physical development of McConnell AFB in support of the base’s current air refueling mission and prospective additional missions. The IDP provides a vision for future development of the base and considers creative solutions, as well as forthcoming challenges. It is a stand-alone document prepared to respond to the USAF’s commitment to planning for future and sustainable development and protecting the environment. Soils and Water, Land Use, Infrastructure, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics Final Environmental Assessment of Installation Development at McConnell AFB (USAF 2012e) Air Mobility Command, McConnell AFB Present, future McConnell AFB seeks to improve its understanding of the potential environmental consequences associated with the continuing base development process. The proposed action is to implement a range of selected projects, such as demolition of aging facilities, new facility construction, facility upgrades, facility repair and renovation, utilities upgrades, community living upgrades, infrastructure improvements, recreational upgrades, natural infrastructure management, and strategic sustainability performance projects that would be among those proposed to be completed or implemented during the next 5 years (from Fiscal Year 2012 to Fiscal Year 2017). Noise, Air Quality, Safety, Soils and Water, Biological Resources, Cultural Resources, Land Use, Infrastructure, Transportation, Hazardous Materials and Waste, Socioeconomics, Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children State and Local Actions McConnell AFB Joint Land Use Study (JLUS) (McConnell AFB 2005) Cities of Derby and Wichita and Sedgwick County, Kansas Present, future The JLUS is a collaborative land use planning effort involving a military base and adjacent local governments. The study evaluates the planning rationale necessary to support and encourage compatible land use development surrounding the base. Its purpose is to provide support to sustain and provide flexibility to military missions on the base while guiding the long.term land use needs of the neighboring counties and communities. Noise, Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics   City of Wichita, Kansas Capital Improvement Plan, 2011–2020 (City of Wichita 2009) City of Wichita, Kansas Present, future The Capital Improvement Program budget document provides an overall 10-year plan for capital assets, as well as a 10-year plan to finance those projects. Summary information includes estimated expenditures, revenues, debt service, and total debt. Land Use, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics Wichita Transportation Improvement Program (WAMPO 2012)  Wichita Area Metropolitan Planning Organization Present, future The Transportation Improvement Program is a short.range program that identifies transportation projects to be implemented in the Wichita Area Metropolitan Planning Organization region from 2012–2016. All projects in this region that use Federal transportation funds and/or have regional significance are required to be included in the Transportation Improvement Plan. Land Use and Recreation, Infrastructure, Socioeconomics 5.4.2 Cumulative Effects This section evaluates the cumulative effects from the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions (see Table 5-7) and the KC-46A scenarios at McConnell AFB. Table 5-8 provides a summary of the cumulative effects. As shown in Table 5-8, air quality, soils and water, safety, biological resources, hazardous materials and waste, and environmental justice and protection of children are not anticipated to contribute to cumulative effects. Table 5-8. Summary of Cumulative Effects for McConnell AFB Resource Area KC-46A FTU Scenario KC-46A MOB 1 Scenarioa Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions Cumulative Effects Noise . . . . Air Quality . . . . Safety . . . . Soils and Water . . . . Biological Resources . . . . Cultural Resources . . . . Land Use . . . . Infrastructure . . . . Hazardous Materials and Waste . . . . Socioeconomics . . . . Environmental Justice and the Protection of Children . . . . a KC-46A MOB 1 scenario is considered under the Preferred Alternative. Key: . – not affected or beneficial impacts, . – affected but not significant, short to medium term, impacts that range from low to high intensity, . – significant impacts, that are high in intensity or are long term. 5.4.2.1 Noise The existing noise environment at McConnell AFB includes KC-135 operations. Implementation of the FTU or MOB 1 scenario at McConnell AFB is not anticipated to result in significant cumulative noise effects. C&D activities in the vicinity of the proposed project locations, in combination with C&D activities proposed as part of the McConnell AFB IDP, are expected to result only in short-term intermittent increases in noise levels during that phase of work (USAF 2012e). These noise impacts would not be expected to result in significant noise impacts when taken in conjunction with actions taken as part of the KC-46 FTU or MOB 1 scenario. The National Guard Bureau is preparing a separate EIS that will support an independent decision to beddown 12 KC-46A aircraft at a second MOB (MOB 2). One of the locations being considered for the MOB 2 is Forbes Field (FOE), Kansas. This action is separate and independent from the FTU and MOB 1 actions that will result from this Draft EIS; however, this action is considered in cumulative effects as addressed in Table 5-7. Under the FTU scenario, the active-duty FTU would conduct approximately 977 airfield operations per year at FOE. In the context of the 24,742 airfield operations currently ongoing at FOE, this addition would be expected to result in an increase in day-night average sound level (DNL) of less than 0.2 decibels (dB) (see Appendix C). If the Air National Guard (ANG) were to beddown MOB 2 at FOE, noise from the FTU scenario aircraft operations would be additive to noise generated by MOB 2. KC-46A noise is similar in type and intensity to the aircraft currently operating at FOE. In this context, KC-46 FTU scenario auxiliary field operations would comprise a small fraction of overall operations. Noise impacts of the KC-46 FTU scenario operations would not be expected to contribute to significant cumulative noise effects at FOE. 5.4.2.2 Cultural Resources None of the buildings proposed to support the FTU scenario at McConnell AFB are considered eligible for listing on the NRHP, and therefore would not contribute to cumulative effects. Three buildings associated with the MOB 1 scenario are considered eligible for listing on the NRHP: 1106, 1107 and 1218. Demolition of Building 1106 would result in an adverse impact. The McConnell AFB IDP environmental assessment, as described in Table 5-7, evaluated the proposed action to determine potential impacts to archeological sites, historic facilities or districts, and traditional cultural properties. The projects identified in the environmental assessment would not result in adverse impacts and therefore would not contribute to cumulative cultural resource impacts in combination with the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenarios. While there are no known future actions that have the potential to contribute to cumulative cultural resource impacts at McConnell AFB, past action (such as the mitigated demolition of historical structures) have resulted in minor, adverse cultural impacts. These actions taken with the current impacts relating to the KC-46A MOB 1 scenario have a potential to cause minor cumulative effects to cultural resources. Coordination is ongoing with the Kansas SHPO to minimize the impacts of the MOB 1 scenario and thereby minimize potential cumulative effects. 5.4.2.3 Land Use Implementation of various plans and projects listed in Table 5-7, in conjunction with the KC-46A scenarios, would result in compatible development within the base. Aircraft operations would continue to affect incompatible development that currently occurs within APZ I and APZ II, resulting in a contribution to cumulative land use impacts. Coordination between McConnell AFB and the Cities of Derby and Wichita would continue to reinforce the goals and strategies outlined in the AICUZ report with the objective to minimize the potential cumulative effects of future development. The Cities of Derby and Wichita and Sedgwick County, in cooperation with McConnell AFB, would also continue to pursue recommendations presented in the 2005 JLUS report. The JLUS identified several planning areas within which increased coordination and communication among stakeholders and increased levels of land use compatibility guidance were recommended. For example, the JLUS recommended managing growth in CZ and APZ areas through zoning requirements, instituting noise level reduction measures in local building codes, and acquiring land within APZ safety areas to minimize future land use conflicts (USAF 2012e). 5.4.2.4 Infrastructure The FTU and MOB 1 scenarios would require additional facility C&D when considered in combination with the McConnell AFB IDP and the associated impacts identified in the IDEA. The FTU scenario would require the construction of new facilities, renovation/alteration/additions to existing facilities, and demolition of facilities (see Table 2-15). The MOB 1 scenario would require more construction activity (see Table 2-18) and therefore has a greater potential to contribute to cumulative effects. The IDP includes projects for new construction, infrastructure improvements, natural infrastructure management, strategic sustainability performance (e.g., solar plant), and demolition of facilities (USAF 2012e). The potential for cumulative effects associated with conflicts between either of the KC-46A scenarios and the proposed IDP projects at McConnell AFB can be off-set by coordinating and including the KC-46A scenario in the USAF comprehensive planning process with AMC. Not all of the projects proposed in the IDP are approved or funded yet, and these projects would not be completed in the same timeframe as the projects identified for either of the KC-46A scenarios. All C&D activities generally would be expected to result in short-term job creation and materials procurement. These types of short-term, construction-related benefits would occur regardless of project location and are not constraints to base development or contributions to significant cumulative effects. Sound engineering and management practices would minimize the potential for cumulative effects during and following construction. Additional impervious surface on the base from the proposed IDP projects would require installation of appropriate stormwater system improvements. 5.4.2.5 Socioeconomics Any present or future actions that would involve an in- or out-migration of people to the area would create a cumulative impact on housing, economic activity (in the form of construction, employment, and earnings), educational facilities and staffing, and public and base services. Construction activities typically provide a beneficial economic impact on the area but are shortterm for the duration of the project. However, many short-term projects occurring throughout the years provide a cumulative beneficial economic impact over the long-term. In January 2012, Boeing announced that it will close its Wichita facilities by the end of 2013 (USAF 2012e). Boeing’s expansive facilities abut McConnell AFB, and any future uses of those facilities are not known at this time. Strategies to minimize cumulative effects to socioeconomics could include implementation of comprehensive plans, capital improvement plans, transportation plans, and other plans and coordination efforts that guide future development activities, including coordination with the base. 5.4.3 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources The irreversible environmental changes and irretrievable commitment of resources that would result from implementation of the KC-46A FTU or MOB 1 scenario at McConnell AFB would be similar in nature and have similar characteristics to those identified for Altus AFB in Section 5.1.3. APPENDIX B DEFINITION OF RESOURCE AND METHODOLOGY FOR ANALYSIS This appendix directly corresponds to the environmental resource areas described in Chapter 3 as the baseline conditions, and the analysis of consequences, as described in Chapter 4, for each of the four bases under consideration. The environmental resource areas are ordered according to the order in Chapters 3 and 4. For each environmental resource area, this appendix provides a definition of the resource, the regulatory setting, if applicable, and a description of the methodology used to evaluate the environmental resource area. Because the same resource areas were analyzed for each of the four bases, the definition, regulatory setting, and methodology are the same for all four bases. The analysis methodology addresses both the context of the environmental resource and the intensity of potential consequences to the resource resulting from implementation of the KC-46A missions. B.1 NOISE B.1.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Sound is tiny vibrations in a medium such as air or water that are detected by the ear. Noise is specifically unwanted sound or, alternatively, a lack of ‘peace and quiet.’ There is a wide variety of types of noises. Reactions to noises depend not only on the qualities of the noise (e.g., intensity, pitch, duration, or time of day) but also on the characteristics of the listener (e.g., sensitivity of the individual and attitude toward the noise source) and the activity in which the listener is engaged at the time the noise occurs. B.1.2 REGULATORY SETTING Since legal limits on allowable noise levels could, in some cases, reduce the combat effectiveness of military equipment, military equipment has been exempted from regulations that impose noise limitations. However, several policies and regulations are in place to limit the effects of military noise. The U.S. Air Force (USAF) recognizes that noise-sensitive land uses are not compatible with elevated aircraft noise levels and has implemented the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) program, as described in Air Force Instruction (AFI) 32-7063 and Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 4165.57, to minimize incompatible land use. In 1992, the Federal Interagency Committee on Noise (FICUN) established a set of guidelines detailing which land uses are compatible at which noise levels; these guidelines have been adopted as part of the AICUZ program. In June 1980, an ad hoc Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise (FICUN) published guidelines (FICUN 1980) relating day-night average sound level (DNL) to compatible land uses. The FICUN guidelines consider areas with noise levels of 75 decibels (dB) DNL or greater as unacceptable living environments. Areas between 65–74 dB DNL are considered “generally unacceptable” for noise-sensitive land uses such as residences, schools, hospitals, and public services. Houses located in areas between 65–74 dB DNL may not qualify for Federal mortgage insurance without additional costs associated with installing noise attenuation. In the outdoor noise environment, levels greater than 65 dB DNL may be annoying to some people during communications. Generally, residential development is not recommended in areas experiencing noise levels of 65 A-weighted decibels (dBA) or greater. Although discouraged, residential development is compatible within the 65–69 dBA and 70–74 dBA contours, provided noise reduction levels of 25 dB and 30 dB, respectively, are achieved. Commercial/retail businesses are compatible without restrictions up to 69 dBA, and up to 79 dBA, provided that noise reduction levels of 25 dB and 30 dB, respectively, are achieved for public areas. Industrial/manufacturing, transportation, and utility companies have a high noise level compatibility, and, therefore, can be located within the higher noise zones. Additional discussion of the relationship between land use and noise can be found in Chapter 3, Sections 3.1.7, 3.2.7, 3.3.7, and 3.4.7, which are the land use sections for each of the four bases. Noise in certain locations near the four bases may exceed levels at which long-term noise-induced hearing loss is possible, and workers in known high noise exposure locations may be required to wear hearing protection devices including, but not limited to, earplugs and earmuffs. The hearing conservation programs at each base are conducted in accordance with Air Force Occupational Safety and Health Standard 48-20, “Occupational Noise and Hearing Conservation Program,” DoDI 6055.12, “DoD Hearing Conservation Program,” and Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 1910.95, “Occupational Noise Exposure.” The Bioenvironmental Engineering Office administers the Hearing Conservation Program at each of the candidate bases. Representatives from the Bioenvironmental Engineering Office visit facilities in which workers could potentially be exposed to noise levels exceeding noise exposure thresholds. A health risk assessment is conducted involving dosimeter testing of a representative sample of employees. An audiometric monitoring program is initiated if noise exposure exceeds established thresholds. U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) policy for assessing hearing loss risk pursuant to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is to use the 80 dB DNL noise contour to identify populations at the most risk of potential hearing loss (USD 2009). B.1.3 METHODOLOGY B.1.3.1 Base Vicinity Noise levels in the vicinity of the Formal Training Unit (FTU) and First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) bases were modeled using NOISEMAP Version 7.2. In accordance with current USAF policy, NOISEMAP runs were conducted using the topographic effects module. This module accounts for the effects of local terrain and ground surface type on the propagation of sound. The areas exposed to elevated noise levels are shown using DNL noise contours at 5 dB increments from 65 dB to 85 dB. Elevated DNL implies that overflight noise is particularly frequent and intense. In general, noise levels are highest on and near the airfield itself and decrease with distance from the airfield. However, in a few instances, the overlapping of two or more flight paths generates a geographically separated area in which noise exceeds 65 DNL. These instances appear as small noise contour polygons separated from the larger noise contour set. The number of off-base persons exposed to noise level increments was estimated using 2010 U.S. Census data. Noise contours were overlaid on census blocks to determine the fraction of each census block that lies within each noise level increment. Census block population was apportioned to inside or outside of the noise level increment based on the fraction of the census block affected. This method assumes even distribution of population with the census block. The U.S. Census counts permanent residents; non-permanent residents are not counted using this method. B.1.3.2 Auxiliary Airfields Aircrews associated with the KC-46A FTU scenario would make use of auxiliary airfields to provide aircrews with varied training experiences. The auxiliary airfields proposed for regular use by the KC-46A FTU are heavily used underbaseline conditions. At each auxiliary airfield proposed for use, the current level of operations was compared against proposed additional operations to determine potential DNL increase. KC-46A operations at auxiliary airfields would be expected to use the same procedures being used by other aircraft at the airfields currently. The KC-46A would be expected to overfly the same ground areas, use the same pattern altitudes, and conform to the same runway usage patterns as current operations. To ensure that the noise level increase threshold of 0.5 dB DNL would not be exceeded as a result of temporary or longer-term increases in KC-46A operations tempo, a mission evolution factor was applied. The mission evolution factor chosen was 150 percent of proposed averaged KC-46A operations. In calculation of the DNL metric, noise events occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. are assessed a 10 dB penalty. As a result, an aircraft operation occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. has the same effect on cumulative DNL as 10 of the same operations occurring during other time periods. The KC-46A would not be expected to conduct operations at auxiliary airfields between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. Each aircraft type operating at the auxiliary airfields was categorized as being either “as loud or louder than a KC-46A” or “less loud than a KC-46A” based on comparison of noise level at a 1,000-foot distance and a standard aircraft configuration type. In calculation of potential DNL change, all aircraft classified as “loud or louder” than a KC-46A were treated as if they were exactly as loud as a KC-46A and aircraft “less loud than a KC-46A” were disregarded. This approach generates conservative results. The potential DNL increase was calculated using the formula below, and results are shown in Table B-1. DNLincrease = 10 LOG (Nday KC46 + [10*Nnight KC46]) - 10 LOG (Nday existing + [10*Nnight existing]) Table B-1. Calculation of Potential DNL Increase Base Proposed KC-46Aa Existing Conclusion Annual Airfield Operations Annual Operations After Mission Evolution Factor Existing Annual Operations Percent Existing Operations as Loud or Louder than KC-46 Percent 2200-0700 (Aircraft Types as Loud or Louder) DNL Change Not Expected to Be Exceeded Requires Further Analysis (Yes/No [Y/N]) Altus AFB FTU Scenario Auxiliary Airfields AMA 517 776 54,115 31% 3% 0.15 N CSM 3,681 5,522 28,485 92% 3% 0.66 Y AFW 2,170 3,255 100,756 12% 15% 0.45 N LBB 148 222 67,919 25% 4% 0.04 N McConnell AFB FTU Scenario Auxiliary Airfields CSM 977 1,466 28,485 92% 3% 0.18 N FOE 977 1,466 24,742 73% 11% 0.18 N ITC 4,561 6,842 165,035 34% 11% 0.26 N a No KC-46A operations would be conducted at night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). Key: AMA= Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport; AFW= Fort Worth Alliance Airport; CSM= Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark; FOE= Forbes Field; ICT= Wichita Mid-Continental Airport; LBB=Lubbock Preston Smith International Airport As shown in the Table B-1, the potential DNL increase would exceed 0.5 dB only at Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark (CSM) under the Altus Air Force Base (AFB) FTU scenario. Increases of less than 0.5 dB would not be expected to be noticed by people near the airfield, and noise impacts would be minimal. No further noise analysis was conducted at these locations. B.2 AIR QUALITY B.2.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Air quality in a given location is defined by the size and topography of the air basin, the local and regional meteorological influences, and the types and concentrations of pollutants in the atmosphere. The significance of a pollutant concentration often is determined by comparing its concentration to an appropriate national or state ambient air quality standard. These standards represent the allowable atmospheric concentrations at which the public health and welfare are protected and include a reasonable margin of safety to protect the more sensitive individuals in the population. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) established the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) to regulate the following criteria pollutants: ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), particulate matter less than or equal to 10 microns in diameter (PM10), particulate matter less than or equal to 2.5 microns in diameter (PM2.5), and lead. The NAAQS generally may not be exceeded more than once per year, except for annual standards, which may never be exceeded. Units of concentration for these standards generally are expressed in parts per million (ppm) or micrograms per cubic meter (.g/m3). Table B-2 presents the NAAQS. Table B-2. National Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time National Standards Primarya, b Secondarya, c Ozone 8-hour 0.075 ppm (147 .g/m3) Same as primary Carbon monoxide 8-hour 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) – 1-hour 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) – Nitrogen dioxide Annual 0.053 ppm (100 .g/m3) Same as primary 1-hour 0.10 ppm (188 .g/m3) – Sulfur dioxide 3-hour – 0.5 ppm (1,300 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.075 ppm (105 .g/m3) – PM10 24-hour 150 .g/m3 Same as primary PM2.5 Annual 12 .g/m3 15 .g/m3 24-hour 35 .g/m3 35 .g/m3 Lead Rolling 3-month period 0.15 .g/m3 Same as primary a Concentrations are expressed first in units in which they were promulgated. Equivalent units given in parenthesis. b Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety to protect the public health. c Secondary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects of a pollutant. The NAAQS 8-hour O3 standard is attained when the measured average of the annual fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour average concentration is less than or equal to 0.075 ppm. For CO and PM10, the NAAQS are not to be exceeded more than once per year. The NAAQS annual NO2 standard is attained when the annual arithmetic mean concentration in a calendar year is less than or equal to 0.053 ppm. The 1-hour NO2 standard is attained when the 3-year average of the 98th percentile of the daily maximum 1-hour average concentration does not exceed 0.10 ppm. For SO2, the primary NAAQS is attained if the 1-hour concentration is less than or equal to 0.075 .g/m3. The NAAQS PM2.5 standards are attained when the annual arithmetic mean concentration is less than or equal to 12 .g/m3 and when the 98th percentile of 24-hour concentration is less than or equal to 65 .g/m3. O3 concentrations are the highest during the warmer months of the year and coincide with the period of maximum insolation. Maximum O3 concentrations tend to be homogeneously spread throughout a region, as it often takes several hours to convert precursor emissions to O3 (mainly nitrogen oxides [NOx] and photochemically reactive volatile organic compounds [VOCs]) in the atmosphere. Inert pollutants, such as CO, tend to have the highest concentrations during the colder months of the year, when light winds and nighttime/early morning surface-based temperature inversions inhibit atmospheric dispersion. Maximum inert pollutant concentrations are usually found near an emission source. B.2.1.1 Greenhouse Gases Greenhouse gases (GHGs) are gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. These emissions are generated by both natural processes and human activities. The accumulation of GHGs in the atmosphere regulates the earth’s temperature. The U.S. Global Change Research Program report, Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, states the following: . Observations show that warming of the climate is unequivocal. The global warming observed over the past 50 years is due primarily to human-induced emissions of heat-trapping gases. These emissions come mainly from the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas), with important contributions from the clearing of forests, agricultural practices, and other activities. . Warming over this century is projected to be considerably greater than over the last century. The global average temperature since 1900 has risen by about 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit (oF). By 2100, it is projected to rise another 2 ºF to 11.5 oF. The U.S. average temperature has risen by a comparable amount and is very likely to rise more than the global average over this century, with some variation from place to place. Several factors will determine future temperature increases. Increases at the lower end of this range are more likely if global heat-trapping gas emissions are cut substantially. If emissions continue to rise at or near current rates, temperature increases are more likely to be near the upper end of the range. Volcanic eruptions or other natural variations could temporarily counteract some of the human-induced warming, slowing the rise in global temperature, but these effects would only last a few years. . Reducing emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) would lessen warming over this century and beyond. Sizable early cuts in emissions would significantly reduce the pace and the overall amount of climate change. Earlier cuts in emissions would have a greater effect in reducing climate change than comparable reductions made later. In addition, reducing emissions of some shorter-lived heat-trapping gases, such as methane (CH4), and some types of particles, such as soot, would begin to reduce warming within weeks to decades. . Climate-related changes have already been observed globally and in the United States. These include increases in air and water temperatures, reduced frost days, increased frequency and intensity of heavy downpours, a rise in sea level, and reduced snow cover, glaciers, permafrost, and sea ice. A longer ice-free period on lakes and rivers, lengthening of the growing season, and increased water vapor in the atmosphere have also been observed. Over the past 30 years, temperatures have risen faster in winter than in any other season, with average winter temperatures in the Midwest and northern Great Plains increasing more than 7 ºF. Some of the changes have been faster than previous assessments had suggested. . These climate-related changes are expected to continue while new ones develop. Likely future changes for the United States and surrounding coastal waters include more intense hurricanes with related increases in wind, rain, and storm surges (but not necessarily an increase in the number of these storms that make landfall), as well as drier conditions in the Southwest and Caribbean. These changes will affect human health, water supply, agriculture, coastal areas, and many other aspects of society and the natural environment. (USGCRP 2009). GHGs include water vapor, CO2, CH4, nitrous oxide, O3, and several hydrocarbons and chlorofluorocarbons. Each GHG has an estimated global warming potential (GWP), which is a function of its atmospheric lifetime and its ability to absorb and radiate infrared energy emitted from the earth’s surface. The GWP of a particular gas provides a relative basis for calculating its carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) or the amount of CO2 that emissions of that gas would be equal to. CO2 has a GWP of 1, and is, therefore, the standard by which all other GHGs are measured. The potential effects of GHG emissions from the project scenarios are by nature global. Given the global nature of climate change and the current state of the science, it is not useful at this time to attempt to link the emissions quantified for local actions to any specific climatological change or resulting environmental impact. Nonetheless, the GHG emissions from the project scenarios have been quantified to the extent feasible in this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for information and comparison purposes. B.2.1.2 Ozone Depleting Substances The 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer prohibited production of all Class I ozone depleting substances (ODSs) in signatory countries by 1996. The Clean Air Act (CAA) amendments of 1990 govern the consumption, transportation, use, and disposal of ODSs. Section 326 of the fiscal year 1993 National Defense Authorization Act requires Senior Acquisition Official approval for contracts requiring use of ODSs. The KC-46A will be the first Air Mobility Command (AMC) aircraft to be completely free of ODSs. The USAF-approved halon alternative is HSC-125. Handheld extinguishers used in the KC-46A also will be ODS-free, whereas commercial aircraft use ODS for all fire suppression systems. B.2.2 REGULATORY SETTING The CAA and its subsequent amendments establish air quality regulations and the NAAQS and delegate the enforcement of these standards to the states. The CAA establishes air quality planning processes and requires areas in nonattainment of an NAAQS to develop a State Implementation Plan (SIP) that details how the state will attain the standard within mandated timeframes. The requirements and compliance dates for attainment are based on the severity of the nonattainment classification of the area. The following summarizes the air quality rules and regulations that apply to the project scenarios. B.2.2.1 Federal Regulations CAA Section 176(c) and USEPA’s General Conformity implementing regulation generally prohibit federal agencies from engaging in, supporting, permitting, or approving any activity that does not conform to the most recent USEPA-approved SIP in nonattainment or maintenance areas. This means that federal projects in such areas or other activities using federal funds or requiring federal approval (1) will not cause or contribute to any new violation of an NAAQS; (2) will not increase the frequency or severity of any existing violation; or (3) will not delay the timely attainment of any standard, interim emission reduction, or other milestone. CAA Section 176(c) (42 U.S. Code [USC] 7506(c)) and 40 CFR Part 93, Subpart B, implement the USEPA General Conformity Rule. The General Conformity Rule applies to Federal actions affecting areas that are in nonattainment of an NAAQS and to designated maintenance areas (attainment areas that have been reclassified from a previous nonattainment status and are required to prepare an air quality maintenance plan). Conformity requirements only apply to nonattainment and maintenance pollutants and their precursor emissions. Conformity determinations are required when the annual direct and indirect emissions from a proposed Federal action equal or exceed an applicable de minimis threshold. These thresholds vary by pollutant and the severity of nonattainment conditions in the region affected by the proposed action. The General Conformity Rule applies to proposed KC-46A operations within the following project regions: (1) for actions proposed at Altus AFB, the serious O3 nonattainment area that encompasses the Fort Worth Alliance Airport (AFW) auxiliary airfield and (2) for actions proposed at Fairchild AFB, the Spokane CO and PM10 maintenance areas, about 4 miles east of the eastern portion of Fairchild AFB. Proposed KC-46A operations within these areas would conform to the applicable SIP if their annual emissions remain below (1) 50 tons per year of VOCs or NOx for the AFW auxiliary airfield and (2) 100 tons per year of CO and PM10 for the Spokane area. Under the CAA, state and local agencies may establish air quality standards and regulations of their own, provided these are at least as stringent as the Federal requirements. These state and local standards and regulations are described in the affected environment sections for each base in Chapter 3. In addition, Table B-3 presents state ambient air quality standards promulgated by the Washington Department of Ecology and North Dakota Department of Health. B.2.2.2 Greenhouse Gases The USEPA has promulgated several final regulations involving GHGs either under the authority of the CAA, or as directed by Congress, but none of them apply directly to the project scenarios. On 18 February 2010, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) released its Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions (CEQ 2010), which suggests that proposed actions that would be reasonably anticipated to emit 25,000 metric tons or more per year CO2e should be evaluated by quantitative and qualitative assessments. This is not a threshold of significance, but rather an indicator that a quantitative and qualitative assessment should be included in the NEPA documentation. The purpose of quantitative analysis of CO2e emissions in this EIS is for its potential usefulness in making reasoned choices among scenarios. Table B-3. Washington and North Dakota Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time State Standards Washington North Dakota Ozone 8-hour  0.075 ppm (147 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.12 ppm (235 .g/m3)  Carbon monoxide 8-hour 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) 1-hour 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) Nitrogen dioxide Annual 0.05 ppm (100 .g/m3) 0.05 ppm (100 .g/m3) 1-hour  0.10 ppm (188 .g/m3) Sulfur dioxide Annual 0.02 ppm  24-hour 0.10 ppm  3-hour  0.5 ppm (1,300 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.40 ppma  1-hour 0.25 ppmb 0.075 ppm (196 .g/m3) PM10 Annual 50 .g/m3  24-hour 150 .g/m3 150 .g/m3 PM2.5 Annual  15 .g/m3 24-hour  35 .g/m3 Total Suspended Particulates Annual 60 .g/m3  24-hour 150 .g/m3  Annualc 0.02 ppm 28 .g/m3  24-hour 0.1 ppm 140 .g/m3  1-hourd 0.2 ppm 280 .g/m3  Instantaneous 10 ppm (14 mg/m3)  a Not to be above this level more than once in a calendar year. b Not to be above this level more than twice in a consecutive 7-day period. c Maximum arithmetic mean concentration averaged over 3 consecutive months. d Not to be exceeded more than once per month. B.2.3 METHODOLOGY The air quality analysis estimated the magnitude of emissions that would occur from proposed KC-46A construction and operational activities at each proposed base location. Depending on the project scenario, the estimation of proposed operational impacts is based on (1) the net increase in emissions due to the addition of KC-46A aircraft or (2) the net change in emissions due to the replacement of existing KC-135 operations with operations from the beddown of KC-46A aircraft. Potential impacts on air quality are evaluated with respect to the extent, context, and intensity of the impact in relation to relevant regulations, guidelines, and scientific documentation. The CEQ defines significance in terms of context and intensity in 40 CFR Section 1508.27. This requires that the significance of an action must be analyzed in respect to the setting of the action and based relative to the severity of the impact. The CEQ NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1508.27(b)) provide 10 key factors to consider in determining the intensity of an impact. In the case of criteria pollutants for which the project region is in attainment of an NAAQS, the analysis compared the net increase in annual air pollutant emissions estimated for each project scenario to the USEPA Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) threshold for new major sources of 250 tons per year of a pollutant as an indicator of significance or non-significance of projected air quality impacts. In the case of criteria pollutants for which the project region does not attain an NAAQS, the analysis compared the net increase in proposed annual emissions to the applicable pollutant threshold that requires a conformity determination for that region. If proposed emissions exceed a PSD or conformity threshold, further analysis was conducted to determine whether impacts were significant. In such cases, if proposed emissions (1) do not contribute to an exceedance of an ambient air quality standard or (2) conform to the approved SIP, then impacts would be less than significant. B.2.3.1 Construction The KC-46A project scenarios at each proposed basing location would require construction and/or renovation of airfield facilities, including training facilities, hangars, taxiways, and maintenance and fueling facilities. Air quality impacts due to proposed construction activities would occur from (1) combustive emissions due to the use of fossil fuel-powered equipment and (2) fugitive dust emissions (PM10/PM2.5) due to the operation of equipment on exposed soil. Construction activity data were developed to estimate proposed construction equipment usages and associated combustive and fugitive dust emissions for each project scenario. Factors needed to derive construction source emission rates were obtained from the Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, Volume I (USEPA 1995); the USEPA NONROAD2008a model for nonroad construction equipment (USEPA 2009); and the USEPA MOVES2010b model for on-road vehicles (USEPA 2013). Inclusion of standard construction practices and Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver certification into proposed construction activities would potentially reduce fugitive dust emissions generated from the use of construction equipment on exposed soil by 50 percent from uncontrolled levels. The standard construction practices for fugitive dust control include the following: 1. Use water trucks to keep areas of vehicle movement damp enough to minimize the generation of fugitive dust. 2. Minimize the amount of disturbed ground area at a given time. 3. Suspend all soil disturbance activities when winds exceed 25 miles per hour or when visible dust plumes emanate from the site and stabilize all disturbed areas with water application. 4. Designate personnel to monitor the dust control program and to increase watering, as necessary, to minimize the generation of dust. B.2.3.2 Operations Sources associated with operation of the proposed KC-46A scenarios at each basing location would include (1) operations and engine maintenance/testing of aircraft, (2) onsite privately owned vehicles (POVs) and government motor vehicles (GMVs), (3) offsite POV commutes, (4) aerospace ground equipment (AGE), (5) nonroad mobile equipment, (6) mobile fuel transfer operations, and (7) stationary and other sources. Operational data used to calculate projected KC-46A aircraft emissions were obtained from data used in the project noise analyses. Factors used to calculate combustive emissions for the KC-46A aircraft are based on emissions data developed by Pratt and Whitney for the PW4062 engine (ICAO 2013). The operational times in mode for the KC-46A engine are based on those for the KC-135 aircraft (Air Force Civil Engineer Center 2013). Emissions from non-aircraft sources due to the proposed KC-46A scenarios at each basing location were estimated by the following methods: 1. Emissions from the usage of AGE by KC-46A aircraft at Altus AFB are based on AGE usages for existing C-17 and KC-135 aircraft at Altus AFB. Emissions from the usage of AGE by KC-46A aircraft at all other base locations are based on AGE usages for existing KC-135 aircraft at Fairchild AFB. 2. Emissions from POVs, GMVs, and stationary sources were estimated by multiplying existing emissions generated at each base for these sources by the ratio of total base employment populations associated with each proposed scenario and baseline conditions. 3. The emission estimations for AGE, POVs, GMVs, and nonroad equipment simulated the gradual turnover of these sources in the future to vehicle and equipment fleets with new and cleaner USEPA emission standards. 4. Emissions from mobile fuel transfer operations were estimated by multiplying existing emissions for this source at Altus AFB by the ratio of total base employment populations associated with each proposed scenario and baseline conditions at Altus AFB. The air quality analysis uses calendar year 2012 to define existing emissions, as it includes the most recent calendar year of operational activities at each basing location. The analysis of proposed aircraft operations is limited to operations that occur within the lowest 3,000 feet (914 meters) of the atmosphere, as this is the typical depth of the atmospheric mixing layer where the release of aircraft emissions would affect ground-level pollutant concentrations. In general, aircraft emissions released above the mixing layer would not appreciably affect ground-level air quality. B.3 SAFETY B.3.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Ground and flight safety involving aviation operations conducted by the USAF are addressed in this section. Because of the proposal to construct within portions of the airfield environment, the focus of this section is on safety-of-flight issues associated with airfield operations. Within the ground safety section, issues involving operations and maintenance (O&M) activities that support operation of the airfield are addressed. Also considered in this section is the safety of personnel and facilities on the ground that may be placed at risk from flight operations. Within the aircraft mishaps/flight safety section for each base, aircraft flight risks and safety issues associated with conducting aviation activities at the respective bases are addressed. Historic information on aircraft accidents for the KC-135 at each base is also presented to give the reader perspective as to the frequency of major mishaps, which occurred during the lengthy service of the existing tanker aircraft. KC-46A flight risks and safety issues associated with conducting aviation activities at the base and in the near-base airspace are addressed. Any KC-46A accidents at the airfield would have direct impacts on the ground in the immediate vicinity of the mishap as a result of explosion/fire and debris spread. B.3.2 REGULATORY SETTING Numerous Federal, civil, and military laws and regulations govern operations at bases and in the surrounding airspace. Individually and collectively, they prescribe measures, processes, and procedures required to ensure safe operations and to protect the public, military, and property. B.3.3 METHODOLOGY A variety of elements associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios at any of the four bases that could potentially affect safety are evaluated relative to the degree to which the action increases or decreases safety risks to the public or private property. Flight and ground safety are assessed for the potential to increase risk and the capability to manage that risk by responding to emergencies. Impacts to safety are assessed according to the potential to increase or decrease in safety risks to personnel, the public and property. The development activities associated with the proposed KC-46A missions are considered to determine whether additional or unique safety risks are associated with its undertaking. If any activity associated with the KC-46A scenarios indicates a major variance from baseline conditions, it would be considered a significant safety impact. B.3.3.1 Flight Safety The primary public concern with regard to flight safety is the potential for aircraft accidents. Such mishaps may occur as a result of mid-air collisions, collisions with man-made structures or terrain, weather-related accidents, mechanical failure, pilot error, or bird-aircraft collisions. Collisions with structures around the airfield are controlled through airfield setbacks and safety zones that restrict construction around the airfield so that both the ground surface is clear for ground maneuvering and the airspace is clear of obstructions such as groves of trees, poles and power lines, and tall structures. The AICUZ defines the accident potential zones (APZs) around the airfield and prescribes restrictions on any construction in the clear zone (CZ) (see Figure B-1). Land use restrictions are recommended for APZs I and II, based mostly on the intensity of use. That is, activities where people congregate are not recommended, and uses where people spend a high percentage of time (such as residential) are also not recommended. The USAF defines five major categories of aircraft mishaps: Classes A, B, C, D, and E, which includes high accident potential. Class A mishaps result in a loss of life, permanent total disability, a total cost in excess of $2 million, and/or destruction of an aircraft. Class B mishaps result in permanent partial disability or inpatient hospitalization of three or more personnel and/or a total cost of between $500,000 and up to $2 million. Class C mishaps involve an injury resulting in any loss of time from work beyond the day or shift on which it occurred, an occupational illness that causes loss of time from work at any time, or an occupational injury or illness resulting in permanent change of job and/or reportable damage of between $50,000 and up to $500,000. High accident potential events are any hazardous occurrence that has a high potential for becoming a mishap. Class C mishaps and high accident potential, the most common types of accidents, represent relatively unimportant incidents because they generally involve minor damage and injuries, and rarely affect property or the public. Class D mishaps result in total cost of property damage of $20,000 or more, but less than $50,000; or a recordable injury or illness not otherwise classified as a Class A, B, or C mishap. Note that in 2010, the threshold for determining the class of mishaps was raised from $1 to $2 million for Class A mishaps, and the ceiling was raised for Class B from $1 million to $2 million. Accident rates for commercial aircraft are determined using accidents per million departures (or flight cycles) since there is a stronger statistical correlation between accidents and departures than there is between accidents and flight hours, between accidents and the number of airplanes in service, or between accidents and passenger miles or freight miles. This EIS focuses on USAF Class A mishaps because of their potentially catastrophic results. Based on historical data on mishaps at all bases, and under all conditions of flight, the military services calculate Class A mishap rates per 100,000 flying hours for each type of aircraft in the inventory. Mishap rates do not consider combat losses due to enemy action. In evaluating this information, it should be emphasized that data presented are only statistically predictive. The actual causes of mishaps are due to many factors, not simply the amount of flying time of the aircraft. Mishap rates are statistically assessed as an occurrence rate per 100,000 flying hours. For the purposes of this analysis, C-135 aircraft include the RC-135, EC-135, and the KC-135 since they share a common airframe based upon the Boeing 707, as modified for military use. Table B-4 reflects the cumulative annual USAF Class A mishap rates of the C-135 for the periods for which accident records have been established. Cargo and Command and Control type aircraft were included since their Mission-Design-Series are similar. The KC-135 entered service with the USAF in 1957; it is one of six military fixed-wing aircraft with over 50 years of continuous service with its original operator. Since the R model conversion of some of the fleet in the 1990s, the safety record of the KC-135 has been on par with that of any modern airliner. Table B-4. Air Force Class A Accident History for Selected Models of Transport Modified Mission Design/Code Aircraft Aircraft Reporting Period Accident Rate per 100,000 Hours Lifetime Hours Flown C-135a CY57-FY12 0.56 14,753,417 C-141 CY64-FY12 0.32 10,641,974 C-17 FY91-FY12 1.10 2,726,728 C-5 CY68-FY12 1.03 2,531,479 C-10 CY81-FY12 1.03 1,558,325 a Includes all variants such as EC and KC types, including EC-135, RC-135, and KC-135 Key: CY = calendar year; FY = fiscal year Source: AFSC 2013 An aircraft crash is what is known in the probability analysis world as a low probability, high consequence risk. Aircraft are designed to ensure that aircraft accidents are rare events. To minimize these accidents, factors causing or contributing to accidents must be understood and prevented. Previous research has studied accident data to determine these factors. The low rate of accidents, however, makes it difficult to discover repeating patterns of these factors. Levels of safety for commercial airframes are typically measured by the number of accidents and incidents and their rates. An aircraft accident is defined as an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft in which people suffer death or injury, and/or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage. There have been many scholarly papers written, and complex mathematical calculations developed, to try and predict where and when an aircraft or other low probability, high consequence risk might occur. However, none of these efforts have resulted in a consensus or an agreed upon methodology within the risk assessor community. The methodology of using accident rates as a predictor of the likelihood of a crash is what is commonly used. The accident rates are based upon accidents per 100,000 hours of flight for military aircraft. For commercial aircraft, in general, this expression is a measure of accidents per million departures. The accident rates for the KC-46A were determined using the accident rate for the B-767 jetliner, which is currently in service. The accident rate for commercial airliners is based upon departures (flight cycles). Using the operational data contained in Chapter 2 for each base (takeoffs are assumed to be one-half of the total projected departure airfield operations). Using the formula CrxAo = 1/X where Cr = crash rate and Ao = departure airfield operations, it is shown that the frequency of an accident, even with increased operations, is not likely to occur in the foreseeable future. While it is counterintuitive, an increase in operation tempo (OPTEMPO) may not result in higher accident rates, and no correlation has been proved or disproved. In a 2002 report to Congress on military aviation safety, the Congressional Research Service concluded, “While no correlation between high OPTEMPO and increased mishaps has been proved, it also hasn’t been disproved. A great degree of uncertainty remains. Little is known, for example, of the OPTEMPO effects on maintenance, ammunition, training in country, living conditions, or personnel tempo” (CRS 2002). In other words, there are numerous unpredictable factors that may or may not contribute to an accident. Bird/Wildlife-Aircraft Strike Hazard (BASH). Bird/wildlife-aircraft strikes constitute a safety concern for the USAF because they can result in damage to aircraft or injury to aircrews or local human populations if an aircraft crashes. Aircraft may encounter birds at altitudes up to 30,000 feet mean sea level (MSL) or higher. However, most birds fly close to the ground. More than 97 percent of reported bird strikes occur below 3,000 feet above ground level (AGL). Approximately 30 percent of bird strikes happen in the airport environment, and almost 55 percent occur during low-altitude flight training (AFSC 2013). To address the issues of aircraft bird strikes, the USAF has developed the Avian Hazard Advisory System to monitor bird activity and forecast bird strike risks. Using Next Generation Radar (NEXRAD) weather radars and models developed to predict bird movement, the Avian Hazard Advisory System is an online, near real time, geographic information system (GIS) used for bird strike risk flight planning across the continental United States and Alaska. Additionally, as part of an overall strategy to reduce BASH risks, the USAF has developed a Bird Avoidance Model using GIS technology as a key tool for analysis and correlation of bird habitat, migration, and breeding characteristics and is combined with key environmental and man.made geospatial data. The model was created to provide USAF pilots and flight schedulers/planners with a tool for making informed decisions when selecting flight routes. The model was created in an effort to protect human lives, wildlife, and equipment during air operations. This information is integrated into required pilot briefings that take place prior to any sortie. Fuel Jettison. The KC-46A, like the KC-135 aircraft, has the ability to jettison fuel in cases of emergency and non-emergency situations. Data on historical KC-135 operations show that slightly less than two sorties per thousand resulted in a release of fuel (USAF 2013). The main environmental concern from fuel released from an aircraft is fuel deposition onto the ground and/or surface waters and any possible negative impacts on human health or natural resources. The results of a definitive study on the fate of jettisoned fuel from large USAF aircraft (such as the KC-135) (Deepti 2003) were used to identify a reasonably conservative ground-level fuel deposition value for the KC-46A. This study used the Fuel Jettison Simulation model developed by the USAF to estimate the ground deposition of fuel from jettison events (Teske and Curbishley 2000). This maximum ground-level fuel deposition value identified for the KC-46A would result in effects that are well below known natural resource and human health thresholds for jet fuel. Therefore, the maximum fuel deposition value expected from the KC-46A would not produce substantial or significant impacts on human or natural resources. It is the policy of the Air Force Major Commands to follow AFIs or supplement those established AFIs. These policies require that pilots avoid fuel jettison, unless safety of flight dictates immediate jettison. For example, AMC policy, which covers all USAF tanker assets, requires that any fuel released from an aircraft must occur above 20,000 feet AGL (AMC 2004, 2012). Similar policy from AETC covers aircrews during training (AFI 11-2KC-135V3). These policies are designed to minimize potential impacts of fuel jettison events. In view of this, no further analysis is included in this section. B.3.3.2 Ground Safety Day-to-day O&M activities conducted at AFBs are performed in accordance with applicable USAF safety regulations, published Air Force Technical Orders, and standards prescribed by Air Force Occupational Safety and Health requirements. These are intended to standardize procedures and practices in all activities on USAF property to reduce occupational risks to government personnel and contractors and to protect other persons that reside on or visit the base or the vicinity of the base. Anti-Terrorism/Force Protection. Anti-Terrorism/Force Protection (AT/FP) is a security program designed to protect USAF active-duty personnel, civilian employees, family members, and facilities and equipment in all locations and situations. The program is accomplished through the planned and integrated application of anti-terrorism measures, physical security, operations security, and personal protective services. It is supported by intelligence, counterintelligence, and other security programs. In response to terrorist attacks, several regulations have been promulgated to ensure that force protection standards are incorporated into the planning, programming, and budgeting for the design and construction of Military Construction-funded facilities. Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 04-010-01, DoD Minimum Antiterrorism Standards for Buildings (published in 2003 and updated in 2007) (DoD 2007) establishes minimum standoff distances that must be maintained between several categories of structures and areas that are relatively accessible to terrorists. The intent of AT/FP and design guidance is to improve security, minimize fatalities, and limit damage to facilities in the event of a terrorist attack. Many military bases, including those under consideration for beddown of the KC-46A, were developed before such considerations became a critical concern. Thus, under current conditions, many units are not able to completely comply with all present AT/FP standards. However, as new construction and modification of facilities occurs, AT/FP standards would be incorporated to the maximum extent practicable.  Construction/Demolition Safety. Short-term safety risks are associated with any demolition and construction activity, including those activities proposed as part of this action. However, adherence to standard safety practices would minimize any potential risks. Airfield Safety. Accident potential relies on identifying where most accidents have occurred in the past at military airfields (USAF 2002). This approach does not produce accident probability statistics since the question of probability involves too many variables for an accurate prediction model to be developed. The analysis of the history of military aircraft accidents focuses on determining where (within the airfield environments) an accident is likely to occur and estimates the size of the impact area that is likely to result from any single accident. As per DoDI 4165.57, “AICUZ, Ground Obstructions,” all structures on the ground have the potential to create hazards to flight. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) provides detailed instructions for the marking of obstructions (i.e., paint schemes and lighting) to warn pilots of their presence. Any temporary or permanent structure, including all appurtenances, that exceeds an overall height of 200 feet AGL or exceeds any obstruction standard contained in 14 CFR Part 77 should normally be marked and/or lighted. The FAA may also recommend marking and/or lighting a structure that does not exceed 200 feet AGL or 14 CFR Part 77 standards because of its particular location. The obstruction standards in 14 CFR Part 77 are primarily focused on structures in the immediate vicinity of airports and approach and departure corridors from airports (14 CFR 77). B.4 SOILS AND WATER B.4.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The term “soils” refers to unconsolidated materials formed from the underlying bedrock or other parent material. Soils play a critical role in both the natural and human environment. Water resources include surface water, groundwater, and floodplains. Surface water resources include lakes, rivers, and streams and are important for a variety of reasons, including economic, ecological, recreational, and human health factors. Groundwater includes the subsurface hydrologic resources of the physical environment; its properties are often described in terms of depth to aquifer or water table, water quality, and surrounding geologic composition. B.4.2 REGULATORY SETTING The Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1977 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and the USEPA Storm Water General Permit regulate pollutant discharges. Pollutants regulated under the CWA include “priority” pollutants, including various toxic pollutants, such as biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fecal coliform, oil and grease, and pH. Wetlands are discussed under the Biological Resources section below. Federal agencies are also required to comply with Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) for any project exceeding 5,000 square feet. Section 438 of the EISA instructs Federal agencies to use site planning, design, construction, and maintenance strategies for the property to maintain or restore, to the maximum extent technically feasible, the predevelopment hydrology of the property. With respect to soil erosion, Section 402(p) of the CWA regulates non-point source discharges of pollutants, under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, or state equivalent program. This section of the CWA was amended to require the USEPA to establish regulations for discharges from active construction sites. NPDES General Construction Permits require preparation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan for projects greater than 1 acre. Prime farmland is protected under the Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 (7 CFR 658). Prime farmland is defined as land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops, and is also available for these uses. The land could be cropland, pasture, rangeland, or other land, but not urban built-up land (defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, or U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps) or water. The project area at all four bases is classified by the U.S. Census Bureau as urbanized lands. B.4.3 METHODOLOGY Impacts on soils and surface water can result from earth disturbance that would expose soil to wind or water erosion. Analysis of impacts on soils and surface water examines the potential for such erosion at each base and describes typical measures employed to minimize erosion. In addition, soil limitations and associated typical engineering remedial measures are evaluated with respect to proposed construction. Criteria for evaluating impacts related to soil resources associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios are impacts on unique soil resources, minimization of soil erosion, and the siting of facilities relative to potential soil limitations. If development proposed in the Draft EIS were to substantially affect any of these features, impacts would be considered significant. Soil disturbance at each base was calculated by summing the square footages of additions/alterations and new construction. Criteria for evaluating impacts related to water resources associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios are water availability, water quality, adherence to applicable regulations, and existence of floodplains. Impacts are measured by the potential to reduce water availability to existing users; to endanger public health or safety by creating or worsening health hazards or safety conditions; or to violate laws or regulations adopted to protect or manage water resources. Flooding impacts are evaluated by determining whether proposed construction is located within a designated floodplain. Groundwater impacts are evaluated by determining whether groundwater beneath the project site would be used for implementing the KC-46A mission, and if so, by determining the potential to adversely affect those groundwater resources. Soils and water resource impacts are not evaluated for the areas below where the KC-46A would be operated or at the auxiliary airfields because no ground-disturbing activities or use of water resources would occur at these locations. B.5 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES B.5.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Biological resources include the native and introduced terrestrial and aquatic plants and animals found within the region of influence (ROI). The ROI for biological resources is defined as the land area (habitats) and airspace that could potentially be affected by infrastructure and construction projects, as well as airspace operations. The ROI generally includes the developed cantonment and airfield areas of the respective bases, but may also include areas near but outside the base boundary. Examples of off-base areas include managed wildlife areas and surface waters that could be indirectly affected by noise or water quality alteration, respectively. Habitat types are based on floral, faunal, and geophysical characteristics. Sensitive habitats include areas that the Federal government, state governments, or the DoD have designated as worthy of special protection due to certain characteristics such as high species diversity, special habitat conditions for rare species, or other unique features. For purposes of analysis, biological resources were organized into four categories: vegetation, wildlife, special-status species, and wetlands. Vegetation includes existing terrestrial plant communities but does not include special-status plants, which are discussed below. Plant species composition within an area generally defines ecological communities and indicates the type of wildlife that may be present. Wildlife includes all vertebrate animal species, with the exception of special-status species, which are discussed below. Typical wildlife includes animal groups such as large and small mammals, songbirds, waterfowl, reptiles, amphibians, and fish. The attributes and quality of available habitats influences the composition, diversity, and abundance of wildlife communities. Special-status species are defined as those plant and animal species protected by various regulations established by Federal and state agencies. These regulations, and the species addressed by them, are described in the Regulatory Setting section below. Wetlands are areas of transition between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000). B.5.2 REGULATORY SETTING “Integrated Natural Resources Management,” AFI 32-7064, explains how to manage natural resources on USAF property in compliance with Federal, state, and local standards. The chief tool for managing base ecosystems is the Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan (INRMP). Based on an interdisciplinary approach to ecosystem management, the INRMP ensures the successful accomplishment of the military mission by integrating all aspects of natural resources management with each other and the rest of the base’s mission. Special-status plant and wildlife species are subject to regulations under the authority of Federal and state agencies. Special-status species include species designated as threatened, endangered, or candidate species by state or Federal agencies. Under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) (16 U.S.C. 1536), an endangered species is defined as any species in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. A threatened species is defined as any species likely to become an endangered species in the foreseeable future. Candidate species are those species for which the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) has sufficient information on their biological status and threats to propose them as endangered or threatened under the ESA, but for which development of a proposed listing regulation is precluded by other higher-priority listing activities. Although candidate species receive no statutory protection under the ESA, the USFWS believes it is important to advise government agencies, industry, and the public that these species are at risk and could warrant protection under the ESA. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) of 1918 (16 U.S.C. 703-712) is the domestic law that affirms, or implements, the United States’ commitment to four international conventions (with Canada, Japan, Mexico, and Russia) for the protection of a shared migratory bird resource. Each of the conventions protect selected species of birds that are common to both countries (i.e., species occur in both countries at some point during their annual life cycle). The act protects all migratory birds and their parts (including eggs, nests, and feathers). The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (BGEPA) (16 U.S.C. 668-668d) is legislation in the United States that protects two species of eagles. The BGEPA prohibits anyone without a permit issued by the Secretary of the Interior from “taking” bald eagles. Taking involves molesting or disturbing birds, their parts, nests, or eggs. The BGEPA provides criminal penalties for persons who “take, possess, sell, purchase, barter, offer to sell, purchase or barter, transport, export or import, at any time or any manner, any bald or golden eagles ... [or any golden eagle], alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof.” Section 404 of the CWA established a program to regulate the discharge of dredged and fill material into waters of the United States, including wetlands. Activities in waters of the United States that are regulated under this program include fills for development, water resource projects (such as dams and levees), infrastructure development (such as highways and airports), and conversion of wetlands to uplands for farming and forestry. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is the lead agency in protecting wetland resources. This agency maintains jurisdiction over Federal wetlands (33 CFR 328.3) under Section 404 of the CWA (30 CFR 320-330) and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act (30 CFR 329). The USEPA assists the USACE (in an administrative capacity) in the protection of wetlands (40 CFR 225.1 to 233.71). In addition, the USFWS and the National Marine Fisheries Service provide support with important advisory roles. Furthermore, Executive Order (EO) 11990, Protection of Wetlands, requires Federal agencies, including the USAF, to minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands and to preserve and enhance the natural and beneficial values of wetlands. EO 11990 requires Federal agencies to avoid, to the extent possible, the long- and short-term adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands and to avoid direct or indirect support of new construction in wetlands wherever there is a practicable alternative; if construction in wetlands cannot be avoided, the USAF will issue a Finding of No Practicable Alternative. Under CWA Section 401, applicants for a Federal license or permit to conduct activities that may result in the discharge of a pollutant into waters of the United States must obtain certification from the state in which the discharge would originate or, if appropriate, from interstate water pollution control agency with jurisdiction over affected waters at the point where the discharge would originate. Therefore, all projects that have a Federal component and may affect state water quality (including projects that require Federal agency approval, such as issuance of a Section 404 permit) must also comply with CWA Section 401. The following state agencies issue Section 401 certifications in their respective states: the Department of Environmental Quality in Oklahoma; the Department of Ecology in Washington; the Department of Health, Division of Water Quality, in North Dakota; and the Department of Health and Environment in Kansas. B.5.3 METHODOLOGY The first step in the analysis of potential impacts on biological resources was to determine the locations of sensitive habitats and species in relation to the proposed action. Maps were examined to locate sensitive habitats and species, and where necessary, site visits and additional surveys were conducted to confirm locations. Next, areas of overlap for the proposed development and sensitive habitats and species were identified. Scientific literature was reviewed for studies that examined similar types of impacts on biological resources. The literature review included a review of basic characteristics and habitat requirements of each sensitive species. Where available, information was also gathered relative to management considerations, incompatible resource management activities, and threats to each sensitive species. Impact analyses were then conducted based on the information gathered from the literature review. The analyses included an assessment of the impacts on biological resources resulting from both construction activities and daily operations. Measures to avoid and/or minimize adverse impacts on biological resources are also presented. The following criteria were evaluated when determining the significance of an effect on biological resources resulting from implementation of actions described in Chapter 2: . The direct impact or taking of a protected special-status species, including habitat alteration . The importance (legal, commercial, ecological, or scientific) of the resource . The relative sensitivity of biological resources to potential effects of the actions . The quantity or percentage of biological resources affected by the actions relative to overall abundance in the ROI . The expected duration of potential impacts resulting from implementation of the actions Determination of the significance of wetland impacts is based on (1) loss of wetland acreage, (2) the function and value of the wetland, (3) the proportion of the wetland that would be affected relative to the occurrence of similar wetlands in the region, (4) the sensitivity of the wetland to proposed activities, and (5) the duration of ecological ramifications. Impacts on wetland resources are considered significant if high-value wetlands would be adversely affected or if wetland acreage is lost. B.6 CULTURAL RESOURCES B.6.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Cultural resources are historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects considered important to a culture, subculture, or community for scientific, traditional, religious, or other purposes. They include archaeological resources, historic architectural/engineering resources, and traditional resources. Only significant cultural resources are considered for potential adverse impacts from an action. Significant cultural resources are those eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4, or identified as important to tribes or other traditional groups, as outlined in the American Indian Religious Freedom Act; the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act; and EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites. Historic properties are any prehistoric or historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects included or eligible for inclusion in the NRHP because of their historic or cultural significance. For a cultural resource to be considered eligible for the NRHP, it must possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association, and it must meet one or more of the following criteria (36 CFR 60.4): . Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history (criterion a). . Association with the lives or persons significant in our past (criterion b). . Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction (criterion c). . Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history (criterion d). In general, these resources must be more than 50 years old; however, younger resources may be eligible if they are exceptionally significant. Section 101(d)(6)(A) of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) states that properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to a tribe or Native Hawaiian organization may be determined to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. NRHP Bulletin 38 (NPS 1998) defines traditional cultural property (TCP), generally, as one that is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. Reasons for eligibility could be because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that are rooted in that community’s history and are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community. TCPs can include archaeological resources, buildings, neighborhoods, prominent topographic features, habitats, plants, animals, and minerals that tribes and other groups consider essential for the continuance of traditional cultures. However, properties of traditional religious and cultural importance need not be determined eligible for the NRHP to be a significant cultural resource considered for potential adverse impacts from an action. On 21 November 1999, the DoD promulgated its American Indian and Alaska Native Policy, which emphasizes the importance of respecting and consulting with tribal governments on a government-to-government basis (DoD 1999). The policy requires an assessment, through consultation, of the effect of proposed DoD actions that may have the potential to significantly affect protected tribal resources, tribal rights, and tribal and Alaska Native lands, before decisions are made by the services. DoDI 4710.02, “DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes,” implements DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for DoD interactions with federally recognized tribes in accordance with its American Indian and Alaska Native Policy and other DoD directives and policies. EO 13007 defines sacred sites as any specific, discrete, narrowly delineated location on Federal land that is identified by a tribe or individual as sacred by virtue of its established religious significance to or ceremonial use by a tribal religion and identified as such to the land managing agency. EO 13007 also requires agencies to accommodate access to, and ceremonial use of, sacred sites by tribal religious practitioners and to avoid adversely affecting their physical integrity. B.6.2 REGULATORY SETTING “Cultural Resources Management,” DoDI 4715.16, (DoD 2008), and AFI 32-7065, “Cultural Resources Management,” (USAF 2004) outline and specify proper procedures for cultural resource management on USAF bases. Laws pertinent to the proposed action include the NHPA of 1966, as amended; the Antiquities Act of 1906; the Historic Sites Act of 1935; NEPA; the Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974; the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979; the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990; and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978. Under Section 106 of the NHPA, the USAF is required to consider the effects of its undertakings at each location on historic properties listed, or eligible for listing, in the NRHP and to consult with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), Tribal Historic Preservation Office, and others regarding potential effects as per 36 CFR 800. Under AFI 32-7065, recorded cultural resources not evaluated for NRHP eligibility must be managed as eligible. Under Section 110 of the NHPA, each location is mandated to maintain an active historic preservation program and provide stewardship of cultural resources “consistent with the preservation of such properties and the mission of the agency (Section 470 h-2(a)).” Federal regulations governing cultural resource activities include the following: 36 CFR 800, Protection of Historic Properties (incorporating amendments effective August 5, 2004); 36 CFR 79, Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections; 43 CFR 7, Protection of Archaeological Resources; 36 CFR 60, National Register of Historic Places; and 36 CFR 63, Determinations of Eligibility for Inclusion in the National Register. Cultural resource-related EOs that may affect the locations include the following: EO 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment; EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites; EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments; and EO 13287, Preserve America. B.6.3 METHODOLOGY Impact analysis for cultural resources focuses on assessing whether the KC-46A mission would have the potential to affect cultural resources that are eligible for listing in the NRHP or have traditional significance for tribes. For this EIS, impact analysis for cultural resources focuses on, but is not limited to, guidelines and standards set forth in NHPA Section 106’s implementing regulations (36 CFR 800). Under Section 106 of the NHPA, the proponent of the action is responsible for determining whether any historic properties are located in the area, assessing whether the proposed undertaking would adversely affect the resources, and notifying the SHPO of any adverse effects. An adverse effect is any action that may directly or indirectly change the characteristics that make the historic property eligible for listing in the NRHP. If an adverse effect is identified, the Federal agency consults with the SHPO and federally recognized tribes to develop measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the adverse effects of the undertaking. Analysis of potential impacts on cultural resources considers both direct and indirect impacts. Impacts may occur through the following: . Physically altering, damaging, or destroying all or part of a resource . Altering characteristics of the surrounding environment that contribute to the resource’s significance . Introducing visual or audible elements that are out of character with the property or alter its setting . Neglecting the resource to the extent that it deteriorates or is destroyed Direct impacts are assessed by (1) identifying the nature and location of all elements of the proposed action and alternatives; (2) comparing those locations with identified historic properties, sensitive areas, and surveyed locations; (3) determining the known or potential significance of historic properties that could be affected; and (4) assessing the extent and intensity of the effects. Indirect impacts occur later in time or farther from the proposed action. Indirect impacts on cultural resources generally result from the effects of project-induced population increases, such as the need to develop new housing areas, utility services, and other support functions to accommodate population growth, or increased visitation of a remote area due to improved vehicle access. These activities and the subsequent use of the facilities can impact cultural resources. A key component of this analysis is defining the area of potential effect, defined as “the geographic area or areas within which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties, if any such properties exist” (36 CFR 800.16(d)). Archaeological and historic architectural resources at the bases were characterized using existing survey and analysis information from Installation Cultural Resources Management Plans, archaeological survey reports, historic buildings survey reports, local histories, and the records of the NRHP and National Historic Landmarks. These documents provided information on known locations of significant resources. In compliance with Section 106 of the NHPA, the USAF consulted with the relevant SHPOs regarding the area of potential effect and potential cultural resource concerns for the proposed action. NRHP-eligible or -listed properties at each base are identified in the base-specific sections. The potential for traditional resources at the bases was identified using Installation Cultural Resources Management Plans and information provided by base cultural resource management staff. Potentially interested tribes were contacted to request information on potential concerns about the proposed action. In this analysis, demolition, construction, and other base-specific actions needed to support the KC-46A basing are part of the alternatives. The assessment of adverse effects takes into account both the potential for physical damage or destruction of historic properties at the bases and the potential adverse effects of visual intrusions, noise, and vibration on historic properties at the bases. Properties eligible for inclusion in the NRHP for their scientific information potential generally are not adversely affected by the introduction of auditory or visual intrusions. Conversely, if integrity of setting or feeling is an important element of a property’s eligibility, that property may be adversely affected by the introduction of auditory or visual intrusions. Impacts on properties of traditional religious and cultural importance (hereafter referred to as “traditional cultural resources”) can result from noise and visual effects of aircraft overflights on rituals and ceremonies and on wildlife resources. The USAF’s ongoing consultation with tribes may identify places of traditional cultural importance or other types of cultural resources that might be adversely affected by auditory or visual intrusions or other elements of the proposed action. B.7 LAND USE B.7.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Land use describes the way the natural landscape has been modified or managed to provide for human needs. In developed and urbanized areas, land uses typically include residential, commercial, industrial, utilities and transportation, recreation, open space, and mixes of these basic types. Other uses such as mining, extractive activities, agriculture, forestry, and specially protected areas (such as larger monuments, parks, and preserves) are usually found on the fringes or outside of urbanized areas. Plans and policies guide how land resources are allocated and managed to best serve multiple needs and interests. Ordinances and regulations define specific limitations on uses. The attributes of land use addressed in this analysis include general land use patterns within and surrounding each military base and the land use regulatory setting. The regulatory setting is the framework for managing land use and approving new development. It pertains to Federal, state, and local statutes, regulations, plans, programs, and ordinances. Region of Influence. The ROI for the land use analyses in this EIS includes the land within and surrounding each base. The analysis considers an area that encompasses the full extent of airfield accident zones, and areas exposed to noise levels of concern, plus a reasonable buffer of a few miles. This ROI provides for a wider context of jurisdictional divisions that influence land use patterns around each base. B.7.2 REGULATORY SETTING The regulatory setting for land use includes the key Federal, state, and local statutes, regulations, plans, policies, and programs applicable to land use on and near each base. The land use discipline assumed the Federal noise compatibility requirements as identified below. Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design – DoD UFC 3-260-01. Several siting criteria have been established specific to land development and use at commercial and military airfields. To maintain safety, the USAF adheres to guidelines set forth in UFC 3-260-01, Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design (UFC 3-260-01). These criteria include CZs, APZs, and other obstruction zones relative to airfield environments. These and other criteria related to safety, security, and other land use issues are used to assist planners and decision makers with appropriate siting of facilities affecting design and physical layout of USAF bases. FICUN Land Use Guidelines (1980). In 1980, FICUN was formed to develop Federal policy and guidance on noise. The committee included the USEPA, FAA, Federal Highway Administration, DoD, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. The designations contained in the FICUN compatibility table for land use do not constitute a Federal determination that any use of land covered by the program is acceptable or unacceptable under Federal, state, or local law. The responsibility for determining the acceptable and permissible land uses and the relationship between specific properties and specific noise contours rests with the local authorities. Air Installation Compatibility Use Zone (AICUZ) Program (DoDI 4165.57). Establishes the AICUZ program, which is similar to the FAA’s Federal Aviation Regulations Part 150 program for civil airports. The AICUZ program is a DoD discretionary program designed to promote compatible land use around military airfields. The military services maintain an AICUZ program to protect the operational integrity of their flying mission. Areas around airfields are exposed to the potential of aircraft accidents despite well-maintained aircraft with highly trained aircrews. DoD developed the AICUZ program to aid in the development of planning mechanisms that protect the safety and health of personnel on and near military airfields and to preserve operational capabilities. The AICUZ program consists of three distinct parts: APZs, hazards to air navigation (height and obstruction criteria established by the FAA), and noise zones. Bases use the AICUZ program to provide land use compatibility guidelines for areas exposed to increased safety risks and noise near the airfield. The noise compatibility guidelines recommended in the AICUZ program are similar to those used by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and FAA to provide information to surrounding jurisdictions to guide planning and regulation of land use. When noise levels exceed a DNL of 65 dB, residential land uses are normally considered incompatible. B.7.3 METHODOLOGY Potential impacts on land use can result from actions that (1) change the suitability of a location for its current or planned use (e.g., noise exposure in residential areas); (2) cause conditions that are unsafe for the public welfare; (3) conflict with the current and planned use of the area based on current zoning, amendments, agreements, regulatory restrictions, management, and land use plans; or (4) displace a current use with a use that does not meet the goals, objectives, and desired use for an area based on public plans or resolutions. The degree of land use effects (negligible, minor, moderate, or significant) is based on the level of land use sensitivity in areas affected by a proposed action, the magnitude of change, and the compatibility of a proposed action with existing or planned land uses. The assessment considers multiple contextual factors that are both quantified and qualitative. The evaluation primarily focuses on changes resulting from the action that may affect off-base areas. Also considered are potential effects on community amenities within the base such as schools, child care facilities, and housing areas. For each scenario, the following land use impact drivers are considered: . Construction and demolition on base (effects such as temporary dust, noise and traffic and longer-term noise or visual changes affecting community areas and nearby off-base locations). The assessment considers the extent of redevelopment, duration, and proximity to sensitive locations of on-base and off-base areas. . O&M activities for the new mission (generating noise, odors, or traffic). The assessment considers whether the action involves any unusual or new activities, and proximity to sensitive locations of on-base and off-base areas. . Aircraft operations at the base and in the surrounding area, including engine run ups, takeoffs and landings, and closed pattern work. The assessment evaluates changes in noise exposure levels and the location of noise relative to existing land use, planned uses, and zoning, focusing on land use compatibility with projected noise levels and accident potential following DoD guidelines. . Change in base population (causing indirect impacts such as congestion in nearby neighborhoods). The following steps are used to evaluate the impacts on land use from the proposed alternatives: 1. Characterize and describe existing land use and conditions (Chapter 3). . Describe general context for the base in the local area (whether urbanized, rural, or natural) and describe jurisdictional boundaries within the area around the airfield. . Describe the overall organization of functions on the base (using site plans, Base General Plans, other NEPA documents). . Describe the land use setting surrounding the base, using aerial photography (National Agriculture Imagery Program [NAIP] 1-meter aerial imagery), notes from site visits, land use plans by local jurisdictions, current zoning. . Describe current compatibility planning efforts for the base and status of compatibility around the airfield (based on AICUZ studies, Joint Land Use Studies, airfield zoning districts, airfield noise complaint logs). . Identify current noise exposure for land uses surrounding the airfield (using maps with baseline noise contours superimposed on aerial photography), describe noise levels affecting current uses and compatibility of the current exposure levels, and identify specific sensitive receptors affected by incompatible noise levels (such as schools and child development centers) based on the DoD noise compatibility guidelines. 2. Evaluate effects on land use of new construction and demolition. The analysis considers direct and indirect effects of redevelopment based on size of construction effort, location of projects relative to sensitive uses (for example, new industrial-type functions relative to family housing areas), and duration of construction. 3. Evaluate effects on land use of new O&M activities. Qualitatively consider if changes in O&M activities can have indirect effects on the suitability of areas outside the base for their current or planned uses. These effects may include dust, noise, traffic, visual modifications. 4. Assess whether any induced changes such as new housing demands in the local area pose any particular concerns for land use. 5. Quantify and locate changes in noise exposure from aircraft operations. . Estimate change in acreage of land on and off the base exposed to noise levels of 65 dB DNL and greater at 5 dB intervals. Consider the relative degree of change in exposure in the surrounding area. . Overlay projected and baseline noise contours on aerial photographs to locate where changes in noise exposure would occur. Identify projected noise exposure for land uses surrounding the airfield (using maps with baseline noise contours superimposed on aerial photography). Describe where the changes occur, what land use is affected, degree of change (decibel increase), and compatibility of the land use with the change. . Where changes in exposure interact with incompatible land use, a more careful evaluation of the zoning and potential future development of the affected area is included. This considers potential for future changes in land use or infill that could heighten an existing incompatible condition. Where residential land is impacted, review of aerial photography and zoning ordinances is used to determine the relative density of homes and potential for future infill. The analysis also identifies how and if current noise compatibility planning is adequate to protect airfield and community interests. 6. The impact assessment considers the degree or intensity of projected accident risk at the airfield in combination with current or possible future incompatible uses in the APZs (context). The analysis rates the degree of existing land use compatibility in the CZs and APZs based on DoD’s land use compatibility guidelines using levels of incompatible land uses and occupied structures within the APZs and CZs. Because accident risk is extremely low, the current condition of land use compatibility in the APZs and CZs is the dominant criteria in assessing impacts on land use. B.8 INFRASTRUCTURE B.8.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Infrastructure consists of the systems and physical structures that enable the population of a USAF base to function. Infrastructure is primarily human-made, with a high correlation between the type and extent of infrastructure and the degree to which an area is characterized as urban, or developed built environment. The availability of infrastructure and its capacity for expansion are essential to the ability of the base to carry out a specific mission, operations, and provide for the needs of the employees and residents. Utilities analyzed for each of the four bases in this EIS include water supply and distribution, sanitary sewer and wastewater systems, stormwater drainage, electrical system, natural gas, solid waste, and transportation. Solid waste management primarily relates to the availability of systems and landfills to support a population’s residential, commercial, and industrial needs. AFI 32-7042, “Waste Management,” incorporates the requirements of Subtitle D, 40 CFR 240 through 244, 257, and 258, applicable Federal regulations, AFIs, and DoD directives. It also establishes the requirement for bases to have a solid waste management plan; procedures for handling, storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste; record keeping and reporting; and pollution prevention (USAF 2009). The infrastructure information contained in this section provides a brief overview of each infrastructure component and describes its capacities, effectiveness, deficiencies, and existing general condition. Transportation infrastructure includes the public roadway network, public transportation systems, airports, railroads, pedestrian/bicycle facilities, and waterborne transportation required for the movement of people, materials, and goods. The proposed action has the potential to impact the public roadways that provide access to the bases, base access control points or gates, and the internal roadway systems of the bases. Roadways are typically assigned a functional classification by state departments of transportation. Functional classification is the process by which streets and highways are grouped into classes, or systems, according to the character of service they are intended to provide. The three main functional classifications for roadways include: . Arterial – These roadways provided mobility so traffic can move from one place to another quickly and safely. . Collector – These roadways link arterials and local roads and perform some of the duties of each. . Local – These roadways provide access to homes, businesses, and other property. B.8.2 REGULATORY SETTING There is no applicable regulatory setting for infrastructure and transportation resources. B.8.3 METHODOLOGY Effects on infrastructure were evaluated for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios based on the potential for disruption or improvement of existing levels of service and additional needs for water, energy and natural gas consumption, wastewater and stormwater drainage systems, and solid waste system availability. Changes in population and proposed development were used to determine impact on infrastructure. For each scenario, the maximum demand or impact to capacity was calculated for the potable water, wastewater, electric and natural gas systems based on the change in population. For the transportation analysis, any change in population was assumed to reside off base. The impact analysis consisted of a quantitative assessment, based on available information for average and peak use and demand data for each on-base utility and the ability of a utility provider to absorb a given level of demand increase for its service area, and a qualitative assessment of the physical condition of each on-base system. Impacts might arise from physical changes to utility supply and distribution systems over their design life cycle and energy needs created by either direct or indirect workforce and population changes related to base activities. An effect would be considered adverse if the proposed FTU or MOB 1 scenario requirements caused any of the following: . A violation of a permit condition or contract with a utility provider . A capacity exceedance of a utility or solid waste facility . If a system could not sustain a mission increase due to poor condition, inefficient function, or operation . If a mission increase would require costly upgrades . A long-term interruption of a utility To assess the potential environmental consequences associated with transportation resources, increased utilization of the existing roadway system and base access gates due to the potential increase of personnel is analyzed, as well as potential effects of construction activities. Impacts could arise from physical changes to circulation, construction-related traffic delays, and changes in traffic volumes. Adverse impacts on roadway capacities would be significant if roads with no history of capacity exceedance had to operate at or above their full design capacity as a result of implementation of the KC-46A scenarios. B.9 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE B.9.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The terms “hazardous materials” and “hazardous waste” refer to substances that, because of their quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristic, may present substantial danger to public health or the environment when released into the environment. Products containing hazardous materials that may result in the generation of hazardous waste include aviation fuel, adhesives, sealants, conversion coatings, corrosion preventative compounds, hydraulic fluids, lubricants, oils, paints, polishes, thinners, and cleaners. B.9.2 REGULATORY SETTING The key Federal regulatory requirements related to hazardous materials and waste include: . Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) . Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11001-11050) . Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 9601-9675) . Community Environmental Response Facilitation Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 9620) . Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (15 U.S.C. 2651) . Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure Rule (40 CFR 112) . USEPA Regulation on Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste (40 CFR 261) . USEPA Regulation on Standards for the Management of Used Oil (40 CFR 279) . USEPA Regulation on Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification (40 CFR 302) . EO 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance . Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 (40 CFR 700–766) . Clean Air Act of 1970, including the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (40 CFR 61) Several USAF regulations address the management and safe handling of hazardous materials and wastes in accordance with applicable Federal and state regulations. These include: . AFI 32-7086, “Hazardous Material Management” . AFI 32-7042, “Solid and Hazardous Waste Compliance” . AFI 32-1052, “Facility Asbestos Management” B.9.3 METHODOLOGY The exact amounts of hazardous waste that would be generated under each scenario are unknown at this time. The qualitative and quantitative assessment of impacts from hazardous materials and waste management focuses on how (context) and to what degree (intensity) each location could affect hazardous materials usage and management, hazardous waste generation and management, and hazardous waste disposal. Potential impacts related to hazardous materials and wastes were analyzed for the following five effects: 1. Generation of hazardous material/waste types or quantities could not be accommodated by the current management system. 2. Increased likelihood of an uncontrolled release of hazardous materials that could contaminate the soil, surface water, groundwater, or air. 3. Non-compliance with applicable Federal and state regulations as a result of the proposed action. 4. Disturbance or creation of contaminated sites, resulting in adverse effects on human health and/or the environment. 5 . Established management policies, procedures, and handling capacities could not accommodate the proposed action. B.10 SOCIOECONOMICS B.10.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Socioeconomics refers to features or characteristics of the social and economic environment. The main concern for socioeconomic resources is the change in personnel associated with the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios that could potentially impact population, employment, earnings, housing, education, and public services. B.10.2 REGULATORY SETTING There is no applicable regulatory setting for socioeconomics. B.10.3 METHODOLOGY The socioeconomic analysis focuses on the effects resulting from the personnel changes, as well as construction and/or operation and maintenance under each scenario. To estimate the changes in population to the ROI, the total number of military personnel, military dependents and family members, and students (if any) as indicated in the personnel tables in Chapter 2 (Tables 2-4, 2-7, 2-10, 2-13, 2-16, 2-19) were added together and assumed to be migrating to the area. For this analysis, any DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors (other base personnel) identified in Chapter 2 associated with the KC-46A FTU scenario, MOB 1 scenario, or KC-135 mission were assumed to be from the local population and were not considered to be incoming personnel. Therefore, under these assumptions, the changes to the number of DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, and contractors would not impact population, housing, education, or public services. To determine the change in on-base jobs, the total change in full-time military personnel, students (if any), DoD civilians, and contractors was added to the existing on-base total work force. Part-time Reservists were not considered to be part of the work force since the Air Force Reserves typically only serve one weekend per month, in any areas they choose to live, and are on temporary duty assignment two weeks a year. For this reason, any change in the number of part-time Reservists associated with each scenario was also not considered as part of the incoming population that would impact housing, economic activity, education, public services, and base services. The economic impact analysis used to determine the effect of construction and operation and maintenance costs (if any) was conducted using the Impact Analysis for Planning (IMPLAN) economic forecasting model. The IMPLAN model uses data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct a mathematical representation of the local economics using the region-specific spending patterns, economic multipliers, and industries (MIG 2012). In this analysis, the IMPLAN model provided representations of the county-wide economy at each location. Economic impacts are analyzed by introducing a change to a specific industry in the form of increased or decreased employment or spending; the IMPLAN model mathematically calculates the resulting changes in the local economy. In this analysis, the IMPLAN model estimates the economic effects of the incoming personnel on spending and employment in the established ROI. The economic impacts analysis separates effects into three components: direct, indirect, and induced. Direct effects are the change in employment and income generated directly by the expenditures of the incoming or outgoing personnel. To produce the goods and services demanded by the incoming personnel, businesses, in turn, may need to purchase additional goods and services from other businesses. The employment and incomes generated by these secondary purchases would result in the indirect effects. Induced effects are the increased household spending generated by the direct and indirect effects. The overall effect from the economic impact analysis is the total number of jobs created throughout the ROI by the direct, indirect, and induced effects. The construction and O&M costs used in the economic activity section were provided by the USAF during the site survey reports. To determine whether the local housing market could support the personnel associated with the FTU or MOB 1 scenarios, several assumptions were made. The first assumption was that DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, and contractors were already residing in the local population and any change to the number of these personnel would not influence the local housing market. The second assumption was that the total number of homes required off base was equal to the total number of incoming full-time military personnel. This number was compared against the number of vacant housing units as defined by the 2010 census. If the number of incoming full-time military personnel did not exceed the number of vacant housing units as defined by the 2010 census, the housing market in the ROI was anticipated to be able to support the incoming population. Students assigned to the FTU would be assumed to be in transient status. Of the 200 students associated with the FTU scenario, 180 students would be lodged in either on base or off base facilities. The other 20 students would be assumed to be non-prior service Airmen, and would thus be required to live in an on base dormitory. Therefore, under each of the FTU scenarios, there would be a potential need for 180 lodging units on or off base and 20 dormitory units on base to support the average daily student load of 200. To determine the total dependents for each base associated with the KC-46A mission and KC-135 drawdown mission (where appropriate), 65 percent of all full-time military personnel, as identified in the personnel tables in Chapter 2 (See Tables 2-4, 2-7, 2-10, 2-13, 2-16, 2-19), were assumed to be accompanied. Each accompanied military member was assumed to be accompanied by 2.5 dependents, or 1 spouse and approximately 1.5 children. All children were assumed to be of school age. Therefore, to determine the total number of school-aged children, a multiplier of 1.5 was applied to 65 percent of the full-time military personnel. Public services were analyzed by considering the overall percentage change to the county population. Base services were analyzed by considering the capacity, staffing, and infrastructure available to support the incoming personnel. The magnitude of potential impacts can vary greatly, depending on the location of the proposed action. If potential socioeconomic changes were to result in substantial shifts in population trends or a decrease in regional spending or earning patterns, those effects would be considered adverse. A proposed action could have a significant effect with respect to socioeconomic conditions in the surrounding ROI if the following were to occur: . Change in the local business volume, employment, or population that exceeds the ROI’s historical annual change . Adverse change on social services or social conditions, including property values, school enrollment, county or municipal expenditures, or crime rates B.11 ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN B.11.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The resource considered for environmental justice is potentially affected populations that meet certain characteristics based on race, income, and age. The resource is defined relatively, in order to understand if impacts from an action are occurring in areas that are disproportionately composed of minorities, low-income persons, and children. This concern arises because large impact projects have historically used sites where real estate values are lower and/or more industrialized. Locations with low property values have tended to attract development of affordable and marginal housing. This dynamic tends to perpetuate and often pre-dates the enactment of community land use ordinances. The intent of environmental justice is to reduce the burden of impacts on socially and economically vulnerable populations. B.11.2 REGULATORY SETTING Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations, EO 12898, directs Federal agencies to address environmental and human health conditions in minority and low-income communities. In addition to environmental justice issues are concerns pursuant to EO 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks, which directs Federal agencies to identify and assess environmental health and safety risks that may disproportionately affect children. USAF guidance for implementation of the EO is contained in the Guide for Environmental Justice Analysis with the Environmental Impact Analysis Process, dated November 1997 (CEQ 1997). Minority populations include all persons identified by the 2010 census to be of Hispanic origin, regardless of race, and all persons not of Hispanic origin other than White (i.e., non-Hispanic persons who are Black, American Indian, Eskimo or Aleut, Asian or Pacific Islander, or other race). The 2010 census did not collect information on income or poverty levels. The latest information on poverty was released in 2012 as a 5-year average from 2007 to 2011 as part of the American Community Survey. Low-income populations include persons living below the poverty level. The poverty level or threshold varies by size of family and number of children under 18 years (i.e., $23,021 for a family of four in 2011). If the total family income is less than the threshold, then the family and every individual in it (or unrelated individuals) is in poverty. The percentage of low-income persons is calculated as a percentage of all persons for whom the U.S. Census Bureau determines poverty status, which is generally a slightly lower number than the total population, as it excludes institutionalized persons, persons in military group quarters and in college dormitories, and unrelated individuals under 15 years old. B.11.3 METHODOLOGY Analysis of environmental justice focuses on potentially unavoidable significant adverse impacts on any of the resource areas evaluated in the EIS. If no potentially significant impacts are identified, an evaluation of environmental justice is not triggered. Where potentially significant impacts are identified in the EIS, the percentages of low-income persons, minority persons, and children under 18 are calculated for the population of the affected area. These percentages are compared to those of the region of comparison to determine if the affected population is disproportionately composed of low-income persons, minority persons, and children under age 18 (i.e., higher than the region of comparison). Since the proposed construction activities would occur within the base boundaries, the only action with the potential to cause adverse impacts is related to the new noise levels generated in the vicinity of each of the bases under consideration for the FTU or MOB 1 actions. Therefore, the ROI for the environmental justice analysis in this EIS uses the county as the region of comparison, and focuses on the demographics of specific affected populations for each of the bases evaluated. Should the analysis of impacts in the EIS conclude that a potentially unavoidable significant impact could occur, the composition of the affected population (i.e., percentages of low-income, minority, and children under age 18) is compared to the region (i.e., the county) to assess if the impact is borne disproportionately by minorities, low-income persons, or children. For the purposes of this analysis, children are defined as persons age 17 and younger, as enumerated by the 2010 census. For the purposes of this analysis, the proportion of affected low-income population in the 2000 census is evaluated to the census tract level. That percentage is then applied to the affected 2010 population as an estimate of the number of low-income persons affected under the 2010 census. The proportion of affected minority and children under 18 in the 2000 census is evaluated to the census block level, and then applied to the affected 2010 population. B.12 REFERENCES AFSC (Armed Forces Services Corporation), 2013. Aircraft Accident Statistics “C” Type Aircraft, Retrieved From http://www.afsec.af.mil/organizations/aviation/index.asp, 16 May 2013. Air Force Civil Engineer Center, 2013. Air Emissions Guide for Air Force Mobile Sources - Methods for Estimating Emissions of Air Pollutants for Mobile Sources at U.S. Air Force Installations. Compliance Technical Support Branch. AMC (Air Mobility Command), 2004. 55th ARS Inflight Guide All Original, 21 August 2004. AMC (Air Mobility Command), 2012. Mobility Air Forces Fuel Jettison Policy. Authority: HQ AMC/A37V FCIF, 3 May 2012. CEQ (Council on Environmental Equality), 1997. Guide for Environmental Justice Analysis with the Environmental Impact Analysis Process, November. CEQ (Council on Environmental Equality), 2010. Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. CRS (Congressional Research Service), 2002. Report for Congress Military Aviation Safety, Congressional Research Service Order Code RL 31571, 16 September 2002. Deepti, K.C., 2003. Environmental Assessment of Fuel Jettisoning and Development of a Geographical/Environmental Modeling with GIS Software. DoD (Department of Defense), 1999. Annotated Policy Document for the American Indian and Alaska Native Policy. DoD (U.S. Department of Defense), 2007. DoD Minimum Antiterrorism Standards for Buildings. DoD (Department of Defense), 2008. Department of Defense Instruction Number 4715.16 Cultural Resources Management. 18 September 2008. FICUN (Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise), 1980. Guidelines for Considering Noise in Land-Use Planning and Control. June. ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), 2013. ICAO Engine Exhaust Emissions Data Bank - Subsonic Engines. Engine Identification: PW4062. Test Organization: Pratt and Whitney. Test Dates: November 30, 2012 to March 12, 2013. MIG (MIG, Inc.), 2012. IMPLAN® (IMPact Analysis for PLANning) Version 3.1 (Computer program). Hudson, WI. Mitsch, W.J. & Gosselink, J.G., 2000. Wetlands, [3rd edition], John Wiley and Sons, NY. NPS (National Park Service), 1998. Guidelines for Evaluating and Documenting Traditional Cultural Properties. Patricia L. Parker and Thomas F. King. Originally published 1990; revised 1992, 1998. Teske, M.E. and Curbishley, T.B., 2000. Fuel Jettison Simulation Model User Manual, Version 2.0. Continuum Dynamics, Inc., Princeton, NJ. USAF (Unites States Air Force), 2002. US Air Force Accident Study Update, Department of the Air Force, US Air Force Headquarters, 19 December 2002. USAF (U.S. Air Force), 2009. Air Force Instruction 32-7042, Waste Management, 15 April 2009. USAF (U.S. Air Force), 2013. Data adjusted gross weight information for the KC46 environmental impact study for KC46 basing CY2008 - CY2012 for KC135s and KC10s, 618th Air and Space Operations Center (Tanker Airlift Control Center) Data Division 618 AOC (TACC)/XOND. USD (Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisitions, Technology, and Logistics), 2009. Memorandum Regarding Methodology for Assessing Hearing Loss Risk and Impacts in DoD Environmental Impact Analysis. 16 Jun 2009. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 1995. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, Volume I. Section 13.2.3, Heavy Construction Operations. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch13/final/c13s02-3.pdf. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2009. NONROAD2008a Model. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/otaq/nonrdmdl.htm. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2013. MOVES2010b Model. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/otaq/models/moves/index.htm. USGCRP (United States Global Change Research Program), 2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. Retrieved from http://www.globalchange.gov/ usimpacts, 26 March 2010. PUBLIC DOCUMENTS UFC 3-260-01, Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design Air Force Air Force Occupational Safety and Health Standard 48-20 Air Force Instructions AFI 32-1052 – Facility Asbestos Management AFI 32-7042 – Solid and Hazardous Waste Compliance AFI 32-7063 – Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Program AFI 32-7064 – Integrated Natural Resources Management AFI 32-7065 – Cultural Resources Management AFI 32-7086 – Hazardous Material Management Code of Federal Regulations 7 CFR 658 – Farmland Protection Policy Act 14 CFR 77 – Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace 29 CFR 1910.95 – Occupational Noise Exposure 30 CFR 320-330, Section 404 30 CFR 329, Section 10 – Rivers and Harbors Act 33 CFR 328.3 – Definition of Waters of the United States 36 CFR 60.4 – National Register of Historic Places 36 CFR 63 – Determinations of Eligibility for Inclusion in the National Register 36 CFR 79 – Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections 36 CFR 800 – Protection of Historic Properties 36 CFR 800.16(d) – Definition of Area of potential effects 40 CFR 61 – National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 40 CFR 93, Subpart B – Determining Conformity of General Federal Actions to State or Federal Implementation Plans 40 CFR 112 – Oil Pollution Prevention 40 CFR 225.1 to 233.71 – Ocean Dumping 40 CFR 261 – EPA Regulation on Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste 40 CFR 279 – EPA Regulation on Standards for the Management of Used Oil 40 CFR 302 – EPA Regulation on Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification 40 CFR Parts 700-766 – Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 40 CFR 1508.27(b) – Council on Environmental Quality 43 CFR 7 – Protection of Archaeological Resources Department of Defense Instructions DoDI 4165.57 – AICUZ, Ground Obstructions DoDI 4710.02 – DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes DoDI 4715.16 – Cultural Resources Management DoDI 6055.12 – Occupational Noise and Hearing Conservation Program Executive Orders EO 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment EO 11990, Protection of Wetlands EO 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites EO 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments EO 13287, Preserve America EO 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance United States Code 15 U.S.C. 2651, Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act of 1986 16 U.S.C. 668 – 668d, Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940 16 U.S.C. 703 – 712, Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 16 U.S.C. 1536, Endangered Species Act of 1973 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., Clean Water Act of 1977 42 U.S.C. 6901, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 42 U.S.C. 7506(c) Transportation Conformity of the Clean Air Act 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675, Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 42 U.S.C. 9620, Community Environmental Response Facilitation Act of 1992 42 U.S.C. 11001-11050, Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 APPENDIX C BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE NOISE ANALYSIS This appendix includes effects on some specific resources that may not be affected by regularly scheduled KC-46A training operations (e.g., noise impacts on manatees). KC-46A mission sorties could occur on an occasional basis at locations worldwide as part of real-world contingency operations. Furthermore, discussion of impacts on a wide variety of resource types provides additional perspective and context for those resources impacted by regular operations. This appendix provides a general noise primer to educate the reader on what constitutes noise, how it is measured, and the studies that were used in support of how and why noise is modeled. Noise is generally described as unwanted sound. Unwanted sound can be based on objective effects (such as hearing loss or damage to structures) or subjective judgments (community annoyance). Noise analysis thus requires a combination of physical measurement of sound, physical and physiological effects, plus psycho- and socio-acoustic effects. This appendix describes how sound is measured and summarizes noise impacts in terms of community acceptability and land use compatibility; gives detailed descriptions of the effects of noise that lead to the impact guidelines presented; and provides a description of the specific methods used to predict aircraft noise, including a detailed description of sonic booms. C.1 NOISE DESCRIPTORS AND IMPACT The following subsections describe the characteristics used to describe sound, the specific noise metrics used for noise impact analysis, and how environmental impact and land use compatibility are judged in terms of these quantities. C.1.1 QUANTIFYING SOUND Measurement and perception of sound involve two basic physical characteristics: amplitude and frequency. Amplitude is a measure of the strength of the sound and is directly measured in terms of the pressure of a sound wave. Because sound pressure varies in time, various types of pressure averages are usually used. Frequency, commonly perceived as pitch, is the number of times per second the sound causes air molecules to oscillate. Frequency is measured in units of cycles per second, or hertz (Hz). Amplitude. The loudest sounds the human ear can comfortably hear have acoustic energy one trillion times the acoustic energy of sounds the ear can barely detect. Because of this vast range, attempts to represent sound amplitude by pressure are generally unwieldy. Sound is, therefore, usually represented on a logarithmic scale with a unit called the decibel (dB). Sound measured on the decibel scale is referred to as a sound level. The threshold of human hearing is approximately 0 dB, and the threshold of discomfort or pain is around 120 dB. Figure C-1 is a chart of A-weighted sound levels from typical sounds. Some (air conditioner, vacuum cleaner) are continuous sounds whose levels are constant for some time. Some (automobile, heavy truck) are the maximum sound during a vehicle passby. Some (urban daytime, urban nighttime) are averages over some extended period. F35B-331 Aircraft Operations and Noise Source: Derived from the Handbook of Noise Control, Harris 1979, FICAN 1997. Figure C-1. Typical A-Weighted Sound Levels of Common Sounds Because of the logarithmic nature of the decibel scale, sounds levels do not add and subtract directly and are somewhat cumbersome to handle mathematically. However, some simple rules of thumb are useful in dealing with sound levels. First, if a sound’s intensity is doubled, the sound level increases by 3 dB, regardless of the initial sound level. For example: 60 dB + 60 dB = 63 dB, and 80 dB + 80 dB = 83 dB. The total sound level produced by two sounds of different levels is usually only slightly more than the higher of the two. For example: 60.0 dB + 70.0 dB = 70.4 dB. Because the addition of sound levels behaves differently than that of ordinary numbers, such addition is often referred to as “decibel addition” or “energy addition.” The latter term arises from the fact that the combination of decibel values consists of first converting each decibel value to its corresponding acoustic energy, then adding the energies using the normal rules of addition, and finally converting the total energy back to its decibel equivalent. The difference in decibels between two sounds represents the ratio of the amplitudes of those two sounds. Because human senses tend to be proportional (i.e., detect whether one sound is twice as big as another) rather than absolute (i.e., detect whether one sound is a given number of pressure units bigger than another), the decibel scale correlates well with human response. Under laboratory conditions, differences in sound level of 1 dB can be detected by the human ear. In the community, the smallest change in average noise level that can be detected is about 3 dB. A change in sound level of about 10 dB is usually perceived by the average person as a doubling (or halving) of the sound’s loudness, and this relation holds true for loud sounds and for quieter sounds. A decrease in sound level of 10 dB actually represents a 90 percent decrease in sound intensity but only a 50 percent decrease in perceived loudness because of the nonlinear response of the human ear (similar to most human senses). The one exception to the exclusive use of levels, rather than physical pressure units, to quantify sound is in the case of sonic booms. Sonic booms are coherent waves with specific characteristics. There is a long-standing tradition of describing individual sonic booms by the amplitude of the shock waves, in pounds per square foot. This is particularly relevant when assessing structural effects as opposed to loudness or cumulative community response. In this environmental analysis, sonic booms are quantified by either decibels or pounds per square foot, as appropriate for the particular impact being assessed. Frequency. The normal human ear can hear frequencies from about 20 Hz to about 20,000 Hz. It is most sensitive to sounds in the 1,000 to 4,000 Hz range. When measuring community response to noise, it is common to adjust the frequency content of the measured sound to correspond to the frequency sensitivity of the human ear. This adjustment is called A-weighting (ANSI 1988). Sound levels that have been so adjusted are referred to as A-weighted sound levels. The audible quality of high-thrust engines in modern military combat aircraft can be somewhat different than other aircraft, including (at high throttle settings) the characteristic nonlinear crackle of high-thrust engines. The spectral characteristics of various noises are accounted for by A-weighting, which approximates the response of the human ear but does not necessarily account for quality. There are other, more detailed, weighting factors that have been applied to sounds. In the 1950s and 1960s, when noise from civilian jet aircraft became an issue, substantial research was performed to determine what characteristics of jet noise were a problem. The metrics Perceived Noise Level and Effective Perceived Noise Level were developed. These accounted for nonlinear behavior of hearing and the importance of low frequencies at high levels, and for many years airport/airbase noise contours were presented in terms of Noise Exposure Forecast, which was based on Perceived Noise Level and Effective Perceived Noise Level. In the 1970s, however, it was realized that the primary intrusive aspect of aircraft noise was the high noise level, a factor that is well represented by A-weighted levels and day-night average sound level (DNL). The refinement of Perceived Noise Level, Effective Perceived Noise Level, and Noise Exposure Forecast was not significant in protecting the public from noise. There has been continuing research on noise metrics and the importance of sound quality, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) for military aircraft noise and by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for civil aircraft noise. The metric Ldnmr, which is described later and accounts for the increased annoyance of rapid onset rate of sound, is a product of this long-term research. The amplitude of A-weighted sound levels is measured in decibels. It is common for some noise analysts to denote the unit of A-weighted sounds by dBA. As long as the use of A-weighting is understood, there is no difference between dB or dBA: it is only important that the use of A-weighting be made clear. In this environmental analysis, A-weighted sound levels are reported as dB. Time Averaging. Sound pressure of a continuous sound varies greatly with time, so it is customary to deal with sound levels that represent averages over time. Levels presented as instantaneous (i.e., as might be read from the display of a sound level meter) are based on averages of sound energy over either 1/8 second (fast) or 1 second (slow). The formal definitions of fast and slow levels are somewhat complex, with details that are important to the makers and users of instrumentation. They may, however, be thought of as levels corresponding to the root mean square sound pressure measured over the 1/8-second or 1-second periods. C.1.2 NOISE METRICS C.1.2.1 Sound Exposure Level Individual time-varying noise events have two main characteristics: a sound level that changes throughout the event and a period of time during which the event is heard. Although the maximum sound level reached during the event provides some measure of the intrusiveness of the event, it alone does not completely describe the total event. The period of time during which the sound is heard is also significant. The Sound Exposure Level (abbreviated SEL or LAE for A-weighted sounds) combines both of these characteristics into a single metric. SEL is a composite metric that represents both the intensity of a sound and its duration. Mathematically, the mean square sound pressure is computed over the duration of the event, then multiplied by the duration in seconds, and the resultant product is turned into a sound level. It does not directly represent the sound level heard at any given time, but rather provides a measure of the net impact of the entire acoustic event. Table C-1 shows SEL values corresponding to representative aircraft in the specified power settings and aircraft configurations. Table C-1. Representative Sound Exposure Levels Aircraft (engine type) Power Setting Power Unit SEL Values (in dBA) At Varying Distances (in feet) 500 1,000 2,000 5,000 10,000 Takeoff/Departure Operations (at 300 knots airspeed) A-10A 6200 NF 102.6 96.2 88.5 76.9 68.3 B-1 97.5% RPM 129.5 123.1 116.5 107.3 99.3 F-15 (P220) 90% NC 117.3 112 106.1 97 88.4 F-16 (P229) 93% NC 116.5 110.8 104.6 95 86.3 F-22 100% ETR 124.2 118.7 112.7 103.5 95.2 Landing/Arrival Operations (at 160 knots airspeed) A-10A 5225 NF 97.9 91.5 83.3 67 55 B-1 90% RPM 103.4 98.3 92.7 83.4 74.4 F-15 (P220) 75% NC 94.2 89.2 83.6 74.9 66.9 F-16 (P229) 83.5% NC 97.4 92.1 86.3 76.9 68.2 F-22 43% ETR 114.9 109.3 103.1 93.5 84.5 Key: Engine Units of Power: ETR = engine thrust ratio; NC = engine core revolutions per minute; NF = engine fan revolutions per minute; RPM = revolutions per minute Source: SELCalc2 (Flyover Noise Calculator), Using NoiseMap 6/7 and Maximum Omega10 Result as the defaults.  C.1.2.2 Day-Night Average Sound Level Noise tends to be more intrusive at night than during the day. This effect is accounted for by applying a 10 dB penalty to events that occur after 10:00 P.M. and before 7:00 A.M. If the equivalent continuous sound pressure level (Leq) is computed over a 24-hour period with this nighttime penalty applied, the result is the DNL. DNL is the community noise metric recommended by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) (USEPA 1974) and has been adopted by most Federal agencies (FICON 1992). It has been well established that DNL correlates well with long-term community response to noise (Finegold et al. 1994; Schultz 1978). DNL accounts for the total, or cumulative, noise impact at a given location, and for this reason is often referred to as a “cumulative” metric. It was noted earlier that, for impulsive sounds, such as sonic booms, C-weighting is more appropriate than A-weighting. DNL computed with C-weighting is denoted CDNL or LCdn. This procedure has been standardized, and impact interpretive criteria similar to those for DNL have been developed (CHABA 1981). C.1.2.3 Onset-Adjusted Monthly Day-Night Average Sound Level Aircraft operations in military training airspace generate a noise environment somewhat different from other community noise environments. Overflights are sporadic, occurring at random times and varying from day to day and week to week. This situation differs from most community noise environments, in which noise tends to be continuous or patterned. Individual military overflight events also differ from typical community noise events in that noise from a low-altitude, high-airspeed flyover can have a rather sudden onset. To represent these differences, the conventional DNL metric is adjusted to account for the “surprise” effect of the sudden onset of aircraft noise events on humans (Plotkin et al. 1987; Stusnick et al. 1992, 1993). For aircraft exhibiting a rate of increase in sound level (called onset rate) of from 15 to 150 dB per second, an adjustment or penalty ranging from 0 to 11 dB is added to the normal SEL. Onset rates above 150 dB per second require an 11 dB penalty, while onset rates below 15 dB per second require no adjustment. The DNL is then determined in the same manner as for conventional aircraft noise events and is designated as onset-rate adjusted day-night average sound level (abbreviated Ldnmr). Because of the irregular occurrences of aircraft operations, the number of average daily operations is determined by using the calendar month with the highest number of operations. The monthly average is denoted Ldnmr. Noise levels are calculated the same way for both DNL and Ldnmr. Ldnmr is interpreted by the same criteria as used for DNL. C.1.3 NOISE IMPACT C.1.3.1 Community Reaction Studies of long-term community annoyance to numerous types of environmental noise show that DNL correlates well with the annoyance. Schultz (1978) showed a consistent relationship between DNL and annoyance. Shultz’s original curve fit (Figure C-2) shows that there is a remarkable consistency in results of attitudinal surveys which relate the percentages of groups of people who express various degrees of annoyance when exposed to different DNL. FigB-2 Source: Schultz 1978. Figure C-2. Community Surveys of Noise Annoyance Another study reaffirmed this relationship (Fidell et al. 1989). Figure C-3 shows an updated form of the curve fit (Finegold et al. 1994) in comparison with the original. The updated fit, which does not differ substantially from the original, is the current preferred form. In general, correlation coefficients of 0.85 to 0.95 are found between the percentages of groups of people highly annoyed and the level of average noise exposure. The correlation coefficients for the annoyance of individuals are relatively low, however, on the order of 0.5 or less. This is not surprising, considering the varying personal factors that influence the manner in which individuals react to noise. For example, individuals with autism are often very strongly affected by sudden noises (Tang et al. 2002). Persons with autism often report experiencing oversensitivity to noise and are often particularly sensitive to high-pitched or sudden onset noises (Grandin 1991). Nevertheless, findings substantiate that community annoyance to aircraft noise is represented quite reliably using DNL. As noted earlier for SEL, DNL does not represent the sound level heard at any particular time, but rather represents the total sound exposure. DNL accounts for the sound level of individual noise events, the duration of those events, and the number of events. Its use is endorsed by the scientific community (ANSI 1980, 1988, 2005; FICON 1992; FICUN 1980; USEPA 1974). While DNL is the best metric for quantitatively assessing cumulative noise impact, it does not lend itself to intuitive interpretation by non-experts. Accordingly, it is common for environmental noise analyses to include other metrics for illustrative purposes. A general indication of the noise environment can be presented by noting the maximum sound levels that can occur and the number of times per day noise events will be loud enough to be heard. Use of other metrics as supplements to DNL has been endorsed by Federal agencies (FICON 1992).  Figure C-3. Response of Communities to Noise; Comparison of Original (Schultz 1978) and Current (Finegold et al. 1994) Curve Fits The Schultz curve is generally applied to annual average DNL. Ldnmr was previously described and presented as being appropriate for quantifying noise in military airspace. The Schultz curve is used with Ldnmr as the noise metric. Ldnmr is always equal to or greater than DNL, so impact is generally higher than would have been predicted if the onset rate and busiest-month adjustments were not accounted for. There are several points of interest in the noise-annoyance relation. The first is DNL of 65 dB. This is a level most commonly used for noise planning purposes and represents a compromise between community impact and the need for activities like aviation, which do cause noise. Areas exposed to DNL above 65 dB are generally not considered suitable for residential use. The second is DNL of 55 dB, which was identified by USEPA as a level “...requisite to protect the public health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety” (USEPA 1974), which is essentially a level below which adverse impact is not expected. The third is DNL of 75 dB. This is the lowest level at which adverse health effects could be credible (USEPA 1974). The very high annoyance levels correlated with DNL of 75 dB make such areas unsuitable for residential land use. Table C-2 shows the relation between annoyance and DNL. Table C-2. Relation Between Annoyance and DNL dB DNL Percent (%) Highly Annoyed 45 0.83 50 1.66 55 3.31 60 6.48 65 12.29 70 22.10 C.1.3.2 Land Use Compatibility As noted above, the inherent variability between individuals makes it impossible to predict accurately how any individual will react to a given noise event. Nevertheless, when a community is considered as a whole, its overall reaction to noise can be represented with a high degree of confidence. As described above, the best noise exposure metric for this correlation is the DNL or Ldnmr for military overflights. In June 1980, an ad hoc Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise published guidelines (FICUN 1980) relating DNL to compatible land uses. This committee was composed of representatives from DoD, the U.S. Department of Transportation, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, USEPA, and the Veterans Administration. Since the issuance of these guidelines, Federal agencies have generally adopted these guidelines for their noise analyses. Following the lead of the committee, DoD and FAA adopted the concept of land use compatibility as the accepted measure of aircraft noise effect. The FAA included the committee’s guidelines in the Federal Aviation Regulations (DOT 1984). These guidelines are reprinted in Table C-3, along with the explanatory notes included in the regulation. Although these guidelines are not mandatory (note the footnote “*” in the table), they provide the best means for determining noise impact in airport communities. In general, residential land uses normally are not compatible with outdoor DNL values above 65 dB, and the extent of land areas and populations exposed to DNL of 65 dB and higher provides the best means for assessing the noise impacts of alternative aircraft actions. In some cases a change in noise level, rather than an absolute threshold, may be a more appropriate measure of impact. Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65– 69 dB 70– 74 dB 75– 79 dB 80+ dB 10 Residential 11 Household units        11.11 Single units; detached N N Ya Ak Bk N N 11.12 Single units; semidetached N N N Ak Bk N N 11.13 Singe units; attached row N N N Ak Bk N N 11.21 Two units; side-by-side N N N Ak Bk N N 11.22 Two units; one above the other N N N Ak Bk N N 11.31 Apartments; walk up N N N Ak Bk N N 11.32 Apartments; elevator N N N Ak Bk N N 12 Group quarters N N N Ak Bk N N 13 Residential hotels N N N Ak Bk N N 14 Mobile home parks or courts N N N N N N N 15 Transient lodgings N N N Ak Bk Ck N 16 Other residential N N Na Ak Bk N N 20 Manufacturing 21 Food and kindred products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 22 Textile mill products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 23 Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials; manufacturing N N Nb Y Yl Ym Yn Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential (Continued) Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65-69 dB 70-74 dB 75-79 dB 80+ dB 24 Lumber and wood products (except furniture); manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 25 Furniture and fixtures; manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 26 Paper and allied products; manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 27 Printing, publishing, and allied industries N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 28 Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing N N Nb Y Yl Ym Yn 29 Petroleum refining and related industries N N N Y Yl Ym Yn 30 Manufacturing 31 Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing N Nb Nb Y Yl Ym Yn 32 Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 33 Primary metal industries N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 34 Fabricated metal products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 35 Professional, scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks; manufacturing N N Nb Y A B N 39 Miscellaneous manufacturing N Yb Yb Y Yl Ym Yn 40 Transportation, Communications, and Utilities 41 Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railroad transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 42 Motor vehicle transportation Nc Y Y Y Yl Ym Yn 43 Aircraft transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 44 Marine craft transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 45 Highway and street right-of-way Nc Y Y Y Yl Ym Yn 46 Automobile parking Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 47 Communications Nc Yd Y Y Ao Bo N 48 Utilities Nc Yd Y Y Y Yl Ym 49 Other transportation communications and utilities Nc Yd Y Y Ao Bo N 50 Trade 51 Wholesale trade N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 52 Retail trade-building materials, hardware and farm equipment N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 53 Retail trade-general merchandise Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 54 Retail trade-food Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 55 Retail trade-automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 56 Retail trade-apparel and accessories Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 57 Retail trade-furniture, home furnishings and equipment Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 58 Retail trade-eating and drinking establishments N N Nb Y A B N 59 Other retail trade N Nb Yb Y A B N 60 Services 61 Finance, insurance, and real estate services N N Yf Y A B N 62 Personal services N N Yf Y A B N  Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential (Continued) Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65-69 dB 70-74 dB 75-79 dB 80+ dB 62.4 Cemeteries N Yg Yg Y Yl Ym Yn,b,a 63 Business services N Yh Yh Y A B N 64 Repair services N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 65 Professional services N N Yf Y A B N 65.1 Hospitals, nursing homes N N N A* B* N N 65.1 Other medical facilities N N N Y A B N 66 Contract construction services N Yf Y Y A B N 67 Governmental services Nf N Yf Y* A* B* N 68 Educational services N N N A* B* N N 69 Miscellaneous services N Nb Yb Y A B N 70 Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 71 Cultural activities (including churches) N N Nb A* B* N N 71.2 Nature exhibits N Yb Y Y* N N N 72 Public assembly N N N Y N N N 72.1 Auditoriums, concert halls N N N A B N N 72.11 Outdoor music shell, amphitheatres N N N N N N N 72.2 Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports N N N Yq Yq N N 73 Amusements N N Yh Y Y N N 74 Recreational activities (including golf courses, riding stables, water recreation) N Yh,i,j Y Y* A* B* N 75 Resorts and group camps N N N Y* Y* N N 76 Parks N Yh Yh Y* Y* N N 79 Other cultural, entertainment, and recreation Ni Yi Yi Y* Y* N N 80 Resources Production and Extraction 81 Agriculture (except livestock) Yp Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 81.5 to 81.7 Livestock farming and animal breeding N Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 82 Agricultural-related activities N Ye Y Yr Ys N N 83 Forestry activities and related services Ne Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 84 Fishing activities and related services Ne Ye Y Y Y Y Y 85 Mining activities and related services N Ye Y Y Y Y Y 89 Other resources production and extraction N Ye Y Y Y Y Y a Suggested maximum density of 1–2 dwelling units per acre possibly increased under a Planned Unit Development where maximum lot coverage is less than 20 percent. b Within each land use category, uses exist where further definition may be needed due to the variation of densities in people and structures. Shopping malls and shopping centers are considered incompatible in any accident potential zone (APZ). c The placing of structures, buildings, or aboveground utility lines in the clear zone is subject to severe restrictions. In a majority of the clear zones, these items are prohibited. See Air Force Instruction (AFI) 32-7063 and Air Force Manual (AFMAN) 32-1123 for specific guidance. d No passenger terminals and no major aboveground transmission lines in APZ I. e Factors to be considered: labor intensity, structural coverage, explosive characteristics, and air pollution. f Low-intensity office uses only. Meeting places, auditoriums, etc., are not recommended. g Excludes chapels. h Facilities must be low intensity. i Clubhouse not recommended. j Areas for gatherings of people are not recommended.  k Footnote k as applied to noise level reduction (NLR) designation A: Although local conditions may require residential use, it is discouraged in DNL 65–69 dB and strongly discouraged in DNL 70–74 dB. An evaluation should be conducted prior to approvals, indicating that a demonstrated community need for residential use would not be met if development were prohibited in these zones, and that there are no viable alternative locations.  Footnote k as applied to NLR designation B: Where the community determines the residential uses must be allowed, measures to achieve outdoor to indoor NLR for DNL 65–69 dB and DNL 70–74 dB should be incorporated into building codes and considered in individual approvals.  Footnote k as applied to NLR designation C: NLR criteria will not eliminate outdoor noise problems. However, building location and site planning and design and use of berms and barriers can help mitigate outdoor exposure, particularly from near ground-level sources. Measures that reduce outdoor noise should be used whenever practical in preference to measures that only protect interior spaces. l Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 65–69 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. m Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 70–74 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. n Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 75–79 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. o If noise-sensitive, use indicated NLR; if not, the use is compatible. p No buildings. q Land use is compatible provided special sound reinforcement systems are installed. r Residential buildings require the same NLR required for facilities in the DNL 65–69 dB range. s Residential buildings require the same NLR required for facilities in the DNL 70–74 dB range. t Residential buildings are not permitted. u Land use is not recommended. If the community decides the use is necessary, hearing protection devices should be worn by personnel. Key: SLUCM = Standard Land Use Coding Manual, U.S. Department of Transportation; Y = Yes; land use and related structures are compatible without restriction; N = No; land use and related structures are not compatible and should be prohibited; A, B, or C = Land use and related structures generally compatible; measures to achieve noise level reduction of A (25 dB), B (30 dB), or C (35 dB) should be incorporated into the design and construction of structures; A*, B*, or C* = Land use generally compatible with noise level reduction. However, measures to achieve an overall noise level reduction do not necessarily solve noise difficulties and additional evaluation is warranted. See appropriate footnotes; * = The designation of these uses as “compatible” in this zone reflects individual Federal agency and program consideration of general cost and feasibility factors, as well as past community experiences and program objectives. Localities, when evaluating the application of these guidelines to specific situations, may have different concerns or goals to consider. C.2 NOISE EFFECTS The discussion in the previous section presented the global effect of noise on communities. The following sections describe particular noise effects. These effects include non-auditory health effects, annoyance, speech interference, sleep disturbance, noise-induced hearing impairment, noise effects on animals and wildlife, noise effects on property values, and noise effects on structures, terrain, and cultural resources. C.2.1 ANNOYANCE The primary effect of aircraft noise on exposed communities is one of annoyance. Noise annoyance is defined by the USEPA as any negative subjective reaction on the part of an individual or group (USEPA 1974). As noted in the discussion of DNL above, community annoyance is best measured by that metric. Because the USEPA Levels Document (USEPA 1974) identified DNL of 55 dB as “. . . requisite to protect public health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety,” it is commonly assumed that 55 dB should be adopted as a criterion for community noise analysis. From a noise exposure perspective, that would be an ideal selection. However, financial resources are generally not available to achieve that goal. Most agencies have identified DNL of 65 dB as a criterion that protects those most impacted by noise, and that can often be achieved on a practical basis (FICON 1992). This corresponds to about 12 percent of the exposed population being highly annoyed. Although DNL of 65 dB is widely used as a benchmark for significant noise impact, and is often an acceptable compromise, it is not a statutory limit, and it is appropriate to consider other thresholds in particular cases. Local ordinances and regulations have been adopted by many municipal governments to prevent civilian development near military installations that would be incompatible with noise generated by military operations. The decision to adopt such measures, and the specific content of the ordinances and regulations, is up to the municipal government. In many cases, the 65 dB DNL noise contour line is adopted as the threshold level above which land use restrictions are invoked. C.2.2 SPEECH INTERFERENCE Speech interference associated with aircraft noise is a primary cause of annoyance to individuals on the ground. The disruption of routine activities such as radio or television listening, telephone use, or family conversation gives rise to frustration and irritation. The quality of speech communication is also important in classrooms, offices, and industrial settings and can cause fatigue and vocal strain in those who attempt to communicate over the noise. Speech is an acoustic signal characterized by rapid fluctuations in sound level and frequency pattern. It is essential for optimum speech intelligibility to recognize these continually shifting sound patterns. Not only does noise diminish the ability to perceive the auditory signal, but it also reduces a listener’s ability to follow the pattern of signal fluctuation. In general, interference with speech communication occurs when intrusive noise exceeds about 60 dB (FICON 1992). Indoor speech interference can be expressed as a percentage of sentence intelligibility among two people speaking in relaxed conversation approximately 3 feet apart in a typical living room or bedroom (USEPA 1974). The percentage of sentence intelligibility is a non-linear function of the (steady) indoor background A-weighted sound level. Such a curve-fit yields 100 percent sentence intelligibility for background levels below 57 dB and yields less than 10 percent intelligibility for background levels above 73 dB. The function is especially sensitive to changes in sound level between 65 dB and 75 dB. As an example of the sensitivity, a 1 dB increase in background sound level from 70 dB to 71 dB yields a 14 percent decrease in sentence intelligibility. The sensitivity of speech interference to noise at 65 dB and above is consistent with the criterion of DNL 65 dB generally taken from the Schultz curve. This is consistent with the observation that speech interference is the primary cause of annoyance. Classroom Criteria. The effect of aircraft noise on children is a controversial area. Certain studies indicate that, in certain situations, children are potentially more sensitive to noise compared to adults. For example, adults average roughly 10 percent better than young children on speech intelligibility tests in high-noise environments (ASA 2000). Some studies indicate that noise negatively impacts classroom learning (e.g., Shield and Dockrell 2008). In response to noise-specific and other environmental studies, Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks (1997), requires Federal agencies to ensure that their policies, programs, and activities address environmental health and safety risks and to identify any disproportionate risks to children. While the issue of noise impacts on children’s learning is not fully settled, in May 2009, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) published a classroom acoustics standard entitled “Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools” (ANSI 2002). At present, complying with the standard is voluntary in most locations. Essentially, the criteria states that when the noisiest hour is dominated by noise from such sources as aircraft, the limits for most classrooms are an hourly average A-weighted sound level of 40 dB, and the A-weighted sound level must not exceed 40 dB for more than 10 percent of the hour. For schools located near airfields, indoor noise levels would have to be lowered by 35–45 dBA relative to outdoor levels (ANSI 2009). C.2.3 SLEEP DISTURBANCE Sleep disturbance is another source of annoyance associated with aircraft noise. This is especially true because of the intermittent nature and content of aircraft noise, which is more disturbing than continuous noise of equal energy and neutral meaning. Sleep disturbance may be measured in either of two ways. “Arousal” represents actual awakening from sleep, while a change in “sleep stage” represents a shift from one of four sleep stages to another stage of lighter sleep without actual awakening. In general, arousal requires a somewhat higher noise level than does a change in sleep stage. An analysis sponsored by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) summarized 21 published studies concerning the effects of noise on sleep (Pearsons et al. 1989). The analysis concluded that a lack of reliable in-home studies, combined with large differences among the results from the various laboratory studies, did not permit development of an acceptably accurate assessment procedure. The noise events used in the laboratory studies and in contrived in-home studies were presented at much higher rates of occurrence than would normally be experienced. None of the laboratory studies were of sufficiently long duration to determine any effects of habituation, such as that which would occur under normal community conditions. An extensive study of sleep interference in people’s own homes (Ollerhead et al. 1992) showed very little disturbance from aircraft noise. There is some controversy associated with these studies, so a conservative approach should be taken in judging sleep interference. Based on older data, the USEPA identified an indoor DNL of 45 dB as necessary to protect against sleep interference (USEPA 1974). Assuming an outdoor-toindoor noise level reduction of 20 dB for typical dwelling units, this corresponds to an outdoor DNL of 65 dB as minimizing sleep interference. A 1984 publication reviewed the probability of arousal or behavioral awakening in terms of SEL (Kryter 1984). Figure C-4, extracted from Figure 10.37 of Kryter (1984), indicates that an indoor SEL of 65 dB or lower should awaken less than 5 percent of those exposed. These results do not include any habituation over time by sleeping subjects. Nevertheless, this provides a reasonable guideline for assessing sleep interference and corresponds to similar guidance for speech interference, as noted above. It was noted in the early sleep disturbance research that the controlled laboratory studies did not account for many factors that are important to sleep behavior, such as habituation to the environment and previous exposure to noise and awakenings from sources other than aircraft noise. In the early 1990s, field studies were conducted to validate the earlier laboratory work. The most significant finding from these studies was that an estimated 80 to 90 percent of sleep disturbances were not related to individual outdoor noise events, but were instead the result of indoor noise sources and other non-noise-related factors. The results showed that there was less of an effect of noise on sleep in real-life conditions than had been previously reported from laboratory studies. The interim Federal Interagency Committee on Noise dose-response curve that was recommended for use in 1992 was based on the most pertinent sleep disturbance research that was conducted through the 1970s, primarily in laboratory settings. After that time, considerable field research was conducted to evaluate the sleep effects in people’s normal, home environment. Laboratory sleep studies tend to show higher values of sleep disturbance than field studies because people who sleep in their own homes are habituated to their environment and, therefore, do not wake up as easily (FICAN 1997). F35A-172 chart Figure C-4. Plot of Sleep Awakening Data Versus Indoor SEL Based on the new information, the Federal Interagency Committee on Aircraft Noise (FICAN) updated its recommended dose-response curve in 1997, depicted as the lower curve on Figure C-5. This figure is based on the results of three field studies (Ollerhead et al. 1992; Fidell et al. 1994, 1995a, 1995b), along with the datasets from six previous field studies. The new relationship represents the higher end, or upper envelope, of the latest field data. It should be interpreted as predicting the “maximum percent of the exposed population expected to be behaviorally awakened” or the “maximum percent awakened” for a given residential population. According to this relationship, a maximum of 3 percent of people would be awakened at an indoor SEL of 58 dB, compared to 10 percent using the 1992 curve. An indoor SEL of 58 dB is equivalent to outdoor SELs of 73 and 83 dB, respectively, assuming 15 and 25 dB noise level reduction from outdoor to indoor with windows open and closed, respectively. The FICAN 1997 curve is represented by the following equation: Percent Awakenings = 0.0087 . [SEL – 30]1.79  http://www.fican.org/images/sleprela.gif Figure C-5. FICAN’s 1997 Recommended Sleep Disturbance Dose-Response Relationship Note the relatively low percentage of awakenings to fairly high noise levels. People think they are awakened by a noise event, but usually the reason for awakening is otherwise. For example, a 1992 United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority study found the average person was awakened about 18 times per night for reasons other than exposure to an aircraft noise – some of these awakenings are due to the biological rhythms of sleep and some to other reasons that were not correlated with specific aircraft events. In July 2008, ANSI and the Acoustical Society of America (ASA) published a method to estimate the percent of the exposed population that might be awakened by multiple aircraft noise events based on statistical assumptions about the probability of awakening (or not awakening) (ANSI 2008). This method relies on probability theory rather than direct field research/experimental data to account for multiple events. Figure C-6 depicts the awakenings data that form the basis and equations of ANSI (2008). The curve labeled ‘Eq. (B1)’ is the relationship between noise and awakening endorsed by FICAN in 1997. The ANSI-recommended curve labeled ‘Eq. (1)’ quantifies the probability of awakening for a population of sleepers who are exposed to an outdoor noise event as a function of the associated indoor SEL in the bedroom. This curve was derived from studies of behavioral awakenings associated with noise events in “steady state” situations where the population has been exposed to the noise long enough to be habituated. The data points on Figure C-6 come from these studies. Unlike the FICAN curve, the ANSI 2008 curve represents the average of the field research data points. In December 2008, FICAN recommended the use of this new estimation procedure for future analyses of behavioral awakenings from aircraft noise. In that statement, FICAN also recognized that additional sleep disturbance research is underway by various research organizations, and results of that work may result in additional changes to FICAN’s position. Until that time, FICAN recommends the use of ANSI (2008).  Figure C-6. Relation Between Indoor SEL and Percentage of Persons Awakened as Stated in ANSI/ASA S12.9-2008/Part 6 (ANSI 2008) C.2.4 NOISE-INDUCED HEARING IMPAIRMENT Residents in surrounding communities express concerns regarding the effects of aircraft noise on hearing. This section provides a brief overview of hearing loss caused by noise exposure. The goal is to provide a sense of perspective as to how aircraft noise (as experienced on the ground) compares to other activities that are often linked with hearing loss. Hearing loss is generally interpreted as a decrease in the ear’s sensitivity or acuity to perceive sound, i.e., a shift in the hearing threshold to a higher level. This change can either be a Temporary Threshold Shift (TTS) or a Permanent Threshold Shift (PTS) (Berger et al. 1995). TTS can result from exposure to loud noise over a given amount of time, yet the hearing loss is not necessarily permanent. An example of TTS might be a person attending a loud music concert. After the concert is over, the person may experience a threshold shift that may last several hours, depending upon the level and duration of exposure. While experiencing TTS, the person becomes less sensitive to low-level sounds, particularly at certain frequencies in the speech range (typically near 4,000 Hz). Normal hearing ability eventually returns, as long as the person has enough time to recover within a relatively quiet environment. PTS usually results from repeated exposure to high noise levels, where the ears are not given adequate time to recover from the strain and fatigue of exposure. A common example of PTS is the result of working in a loud environment such as a factory. It is important to note that a temporary shift (TTS) can eventually become permanent (PTS) over time with continuous exposure to high noise levels. Thus, even if the ear is given time to recover from TTS, repeated occurrence of TTS may eventually lead to permanent hearing loss. The point at which a TTS results in a PTS is difficult to identify and varies with a person’s sensitivity. Considerable data on hearing loss have been collected and analyzed by the scientific/medical community. It has been well established that continuous exposure to high noise levels will damage human hearing (USEPA 1978). The Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulation of 1971 standardizes the limits on workplace noise exposure for protection from hearing loss as an average level of 90 dB over an 8-hour work period or 85 dB over a 16-hour period (the average level is based on a 5 dB decrease per doubling of exposure time) (DoL 1971). Even the most protective criterion (no measurable hearing loss for the most sensitive portion of the population at the ear’s most sensitive frequency, 4,000 Hz, after a 40-year exposure) is an average sound level of 70 dB over a 24-hour period. The USEPA established 75 dB for an 8-hour exposure and 70 dB for a 24-hour exposure as the average noise level standard requisite to protect 96 percent of the population from greater than a 5 dB PTS (USEPA 1978). The National Academy of Sciences Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics, and Biomechanics identified 75 dB as the minimum level at which hearing loss may occur (CHABA 1977). Finally, the World Health Organization has concluded that environmental and leisure-time noise below an Leq24 value of 70 dB “will not cause hearing loss in the large majority of the population, even after a lifetime of exposure” (WHO 2000). C.2.4.1 Hearing Loss and Aircraft Noise The 1982 USEPA guidelines report specifically addresses the criteria and procedures for assessing the noise-induced hearing loss in terms of the Noise-Induced Permanent Threshold Shift (NIPTS), a quantity that defines the permanent change in hearing level, or threshold, caused by exposure to noise (USEPA 1982). This effect is also described as Potential Hearing Loss. Numerically, the NIPTS is the change in threshold averaged over the frequencies 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz that can be expected from daily exposure to noise over a normal working lifetime of 40 years, with the exposure beginning at an age of 20 years. A grand average of the NIPTS over time (40 years) and hearing sensitivity (10 to 90 percentiles of the exposed population) is termed the Average NIPTS. The Average NIPTS that can be expected for noise exposure as measured by the DNL metric is given in Table C-4. Table C-4. Average NIPTS and 10th Percentile NIPTS as a Function of DNL dB DNL Average NIPTS dBa 10th Percentile NIPTS dBa 75–76 1.0 4.0 76–77 1.0 4.5 77–78 1.6 5.0 78–79 2.0 5.5 79–80 2.5 6.0 80–81 3.0 7.0 81–82 3.5 8.0 82–83 4.0 9.0 83–84 4.5 10.0 84–85 5.5 11.0 85–86 6.0 12.0 86–87 7.0 13.5 87–88 7.5 15.0 88–89 8.5 16.5 89–90 9.5 18.0 a Rounded to the nearest 0.5 dB. For example, for a noise exposure of 80 dB DNL, the expected lifetime average value of NIPTS is 2.5 dB, or 6.0 dB for the 10th percentile. Characterizing the noise exposure in terms of DNL will usually overestimate the assessment of hearing loss risk as DNL includes a 10 dB weighting factor for aircraft operations occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. If, however, flight operations between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. account for 5 percent or less of the total 24-hour operations, the overestimation is on the order of 1.5 dB. From a civilian airport perspective, the scientific community has concluded that there is little likelihood that the resulting noise exposure from aircraft noise could result in either a temporary or permanent hearing loss. Studies on community hearing loss from exposure to aircraft flyovers near airports showed that there is no danger, under normal circumstances, of hearing loss due to aircraft noise (Newman and Beattie 1985). The USEPA criterion (Leq24 = 70 dBA) can be exceeded in some areas located near airports, but that is only the case outdoors. Inside a building, where people are more likely to spend most of their time, the average noise level will be much less than 70 dBA (Eldred and von Gierke 1993). Eldred and von Gierke also report that “several studies in the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom have confirmed the predictions that the possibility for permanent hearing loss in communities, even under the most intense commercial take-off and landing patterns, is remote.” With regard to military airbases, as individual aircraft noise levels are increasing with the introduction of new aircraft, a 2009 DoD policy directive requires that hearing loss risk be estimated for the at risk population, defined as the population exposed to DNL greater than or equal to 80 dB (DoD 2009). Specifically, DoD components are directed to “use the 80 Day-Night A-Weighted (DNL) noise contour to identify populations at the most risk of potential hearing loss.” This does not preclude populations outside the 80 dB DNL contour (i.e., at lower exposure levels) from being at some degree of risk of hearing loss. However, the analysis should be restricted to populations within this contour area, including residents of on-base housing. The exposure of workers inside the base boundary area should be considered occupational and evaluated using the appropriate DoD component regulations for occupational noise exposure. With regard to military airspace activity, studies have shown conflicting results. A 1995 laboratory study measured changes in human hearing from noise representative of low-flying aircraft on Military Training Routes (Nixon et al. 1993). The potential effects of aircraft flying along Military Training Routes is of particular concern because maximum overflight noise levels can exceed 115 dB, with rapid increases in noise levels exceeding 30 dB per second. In this study, participants were first subjected to four overflight noise exposures at A-weighted levels of 115 dB to 130 dB. Fifty percent of the subjects showed no change in hearing levels, 25 percent had a temporary 5 dB increase in sensitivity (the people could hear a 5 dB wider range of sound than before exposure), and 25 percent had a temporary 5 dB decrease in sensitivity (the people could hear a 5 dB narrower range of sound than before exposure). In the next phase, participants were subjected to a single overflight at a maximum level of 130 dB for eight successive exposures, separated by 90 seconds or until a temporary shift in hearing was observed. The TTSs showed an increase in sensitivity of up to 10 dB. In another study of 115 test subjects between 18 and 50 years old in 1999, TTSs were measured after laboratory exposure to military low-altitude flight noise (Ising et al. 1999). According to the authors, the results indicate that repeated exposure to military low-altitude flight noise with a maximum sound level (Lmax) greater than 114 dB, especially if the noise level increases rapidly, may have the potential to cause noise-induced hearing loss in humans. Aviation and typical community noise levels near airports are not comparable to the occupational or recreational noise exposures associated with hearing loss. Studies of aircraft noise levels associated with civilian airport activity have not definitively correlated permanent hearing impairment with aircraft activity. It is unlikely that airport neighbors will remain outside their homes 24 hours per day, so there is little likelihood of hearing loss below an average sound level of 75 dB DNL. Near military airbases, average noise levels above 75 dB may occur, and while new DoD policy dictates that NIPTS be evaluated, no research results to date have definitively related permanent hearing impairment to aviation noise. C.2.4.2 Non-Auditory Health Effects Studies have been conducted to determine whether correlations exist between noise exposure and cardiovascular problems, birth weight, and mortality rates. The non-auditory effect of noise on humans is not as easily substantiated as the effect on hearing. Prolonged stress is known to be a contributor to a number of health disorders. Kryter and Poza (1980) state, “It is more likely that noise-related general ill-health effects are due to the psychological annoyance from the noise interfering with normal everyday behavior, than it is from the noise eliciting, because of its intensity, reflexive response in the autonomic or other physiological systems of the body.” Psychological stresses may cause a physiological stress reaction that could result in impaired health. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and USEPA commissioned the Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics (CHABA) in 1981 to study whether established noise standards are adequate to protect against health disorders other than hearing defects. CHABA’s conclusion was that: Evidence from available research reports is suggestive, but it does not provide definitive answers to the question of health effects, other than to the auditory system, of long-term exposure to noise. It seems prudent, therefore, in the absence of adequate knowledge as to whether or not noise can produce effects upon health other than damage to auditory system, either directly or mediated through stress, that insofar as feasible, an attempt should be made to obtain more critical evidence. Since the CHABA report, there have been further studies that suggest that noise exposure may cause hypertension and other stress-related effects in adults. Near an airport in Stockholm, Sweden, the prevalence of hypertension was reportedly greater among nearby residents who were exposed to energy averaged noise levels exceeding 55 dB and maximum noise levels exceeding 72 dB, particularly older subjects and those not reporting impaired hearing ability (Rosenlund et al. 2001). A study of elderly volunteers who were exposed to simulated military low-altitude flight noise reported that blood pressure was raised by Lmax of 112 dB and high speed level increase (Michalak et al. 1990). Yet another study of subjects exposed to varying levels of military aircraft or road noise found no significant relationship between noise level and blood pressure (Pulles et al. 1990). Most studies of non-auditory health effects of long-term noise exposure have found that noise exposure levels established for hearing protection will also protect against any potential non-auditory health effects, at least in workplace conditions. One of the best scientific summaries of these findings is contained in the lead paper at the National Institutes of Health Conference on Noise and Hearing Loss, held on 22 to 24 January 1990 in Washington, D.C.: The nonauditory effects of chronic noise exposure, when noise is suspected to act as one of the risk factors in the development of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and other nervous disorders, have never been proven to occur as chronic manifestations at levels below these criteria (an average of 75 dBA for complete protection against hearing loss for an 8-hour day). At the 1988 International Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem, most studies attempting to clarify such health effects did not find them at levels below the criteria protective of noise-induced hearing loss, and even above these criteria, results regarding such health effects were ambiguous. Consequently, one comes to the conclusion that establishing and enforcing exposure levels protecting against noise-induced hearing loss would not only solve the noise-induced hearing loss problem, but also any potential non-auditory health effects in the work place (von Gierke 1990). Although these findings were specifically directed at noise effects in the workplace, they are equally applicable to aircraft noise effects in the community environment. Research studies regarding the non-auditory health effects of aircraft noise are ambiguous, at best, and often contradictory. Yet, even those studies that purport to find such health effects use time-average noise levels of 75 dB and higher for their research. For example, two University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) researchers apparently found a relationship between aircraft noise levels under the approach path to Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) and increased mortality rates among the exposed residents by using an average noise exposure level greater than 75 dB for the “noise-exposed” population (Meacham and Shaw 1979). Nevertheless, three other UCLA professors analyzed those same data and found no relationship between noise exposure and mortality rates (Frerichs et al. 1980). As a second example, two other UCLA researchers used this same population near LAX to show a higher rate of birth defects for 1970 to 1972 when compared with a control group residing away from the airport (Jones and Tauscher 1978). Based on this report, a separate group at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention performed a more thorough study of populations near Atlanta’s Hartsfield International Airport for 1970 to 1972 and found no relationship in their study of 17 identified categories of birth defects to aircraft noise levels above 65 dB (Edmonds et al. 1979). In summary, there is no scientific basis for a claim that potential health effects exist for aircraft time-averaged sound levels below 75 dB. The potential for noise to affect physiological health, such as the cardiovascular system, has been speculated; however, no unequivocal evidence exists to support such claims (Harris 1997). Conclusions drawn from a review of health effect studies involving military low-altitude flight noise with its unusually high maximum levels and rapid rise in sound level have shown no increase in cardiovascular disease (Schwarze and Thompson 1993). Additional claims that are unsupported include flyover noise producing increased mortality rates and increases in cardiovascular death, aggravation of post-traumatic stress syndrome, increased stress, increases in admissions to mental hospitals, and adverse effects on pregnant women and fetuses (Harris 1997). C.2.4.3 Performance Effects The effect of noise on the performance of activities or tasks has been the subject of many studies. Some of these studies have established links between continuous high noise levels and performance loss. Noise-induced performance losses are most frequently reported in studies employing noise levels in excess of 85 dB. Little change has been found in low-noise cases. It has been cited that moderate noise levels appear to act as a stressor for more sensitive individuals performing a difficult psychomotor task. While the results of research on the general effect of periodic aircraft noise on performance have yet to yield definitive criteria, several general trends have been noted including: . A periodic intermittent noise is more likely to disrupt performance than a steady state continuous noise of the same level. Flyover noise, due to its intermittent nature, might be more likely to disrupt performance than a steady state noise of equal level. . Noise is more inclined to affect the quality than the quantity of work. . Noise is more likely to impair the performance of tasks that place extreme demands on the worker. C.2.4.4 Noise Effects on Children In response to noise-specific and other environmental studies, Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks (1997), requires Federal agencies to ensure that policies, programs, and activities address environmental health and safety risks to identify any disproportionate risks to children. A review of the scientific literature indicates that there has not been a tremendous amount of research in the area of aircraft noise effects on children. The research reviewed does suggest that environments with sustained high background noise can have variable effects, including noise effects on learning and cognitive abilities, and reports of various noise-related physiological changes. C.2.4.4.1 Effects on Learning and Cognitive Abilities In “Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools,” (ANSI 2002), ANSI refers to studies that suggest that loud and frequent background noise can affect the learning patterns of young children (ANSI 2002). ANSI provides discussion on the relationships between noise and learning, and stipulates design requirements and acoustical performance criteria for outdoor-to-indoor noise isolation. School design is directed to be cognizant of, and responsive to, surrounding land uses and the shielding of outdoor noise from the indoor environment. The ANSI acoustical performance criteria for schools include the requirement that the 1-hour average background noise level shall not exceed 35 dBA in core learning spaces smaller than 20,000 cubic feet and 40 dBA in core learning spaces with enclosed volumes exceeding 20,000 cubic feet. This would require schools be constructed such that, in quiet neighborhoods, indoor noise levels are lowered by 15 to 20 dBA relative to outdoor levels. In schools near airports, indoor noise levels would have to be lowered by 35 to 45 dBA relative to outdoor levels (ANSI 2002). The studies referenced by ANSI to support the new standard are not specific to jet aircraft noise and the potential effects on children. However, there are references to studies that have shown that children in noisier classrooms scored lower on a variety of tests. Excessive background noise or reverberation within schools causes interferences of communication and can therefore create an acoustical barrier to learning (ANSI 2002). Studies have been performed that contribute to the body of evidence emphasizing the importance of communication by way of the spoken language to the development of cognitive skills. The ability to read, write, comprehend, and maintain attentiveness, are, in part, based upon whether teacher communication is consistently intelligible (ANSI 2002). Numerous studies have shown varying degrees of effects of noise on the reading comprehension, attentiveness, puzzle-solving, and memory/recall ability of children. It is generally accepted that young children are more susceptible than adults to the effects of background noise. Because of the developmental status of young children (linguistic, cognitive, and proficiency), barriers to hearing can cause interferences or disruptions in developmental evolution. Research on the impacts of aircraft noise, and noise in general, on the cognitive abilities of school-aged children has received more attention in the last 20 years. Several studies suggest that aircraft noise can affect the academic performance of school children. Although many factors could contribute to learning deficits in school-aged children (e.g., socioeconomic level, home environment, diet, sleep patterns), evidence exists that suggests that chronic exposure to high aircraft noise levels can impair learning. Specifically, elementary school children attending schools near New York City’s two airports demonstrated lower reading scores than children living farther away from the flight paths (Green et al. 1982). Researchers have found that tasks involving central processing and language comprehension (such as reading, attention, problem solving, and memory) appear to be the most affected by noise (Evans and Lepore 1993; Evans et al. 1998). It has been demonstrated that chronic exposure of first- and second-grade children to aircraft noise can result in reading deficits and impaired speech perception (i.e., the ability to hear common, low-frequency [vowel] sounds but not high frequencies [consonants] in speech) (Evans and Maxwell 1997). The Evans and Maxwell (1997) study found that chronic exposure to aircraft noise resulted in reading deficits and impaired speech perception for first- and second-grade children. Other studies found that children residing near LAX had more difficulty solving cognitive problems and did not perform as well as children from quieter schools in puzzle-solving and attentiveness (Bronzaft 1997; Cohen et al. 1980). Children attending elementary schools in high aircraft noise areas near London’s Heathrow Airport demonstrated poorer reading comprehension and selective cognitive impairments (Haines et al. 2001a, 2001b). Similar studies involving the testing of attention, memory, and reading comprehension of school children located near airports showed that their tests exhibited reduced performance results compared to those of similar groups of children who were located in quieter environments (Evans et al. 1998; Haines et al. 1998). The Haines and Stansfeld study indicated that there may be some long-term effects associated with exposure, as 1-year follow-up testing still demonstrated lowered scores for children in higher noise schools (Haines et al. 2001a, 2001b). In contrast, a 2002 study found that although children living near the old Munich airport scored lower in standardized reading and long-term memory tests than a control group, their performance on the same tests were equal to that of the control group once the airport was closed (Hygge et al. 2002). Finally, although it is recognized that there are many factors that could contribute to learning deficits in school-aged children, there is increasing awareness that chronic exposure to high aircraft noise levels may impair learning. This awareness has led the World Health Organization (WHO 2000) and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization working group (NATO 2000) to conclude that daycare centers and schools should not be located near major sources of noise, such as highways, airports, and industrial sites. C.2.4.4.2 Health Effects Physiological effects in children exposed to aircraft noise and the potential for health effects have also been the focus of limited investigation. Studies in the literature include examination of blood pressure levels, hormonal secretions, and hearing loss. As a measure of stress response to aircraft noise, blood pressure readings have been used to monitor children’s health. Children who were chronically exposed to aircraft noise from a new airport near Munich, Germany, had modest (although significant) increases in blood pressure, significant increases in stress hormones, and a decline in quality of life (Evans et al. 1998). Children attending noisy schools had statistically significant average systolic and diastolic blood pressure (p<0.03). Systolic blood pressure means were 89.68 millimeters for children attending schools located in noisier environments compared to 86.77 millimeters for a control group. Similarly, diastolic blood pressure means for the noisier environment group were 47.84 millimeters and 45.16 millimeters for the control group (Cohen et al. 1980). Although the literature appears limited, studies focused on the wide range of potential effects of aircraft noise on school children have also investigated hormonal levels between groups of children exposed to aircraft noise compared to those in a control group. Specifically, two studies analyzed cortisol and urinary catecholamine levels in school children as measurements of stress response to aircraft noise (Haines et al. 2001b, 2001c). In both instances, there were no differences between the aircraft-noise-exposed children and the control groups. Other studies have reported hearing losses from exposure to aircraft noise. Noise-induced hearing loss was reportedly higher in children who attended a school located under a flight path near a Taiwan airport, as compared to children at another school far away (Chen et al. 1997). Another study reported that hearing ability was reduced significantly in individuals who lived near an airport and were frequently exposed to aircraft noise (Chen and Chen 1993). In that study, noise exposure near the airport was reportedly uniform, with DNL greater than 75 dB and maximum noise levels of about 87 dB during overflights. Conversely, several other studies that were reviewed reported no difference in hearing ability between children exposed to high levels of airport noise and children located in quieter areas (Andrus et al. 1975; Fisch 1977; Wu et al. 1995). C.2.5 NOISE EFFECTS ON DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND WILDLIFE Hearing is critical to an animal’s ability to react, compete, reproduce, hunt, forage, and survive in its environment. While the existing literature does include studies on possible effects of jet aircraft noise and sonic booms on wildlife, there appears to have been little concerted effort in developing quantitative comparisons of aircraft noise effects on normal auditory characteristics. Behavioral effects have been relatively well described, but the larger ecological context issues, and the potential for drawing conclusions regarding effects on populations, has not been well developed. The relationships between potential auditory/physiological effects and species interactions with their environments are not well understood. Manci et al. (1988) assert that the consequences that physiological effects may have on behavioral patterns are vital to understanding the long-term effects of noise on wildlife. Questions regarding the effects (if any) on predator-prey interactions, reproductive success, and intra-inter specific behavior patterns remain. The following discussion provides an overview of the existing literature on noise effects (particularly jet aircraft noise) on animal species. The literature reviewed outlines those studies that have focused on the observations of the behavioral effects that jet aircraft and sonic booms have on animals. A great deal of research was conducted in the 1960s and 1970s on the effects of aircraft noise on the public and the potential for adverse ecological impacts. These studies were largely completed in response to the increase in air travel and the introduction of supersonic jet aircraft. According to Manci et al. (1988), the foundation of information created from that focus does not necessarily correlate or provide information specific to the impacts on wildlife in areas overflown by aircraft at supersonic speed or at low altitudes. The abilities to hear sounds and noise and to communicate assist wildlife in maintaining group cohesiveness and survivorship. Social species communicate by transmitting calls of warning, introduction, and others that are subsequently related to an individual’s or group’s responsiveness. Animal species differ greatly in their responses to noise. Noise effects on domestic animals and wildlife are classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary effects are direct, physiological changes to the auditory system, and most likely include the masking of auditory signals. Masking is defined as the inability of an individual to hear important environmental signals that may arise from mates, predators, or prey. There is some potential that noise could disrupt a species’ ability to communicate or interfere with behavioral patterns (Manci et al. 1988). Although the effects are likely temporal, aircraft noise may cause masking of auditory signals within exposed faunal communities. Animals rely on hearing to avoid predators, obtain food, and communicate and attract other members of their species. Aircraft noise may mask or interfere with these functions. Other primary effects, such as ear drum rupture or temporary (TTS) and permanent (PTS) hearing threshold shifts, are not as likely given the subsonic noise levels produced by aircraft overflights. Secondary effects may include non-auditory effects such as stress and hypertension; behavioral modifications; interference with mating or reproduction; and impaired ability to obtain adequate food, cover, or water. Tertiary effects are the direct result of primary and secondary effects. These include population decline and habitat loss. Most of the effects of noise are mild enough to be undetectable as variables of change in population size or population growth against the background of normal variation (Bowles 1995). Other environmental variables (e.g., predators, weather, changing prey base, ground-based disturbance) also influence secondary and tertiary effects and confound the ability to identify the ultimate factor in limiting productivity of a certain nest, area, or region. Overall, the literature suggests that species differ in their response to various types, durations, and sources of noise (Manci et al. 1988). Many scientific studies have investigated the effects of aircraft noise on wildlife, and some have focused on wildlife “flight” due to noise. Apparently, animal responses to aircraft are influenced by many variables, including size, speed, proximity (both height above the ground and lateral distance), engine noise, color, flight profile, and radiated noise. The type of aircraft (e.g., fixed-wing versus rotor-wing [helicopter]) and type of flight mission may also produce different levels of disturbance, with varying animal responses (Manci et al. 1988). Consequently, it is difficult to generalize animal responses to noise disturbances across species. One result of the 1988 Manci et al. literature review was the conclusion that, while behavioral observation studies were relatively limited, a general behavioral reaction in animals from exposure to aircraft noise is the startle response. The intensity and duration of the startle response appear to be dependent on which species is exposed, whether there is a group or an individual, and whether there have been previous exposures. Responses range from flight, trampling, stampeding, jumping, or running to movement of the head in the apparent direction of the noise source. Manci et al. (1988) reported that the literature indicated that avian species may be more sensitive to aircraft noise than mammals. C.2.5.1 Domestic Animals Although some studies report that the effects of aircraft noise on domestic animals is inconclusive, a majority of the literature reviewed indicates that domestic animals exhibit some behavioral responses to military overflights, but generally seem to habituate to the disturbances over a period of time. Mammals in particular appear to react to noise at sound levels higher than 90 dB, with responses including the startle response, freezing (i.e., becoming temporarily stationary), and fleeing from the sound source. Many studies on domestic animals suggest that some species appear to acclimate to some forms of sound disturbance (Manci et al. 1988). Some studies have reported primary and secondary effects, including reduced milk production and rate of milk release, increased glucose concentrations, decreased levels of hemoglobin, increased heart rate, and a reduction in thyroid activity. These latter effects appear to represent a small percentage of the findings occurring in the existing literature. Some reviewers have indicated that earlier studies and claims by farmers linking adverse effects of aircraft noise on livestock did not necessarily provide clear-cut evidence of cause and effect (Cottereau 1978). In contrast, many studies conclude that there is no evidence that aircraft overflights affect feed intake, growth, or production rates in domestic animals. Cattle. In response to concerns about overflight effects on pregnant cattle, milk production, and cattle safety, the USAF prepared a handbook for environmental protection that summarizes the literature on the impacts of low-altitude flights on livestock (and poultry) and includes specific case studies conducted in numerous airspaces across the country. Adverse effects have been found in a few studies, but have not been reproduced in other similar studies. One such study, conducted in 1983, suggested that 2 of 10 cows in late pregnancy aborted after showing rising estrogen and falling progesterone levels. These increased hormonal levels were reported as being linked to 59 aircraft overflights. The remaining eight cows showed no changes in their blood concentrations and calved normally (USAF 1994). A similar study reported that abortions occurred in three out of five pregnant cattle after exposing them to flyovers by six different aircraft (USAF 1994). Another study suggested that feedlot cattle could stampede and injure themselves when exposed to low-level overflights (USAF 1994). A majority of the studies reviewed suggest that there is little or no effect of aircraft noise on cattle. Studies presenting adverse effects on domestic animals have been limited. A number of studies (Kovalcik and Sottnik 1971; Parker and Bayley 1960) investigated the effects of jet aircraft noise and sonic booms on the milk production of dairy cows. Through the compilation and examination of milk production data from areas exposed to jet aircraft noise and sonic boom events, it was determined that milk yields were not affected. This was particularly evident in those cows that had been previously exposed to jet aircraft noise. One study examined the causes of 1,763 abortions in Wisconsin dairy cattle over a 1-year time period, and none were associated with aircraft disturbances (USAF 1993). In 1987, Anderson contacted seven livestock operators for production data, and no effects of low-altitude and supersonic flights were noted. Three out of 43 cattle previously exposed to low-altitude flights showed a startle response to an F/A-18 aircraft flying overhead at 500 feet above ground level (AGL) at 400 knots by running less than 10 meters. They resumed normal activity within 1 minute (USAF 1994). In 1983, Beyer found that helicopters caused more reaction than other low-altitude overflights. A 1964 study also found that helicopters flying 30 to 60 feet overhead did not affect milk production and pregnancies of 44 cows and heifers (USAF 1994). Additionally, Beyer reported that five pregnant dairy cows in a pasture did not exhibit fright-flight tendencies or have their pregnancies disrupted after being overflown by 79 low-altitude helicopter flights and 4 low-altitude, subsonic jet aircraft flights (USAF 1994). A 1956 study found that the reactions of dairy and beef cattle to noise from low-altitude, subsonic aircraft were similar to those caused by paper blowing about, strange persons, or other moving objects (USAF 1994). In a report to Congress, the U.S. Forest Service concluded that “evidence both from field studies of wild ungulates and laboratory studies of domestic stock indicate that the risks of damage are small (from aircraft approaches of 50 to 100 meters), as animals take care not to damage themselves (USFS 1992). If animals are overflown by aircraft at altitudes of 50 to 100 meters, there is no evidence that mothers and young are separated, that animals collide with obstructions (unless confined) or that they traverse dangerous ground at too high a rate.” These varied study results suggest that, although the confining of cattle could magnify animal response to aircraft overflight, there is no proven cause-and-effect link between startling cattle from aircraft overflights and abortion rates or lower milk production. Horses. Horses have also been observed to react to overflights of jet aircraft. Several of the studies reviewed reported a varied response of horses to low-altitude aircraft overflights. Observations made in 1966 and 1968 noted that horses galloped in response to jet flyovers (USAF 1993). In 1995, Bowles cites Kruger and Erath as observing horses exhibiting intensive flight reactions, random movements, and biting/kicking behavior. However, no injuries or abortions occurred, and there was evidence that the mares adapted somewhat to the flyovers over the course of a month (USAF 1994). Although horses were observed noticing the overflights, it did not appear to affect either survivability or reproductive success. There was also some indication that habituation to these types of disturbances was occurring. LeBlanc et al. studied the effects of F-14 jet aircraft noise on pregnant mares (1991). They specifically focused on any changes in pregnancy success, behavior, cardiac function, hormonal production, and rate of habituation. Their findings reported observations of “flight-fright” reactions, which caused increases in heart rates and serum cortisol concentrations. The mares, however, did habituate to the noise. Levels of anxiety and mass body movements were the highest after initial exposure, with intensities of responses decreasing thereafter. There were no differences in pregnancy success when compared to a control group. Swine. Generally, the literature findings for swine appear to be similar to those reported for cows and horses. While there are some effects from aircraft noise reported in the literature, these effects are minor. Studies of continuous noise exposure (i.e., 6 hours or 72 hours of constant exposure) reported influences on short-term hormonal production and release. Additional constant exposure studies indicated the observation of stress reactions, hypertension, and electrolyte imbalances (Dufour 1980). A study by Bond et al. demonstrated no adverse effects on the feeding efficiency, weight gain, ear physiology, or thyroid and adrenal gland condition of pigs subjected to aircraft noise (1963). Observations of heart rate increase were recorded and it was noted that cessation of the noise resulted in the return to normal heart rates. Conception rates and offspring survivorship did not appear to be influenced by exposure to aircraft noise. Similarly, simulated aircraft noise at levels of 100 dB to 135 dB had only minor effects on the rate of feed utilization, weight gain, food intake, and reproduction rates of boars and sows exposed, and there were no injuries or inner ear changes observed (Gladwin et al. 1988; Manci et al. 1988). Domestic Fowl. According to a 1994 position paper by the USAF on effects of low-altitude overflights (below 1,000 feet) on domestic fowl, overflight activity has negligible effects (USAF 1994). The paper did recognize that given certain circumstances, adverse effects can be serious. Some of the effects can be panic reactions, reduced productivity, and effects on marketability (e.g., bruising of the meat caused during “pile-up” situations). The typical reaction of domestic fowl after exposure to sudden, intense noise is a short-term startle response. The reaction ceases as soon as the stimulus is ended, and within a few minutes all activity returns to normal. More severe responses are possible depending on the number of birds, the frequency of exposure, and environmental conditions. Large crowds of birds and birds not previously exposed are more likely to pile up in response to a noise stimulus (USAF 1994). According to studies and interviews with growers, it is typically the previously unexposed birds that incite panic crowding, and the tendency to do so is markedly reduced within five exposures to the stimulus (USAF 1994). This suggests that the birds habituate relatively quickly. Egg productivity was not adversely affected by infrequent noise bursts, even at exposure levels as high as 120 to 130 dB. Between 1956 and 1988, there were 100 recorded claims against the Navy for alleged damage to domestic fowl. The number of claims averaged three per year, with peak numbers of claims following publications of studies on the topic in the early 1960s (USAF 1994). Many of the claims were disproved or did not have sufficient supporting evidence. The claims were filed for the following alleged damages: 55 percent for panic reactions, 31 percent for decreased production, 6 percent for reduced hatchability, 6 percent for weight loss, and less than 1 percent for reduced fertility (USAF 1994). Turkeys. The review of the existing literature suggests that there has not been a concerted or widespread effort to study the effects of aircraft noise on commercial turkeys. One study involving turkeys examined the differences between simulated versus actual overflight aircraft noise, turkey responses to the noise, weight gain, and evidence of habituation (Bowles et al. 1990). Findings from the study suggested that turkeys habituated to jet aircraft noise quickly, that there were no growth rate differences between the experimental and control groups, and that there were some behavioral differences that increased the difficulty in handling individuals within the experimental group. Low-altitude overflights were shown to cause turkey flocks that were kept inside turkey houses to occasionally pile up and experience high mortality rates due to the aircraft noise and a variety of disturbances unrelated to aircraft (USAF 1994). C.2.5.2 Wildlife Studies on the effects of overflights and sonic booms on wildlife have been focused mostly on avian species and ungulates such as caribou and bighorn sheep. Few studies have been conducted on marine mammals, small terrestrial mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and carnivorous mammals. Generally, species that live entirely below the surface of the water have also been ignored due to the fact they do not experience the same level of sound as terrestrial species (NPS 1994). Wild ungulates appear to be much more sensitive to noise disturbance than domestic livestock (Manci et al. 1988). This may be due to previous exposure to disturbances. One common factor appears to be that low-altitude flyovers seem to be more disruptive in terrain where there is little cover (Manci et al. 1988). C.2.5.3 Mammals Terrestrial Mammals. Studies of terrestrial mammals have shown that noise levels of 120 dBA can damage mammals’ ears, and levels of 95 dBA can cause temporary loss of hearing acuity. Noise from aircraft has affected other large carnivores by causing changes in home ranges, foraging patterns, and breeding behavior. One study recommended that aircraft not be allowed to fly at altitudes below 2,000 feet AGL over important grizzly and polar bear habitat (Dufour 1980). Wolves have been frightened by low-altitude flights that were 25 to 1,000 feet off the ground. However, wolves have been found to adapt to aircraft overflights and noise as long as they were not being hunted from aircraft (Dufour 1980). Wild ungulates (American bison, caribou, bighorn sheep) appear to be much more sensitive to noise disturbance than domestic livestock (Weisenberger et al. 1996). Behavioral reactions may be related to the past history of disturbances by such things as humans and aircraft. Common reactions of reindeer kept in an enclosure and exposed to aircraft noise disturbance were a slight startle response, raising of the head, pricking ears, and scenting of the air. Panic reactions and extensive changes in behavior of individual animals were not observed. Observations of caribou in Alaska exposed to fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters showed running and panic reactions occurred when overflights were at an altitude of 200 feet or less. The reactions decreased with increased altitude of overflights, and for overflights higher than 500 feet in altitude, the panic reactions stopped. Also, smaller groups reacted less strongly than larger groups. One negative effect of the running and avoidance behavior is increased expenditure of energy. For a 90-kilogram animal, the calculated expenditure due to aircraft harassment is 64 kilocalories per minute when running and 20 kilocalories per minute when walking. When conditions are favorable, this expenditure can be counteracted with increased feeding; however, during harsh winter conditions, this may not be possible. Incidental observations of wolves and bears exposed to fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters suggested that wolves were less disturbed than wild ungulates, while grizzly bears showed the greatest response of any animal species observed. It has been proven that low-altitude overflights do induce stress in animals. Increased heart rates, an indicator of excitement or stress, have been found in pronghorn antelope, elk, and bighorn sheep. These reactions occur naturally as a response to predation, so infrequent overflights may not, in and of themselves, be detrimental. However, flights at high frequencies over a long period of time may cause harmful effects. The consequences of this disturbance, while cumulative, are not additive. Aircraft disturbance may not cause obvious and serious health effects, but coupled with a harsh winter, it may have an adverse impact. Research has shown that stress induced by other types of disturbances produces long-term decreases in metabolism and hormone balances in wild ungulates. Behavioral responses can range from mild to severe. Mild responses include head raising, body shifting, or turning to orient toward the aircraft. Moderate disturbance may be nervous behaviors, such as trotting a short distance. Escape is the typical severe response. Marine Mammals. The physiological composition of the ear in aquatic and marine mammals exhibits adaptation to the aqueous environment. These differences (relative to terrestrial species) manifest themselves in the auricle and middle ear (Manci et al. 1988). Some mammals use echolocation to perceive objects in their surroundings and to determine the directions and locations of sound sources (Simmons 1983 in Manci et al. 1988). Research conducted on northern fur seals, sea lions, and ringed seals indicated that there are some differences in how various animal groups receive frequencies of sound. It was observed that these species exhibited varying intensities of a startle response to airborne noise, which was habituated over time. The rates of habituation appeared to vary with species, populations, and demographics (age, sex). Time of day of exposure was also a factor (Muyberg 1978 in Manci et al. 1988). Studies accomplished near the Channel Islands were conducted near the area where the space shuttle launches occur. It was found that there were some response differences between species relative to the loudness of sonic booms. Those booms that were between 80 and 89 dBA caused a greater intensity of startle reactions than lower-intensity booms of 72 to 79 dBA. However, the duration of the startle responses to louder sonic booms was shorter (Jehl and Cooper 1980 in Manci et al. 1988). Jehl and Cooper indicated that low-flying helicopters, loud boat noises, and humans were the most disturbing to pinnipeds (1980). According to the research, although the space launch and associated operational activity noises have not had a measurable effect on the pinniped population, it also suggests that there was a greater “disturbance level” exhibited during launch activities. There was a recommendation to continue observations for behavioral effects and to perform long-term population monitoring (Jehl and Cooper 1980). The continued presence of single or multiple noise sources could cause marine mammals to leave a preferred habitat. However, it does not appear likely that overflights could cause migration from suitable habitats because aircraft noise over water is mobile and would not persist over any particular area. Aircraft noise, including supersonic noise, currently occurs in the overwater airspace of Eglin, Tyndall, and Langley Air Force Bases from sorties predominantly involving jet aircraft. Survey results reported in Davis et al. indicate that cetaceans (i.e., dolphins) occur under all of the Eglin and Tyndall marine airspace (2000). The continuing presence of dolphins indicates that aircraft noise does not discourage use of the area and apparently does not harm the locally occurring population. In a summary by the National Park Service on the effects of noise on marine mammals, it was determined that gray whales and harbor porpoises showed no outward behavioral response to aircraft noise or overflights (1994). Bottlenose dolphins showed no obvious reaction in a study involving helicopter overflights at 1,200 to 1,800 feet above the water. They also did not show any reaction to survey aircraft unless the shadow of the aircraft passed over them, at which point there was some observed tendency to dive (Richardson et al. 1995). Other anthropogenic noises in the marine environment from ships and pleasure craft may have more of an effect on marine mammals than aircraft noise (USAF 2000). The noise effects on cetaceans appear to be somewhat attenuated by the air/water interface. Manatees appear relatively unresponsive to human-generated noise to the point that they are often suspected of being deaf to oncoming boats (although their hearing is actually similar to that of pinnipeds) (Bullock et al. 1980). Little is known about the importance of acoustic communication to manatees, although they are known to produce at least 10 different types of sounds and are thought to have sensitive hearing (Richardson et al. 1995). C.2.5.4 Birds Auditory research conducted on birds indicates that they fall between reptiles and mammals relative to hearing sensitivity. According to Dooling, within the range of 1,000 to 5,000 Hz, birds show a level of hearing sensitivity similar to that of the more sensitive mammals (1978). In contrast to mammals, bird sensitivity falls off at a greater rate with increasing and decreasing frequencies. Passive observations and studies examining aircraft bird strikes indicate that birds nest and forage near airports. Aircraft noise in the vicinity of commercial airports apparently does not inhibit bird presence and use. High-noise events (like a low-altitude aircraft overflight) may cause birds to engage in escape or avoidance behaviors, such as flushing from perches or nests (Ellis et al. 1991). These activities impose an energy cost on the birds that, over the long term, may affect survival or growth. In addition, the birds may spend less time engaged in necessary activities like feeding, preening, or caring for their young because they spend time in noise-avoidance activity. However, the long-term significance of noise-related impacts is less clear. Several studies on nesting raptors have indicated that birds become habituated to aircraft overflights and that long-term reproductive success is not affected (Grubb and King 1991; Ellis et al. 1991). Threshold noise levels for significant responses range from 62 dB for Pacific black brant to 85 dB for crested tern (Brown 1990; Ward and Stehn 1990). Songbirds were observed to become silent prior to the onset of a sonic boom event (F-111 jets), followed by “raucous discordant cries.” There was a return to normal singing within 10 seconds after the boom (Higgins 1974 in Manci et al. 1988). Ravens responded by emitting protestation calls, flapping their wings, and soaring. Manci et al. reported a reduction in reproductive success in some small territorial passerines (i.e., perching birds or songbirds) after exposure to low-altitude overflights (1988). However, it has been observed that passerines are not driven any great distance from a favored food source by a nonspecific disturbance, such as aircraft overflights (USFS 1992). Further study may be warranted. A recent study, conducted cooperatively between DoD and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, assessed the response of the red-cockaded woodpecker to a range of military training noise events, including artillery, small arms, helicopter, and maneuver noise (Pater et al. 1999). The project findings show that the red-cockaded woodpecker successfully acclimates to military noise events. Depending on the noise level, which ranged from innocuous to very loud, the birds responded by flushing from their nest cavities. When the noise source was closer and the noise level was higher, the number of flushes increased proportionately. In all cases, however, the birds returned to their nests within a relatively short period of time (usually within 12 minutes). Additionally, the noise exposure did not result in any mortality or statistically detectable changes in reproductive success (Pater et al. 1999). Red-cockaded woodpeckers did not flush when artillery simulators were more than 122 meters away and SEL noise levels were 70 dBA. Lynch and Speake studied the effects of both real and simulated sonic booms on the nesting and brooding eastern wild turkey in Alabama (1978). Hens at four nest sites were subjected to between 8 and 11 combined real and simulated sonic booms. All tests elicited similar responses, including quick lifting of the head and apparent alertness for between 10 and 20 seconds. No apparent nest failure occurred as a result of the sonic booms. Twenty-one brood groups were also subjected to simulated sonic booms. Reactions varied slightly between groups, but the largest percentage of groups reacted by standing motionless after the initial blast. Upon the sound of the boom, the hens and poults fled until reaching the edge of the woods (approximately 4 to 8 meters). Afterward, the poults resumed feeding activities while the hens remained alert for a short period of time (approximately 15 to 20 seconds). In no instances were poults abandoned, nor did they scatter and become lost. Every observation group returned to normal activities within a maximum of 30 seconds after a blast. C.2.5.4.1 Raptors In a literature review of raptor responses to aircraft noise, Manci et al. found that most raptors did not show a negative response to overflights (1988). When negative responses were observed, they were predominantly associated with rotor-winged aircraft or jet aircraft that were repeatedly passing within 0.5 miles of a nest. Ellis et al. performed a study to estimate the effects of low-level military jet aircraft and mid-to high-altitude sonic booms (both actual and simulated) on nesting peregrine falcons and seven other raptors (common black-hawk, Harris’ hawk, zone-tailed hawk, red-tailed hawk, golden eagle, prairie falcon, bald eagle) (1991). They observed responses to test stimuli, determined nest success for the year of the testing, and evaluated site occupancy the following year. Both long- and short-term effects were noted in the study. The results reported the successful fledging of young in 34 of 38 nest sites (all eight species) subjected to low-level flight and/or simulated sonic booms. Twenty-two of the test sites were revisited in the following year, and observations of pairs or lone birds were made at all but one nest. Nesting attempts were underway at 19 of 20 sites that were observed long enough to be certain of breeding activity. Re-occupancy and productivity rates were within or above expected values for self-sustaining populations. Short-term behavior responses were also noted. Overflights at a distance of 150 meters or less produced few significant responses and no severe responses. Typical responses included crouching or, very rarely, flushing from the perch site. Significant responses were most evident before egg laying and after young were “well grown.” Incubating or brooding adults never burst from the nest, thus preventing egg breaking or knocking chicks out of the nest. Jet passes and sonic booms often caused noticeable alarm; however, significant negative responses were rare and did not appear to limit productivity or re-occupancy. The locations of some of the nests may have caused some birds to be habituated to aircraft noise. There were some test sites located at distances far from zones of frequent military aircraft usage, and the test stimuli were often closer, louder, and more frequent than would be likely for a normal training situation. Manci et al. noted that a female northern harrier was observed hunting on a bombing range in Mississippi during bombing exercises (1988). The harrier was apparently unfazed by the exercises, even when a bomb exploded within 200 feet. In a similar case of habituation/non-disturbance, a study on the Florida snail-kite stated that the greatest reaction to overflights (approximately 98 dBA) was “watching the aircraft fly by.” No detrimental impacts to distribution, breeding success, or behavior were noted. Bald Eagle. A study by Grubb and King on the reactions of the bald eagle to human disturbances showed that terrestrial disturbances elicited the greatest response, followed by aquatic (i.e., boats) and aerial disturbances (1991). The disturbance regime of the area where the study occurred was predominantly characterized by aircraft noise. The study found that pedestrians consistently caused responses that were greater in both frequency and duration. Helicopters elicited the highest level of aircraft-related responses. Aircraft disturbances, although the most common form of disturbance, resulted in the lowest levels of response. This low response level may have been due to habituation; however, flights less than 170 meters away caused reactions similar to other disturbance types. Ellis et al. showed that eagles typically respond to the proximity of a disturbance, such as a pedestrian or aircraft within 100 meters, rather than the noise level (1991). They also noted that helicopters were four times more likely to cause a reaction than a commercial jet and 20 times more likely to cause a reaction than a propeller plane. Fraser et al. have suggested that raptors habituate to overflights rapidly, sometimes tolerating aircraft approaches of 65 feet or less (1985). Osprey. A 1998 study by Trimper et al. in Goose Bay, Labrador, Canada, focused on the reactions of nesting osprey to military overflights by CF-18 Hornets. Reactions varied from increased alertness and focused observation of planes to adjustments in incubation posture. No overt reactions (e.g., startle response, rapid nest departure) were observed as a result of an overflight. Young nestlings crouched as a result of any disturbance until they grew to 1 to 2 weeks prior to fledging. Helicopters, human presence, float planes, and other ospreys elicited the strongest reactions from nesting ospreys. These responses included flushing, agitation, and aggressive displays. Adult osprey showed high nest occupancy rates during incubation regardless of external influences. The osprey observed occasionally stared in the direction of the flight before it was audible to the observers. The birds may have been habituated to the noise of the flights; however, overflights were strictly controlled during the experimental period. Strong reactions to float planes and helicopter may have been due to the slower flight and therefore longer duration of visual stimuli rather than noise-related stimuli. Red-Tailed Hawk. Andersen et al. conducted a study that investigated the effects of low-level helicopter overflights on 35 red-tailed hawk nests (1989). Some of the nests had not been flown over prior to the study. The hawks that were naïve (i.e., not previously exposed) to helicopter flights exhibited stronger avoidance behavior (9 of 17 birds flushed from their nests) than those that had experienced prior overflights. The overflights did not appear to affect nesting success in either study group. These findings were consistent with the belief that red-tailed hawks habituate to low-level air traffic, even during the nesting period. C.2.5.4.2 Migratory Waterfowl A study by Conomy et al. exposed previously unexposed ducks to 71 noise events per day that equaled or exceeded 80 dBA (1998). It was determined that the proportion of time black ducks reacted to aircraft activity and noise decreased from 38 percent to 6 percent in 17 days and remained stable at 5.8 percent thereafter. In the same study, the wood duck did not appear to habituate to aircraft disturbance. This supports the notion that animal response to aircraft noise is species-specific. Because a startle response to aircraft noise can result in flushing from nests, migrants and animals living in areas with high concentrations of predators would be the most vulnerable to experiencing effects of lowered birth rates and recruitment over time. Species that are subjected to infrequent overflights do not appear to habituate to overflight disturbance as readily. Black brant studied in the Alaskan Peninsula were exposed to jets and propeller aircraft, helicopters, gunshots, people, boats, and various raptors. Jets accounted for 65 percent of all the disturbances. Humans, eagles, and boats caused a greater percentage of brant to take flight. There was markedly greater reaction to Bell-206-B helicopter flights than fixed-wing, single-engine aircraft (Ward et al. 1986). The presence of humans and low-flying helicopters in the Mackenzie Valley North Slope area did not appear to affect the population density of Lapland longspurs, but the experimental group was shown to have reduced hatching and fledging success and higher nest abandonment. Human presence appeared to have a greater impact on the incubating behavior of the black brant, common eider, and Arctic tern than fixed-wing aircraft (Gunn and Livingston 1974). Gunn and Livingston found that waterfowl and seabirds in the Mackenzie Valley and North Slope of Alaska and Canada became acclimated to float plane disturbance over the course of 3 days (1974). Additionally, it was observed that potential predators (bald eagle) caused a number of birds to leave their nests. Non-breeding birds were observed to be more reactive than breeding birds. Waterfowl were affected by helicopter flights, while snow geese were disturbed by Cessna 185 flights. The geese flushed when the planes were under 1,000 feet, compared to higher flight elevations. An overall reduction in flock sizes was observed. It was recommended that aircraft flights be reduced in the vicinity of pre-migratory staging areas. Manci et al. reported that waterfowl were particularly disturbed by aircraft noise (1988). The most sensitive appeared to be snow geese. Canada geese and snow geese were thought to be more sensitive than other animals such as turkey vultures, coyotes, and raptors (Edwards et al. 1979). C.2.5.4.3 Wading and Shore Birds Black et al. studied the effects of low-altitude (less than 500 feet AGL) military training flights with sound levels from 55 to 100 dBA on wading bird colonies (i.e., great egret, snowy egret, tricolored heron, and little blue heron) (1984). The training flights involved three or four aircraft, which occurred once or twice per day. This study concluded that the reproductive activity— including nest success, nestling survival, and nestling chronology—was independent of F-16 overflights. Dependent variables were more strongly related to ecological factors, including location and physical characteristics of the colony and climatology. Another study on the effects of circling fixed-wing aircraft and helicopter overflights on wading bird colonies found that at altitudes of 195 to 390 feet, there was no reaction in nearly 75 percent of the 220 observations. Ninety percent displayed no reaction or merely looked toward the direction of the noise source. Another 6 percent stood up, 3 percent walked from the nest, and 2 percent flushed (but were without active nests) and returned within 5 minutes (Kushlan 1979). Apparently non-nesting wading birds had a slightly higher incidence of reacting to overflights than nesting birds. Seagulls observed roosting near a colony of wading birds in another study remained at their roosts when subsonic aircraft flew overhead (Burger 1981). Colony distribution appeared to be most directly correlated to available wetland community types and was found to be distributed randomly with respect to Military Training Routes. These results suggest that wading bird species presence was most closely linked to habitat availability and that they were not affected by low-level military overflights (USAF 2000). Burger studied the response of migrating shorebirds to human disturbance and found that shorebirds did not fly in response to aircraft overflights, but did flush in response to more localized intrusions (i.e., humans and dogs on the beach) (1986). Burger studied the effects of noise from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York on herring gulls that nested less than 1 kilometer from the airport (1981). Noise levels over the nesting colony were 85 to 100 dBA on approach and 94 to 105 dBA on takeoff. Generally, there did not appear to be any prominent adverse effects of subsonic aircraft on nesting, although some birds flushed when a Concorde flew overhead and, when they returned, engaged in aggressive behavior. Groups of gulls tended to loaf in the area of the nesting colony, and these birds remained at the roost when the Concorde flew overhead. Up to 208 of the loafing gulls flew when supersonic aircraft flew overhead. These birds would circle around and immediately land in the loafing flock (USAF 2000). In 1970, sonic booms were potentially linked to a mass hatch failure of sooty terns on the Dry Tortugas (Austin et al. 1970). The cause of the failure was not certain, but it was conjectured that sonic booms from military aircraft or an overgrowth of vegetation were factors. In the previous season, sooties were observed to react to sonic booms by rising in a “panic flight,” circling over the island, and then usually settling down on their eggs again. Hatching that year was normal. Following the 1969 hatch failure, excess vegetation was cleared and measures were taken to reduce supersonic activity. The 1970 hatch appeared to proceed normally. A colony of noddies on the same island hatched successfully in 1969, the year of the sooty hatch failure. Subsequent laboratory tests of exposure of eggs to sonic booms and other impulsive noises (Bowles et al. 1991; Bowles et al. 1994; Cogger and Zegarra 1980) failed to show adverse effects on the hatching of eggs. A structural analysis (Ting et al. 2002) showed that, even under extraordinary circumstances, sonic booms would not damage an avian egg. Burger observed no effects of subsonic aircraft on herring gulls in the vicinity of John F. Kennedy International Airport (1981). The Concorde aircraft did cause more nesting gulls to leave their nests (especially in areas of higher density of nests), causing the breakage of eggs and the scavenging of eggs by intruder prey. Clutch sizes were observed to be smaller in areas of higher-density nesting (presumably due to the greater tendency for panic flight) than in areas where there were fewer nests. C.2.5.5 Fish, Reptiles, and Amphibians The effects of overflight noise on fish, reptiles, and amphibians have been poorly studied, but conclusions regarding their expected responses have involved speculation based upon known physiologies and behavioral traits of these taxa (Gladwin et al. 1988). Although fish do startle in response to low-flying aircraft noise, and probably to the shadows of aircraft, they have been found to habituate to the sound and overflights. Reptiles and amphibians that respond to low frequencies and those that respond to ground vibration, such as spadefoots (genus Scaphiopus), may be affected by noise. Limited information is available on the effects of short-duration noise events on reptiles. Dufour in 1980 and Manci et al. in 1988, summarized a few studies of reptile responses to noise. Some reptile species tested under laboratory conditions experienced at least TTSs or hearing loss after exposure to 95 dB for several minutes. Crocodilians in general have the most highly developed hearing of all reptiles. Crocodile ears have lids that can be closed when the animal goes under water. These lids can reduce the noise intensity by 10 to 12 dB (Wever and Vernon 1957). On Homestead Air Reserve Station, Florida, two crocodilians (the American alligator and the spectacled caiman) reside in wetlands and canals along the base runway, suggesting that they can coexist with existing noise levels of an active runway, including DNLs of 85 dB. C.2.5.6 Summary Some physiological/behavioral responses such as increased hormonal production, increased heart rate, and reduction in milk production have been described in a small percentage of studies. A majority of the studies focusing on these types of effects have reported short-term or no effects. The relationships between physiological effects and how species interact with their environments have not been thoroughly studied. Therefore, the larger ecological context issues regarding physiological effects of jet aircraft noise (if any) and resulting behavioral pattern changes are not well understood. Animal species exhibit a wide variety of responses to noise. It is therefore difficult to generalize animal responses to noise disturbances or to draw inferences across species, as reactions to jet aircraft noise appear to be species-specific. Consequently, some animal species may be more sensitive than other species and/or may exhibit different forms or intensities of behavioral responses. For instance, one study suggests that wood ducks appear to be more sensitive and more resistant to acclimation to jet aircraft noise than Canada geese. Similarly, wild ungulates seem to be more easily disturbed than domestic animals. The literature does suggest that common responses include the “startle” or “fright” response and, ultimately, habituation. It has been reported that the intensities and durations of the startle response decrease with the numbers and frequencies of exposures, suggesting no long-term adverse effects. The majority of the literature suggests that domestic animal species (cows, horses, chickens) and wildlife species exhibit adaptation, acclimation, and habituation after repeated exposure to jet aircraft noise and sonic booms. Animal responses to aircraft noise appear to be somewhat dependent on, or influenced by, the size, shape, speed, proximity (vertical and horizontal), engine noise, color, and flight profile of planes. Helicopters also appear to induce greater intensities and durations of disturbance behavior as compared to fixed-wing aircraft. Some studies showed that animals that had been previously exposed to jet aircraft noise exhibited greater degrees of alarm and disturbance to other objects creating noise, such as boats, people, and objects blowing across the landscape. Other factors influencing response to jet aircraft noise may include wind direction, speed, and local air turbulence; landscape structures (i.e., amount and type of vegetative cover); and, in the case of bird species, whether the animals are in the incubation/nesting phase. C.2.6 PROPERTY VALUES There are a number of factors that affect property values, which makes predicting impacts difficult. Factors directly related to the property, such as size, improvements, and location of the property, as well as current conditions in the real estate market, interest rates, and housing sales in the area, are more likely to have a direct adverse impact on property values. Several studies have analyzed property values as they relate to military and civilian aircraft noise. In one study, a regression analysis of property values as they relate to aircraft noise at two military installations was conducted (Fidell et al. 1996). This study found that, while aircraft noise at these installations may have had minor impacts on property values, it was difficult to quantify that impact. Other factors, such as the quality of the housing near the installations and the local real estate market, had a larger impact on property values. Therefore, the regression analysis was not able to predict the impact of aircraft noise on the property values of two comparable properties. Another study analyzed 33 other studies attempting to quantify the impact of noise on property values (Nelson 2003). The result of the study supports the idea that the potential for an adverse impact on property values as a result of aircraft noise exists and estimates that the value of a specific property could be discounted between 0.5 and 0.6 percent per decibel when compared to a similar property that is not impacted by aircraft noise. Additional data indicate that the discount for property values as a result of noise would be higher for noise levels above 75 dB DNL. C.2.7 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE EFFECTS ON STRUCTURES Normally, the most sensitive components of a structure to airborne noise are the windows and, infrequently, the plastered walls and ceilings. An evaluation of the peak sound pressures impinging on the structure is normally sufficient to determine the possibility of damage. In general, at sound levels above 130 dB, there is the possibility of the excitation of structural component resonance. While certain frequencies (such as 30 Hz for window breakage) may be of more concern than other frequencies, conservatively, only sounds lasting more than 1 second above a sound level of 130 dB are potentially damaging to structural components (CHABA 1977). A study directed specifically at low-altitude, high-speed aircraft showed that there is little probability of structural damage from such operations (Sutherland 1989). One finding in that study is that sound levels at damaging frequencies (e.g., 30 Hz for window breakage or 15 to 25 Hz for whole-house response) are rarely above 130 dB. Noise-induced structural vibration may also cause annoyance to dwelling occupants because of induced secondary vibrations, or “rattle,” of objects within the dwelling, such as hanging pictures, dishes, plaques, and bric-a-brac. Window panes may also vibrate noticeably when exposed to high levels of airborne noise, causing homeowners to fear breakage. In general, such noise-induced vibrations occur at sound levels above those considered normally incompatible with residential land use. Thus, assessments of noise exposure levels for compatible land use should also be protective of noise-induced secondary vibrations. C.2.8 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE EFFECTS ON STRUCTURE AND TERRAIN Members of the public often believe that noise from low-flying aircraft can cause avalanches or landslides by disturbing fragile soil or snow structures in mountainous areas. There are no known instances of such effects, and it is considered improbable that such effects would result from routine, subsonic aircraft operations. C.2.9 NOISE EFFECTS ON HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES Because of the potential for increased fragility of structural components of historical buildings and other historical sites, aircraft noise may affect such sites more severely than newer, modern structures. Most scientific studies of the effects of noise and vibration on historic properties have considered potential impacts on standing architecture. For example, the FAA published a study of potential impacts resulting from vibrations caused by the noise of subsonic Concorde overflights on five historic properties, including a restored plantation house, a stone bridge and tollhouse, and other structures (Hershey, Kevala, and Burns 1975). This study analyzed the breakage probabilities of structural elements that might be considered susceptible to vibration, such as window glass, mortar, and plaster. The results indicated that, with the exception of some already cracked window glass, there was no practical risk of noise-induced vibration damage to any of these structures. Some studies of the effects of overflights—both subsonic and supersonic—on archaeological structures and other types of sites also have been published. Battis examined the effects of low-altitude overflights of B-52, RF-4C, and A-7 aircraft on standing walls at Long House Ruin in northeastern Arizona (Battis 1988). The motion levels observed during all passes were well below a conservative threshold for vibration in ancient structures, a level of 1.3 millimeters per second, established by two previous studies. Battis concluded that vibration associated with aircraft overflights at speeds and altitudes similar to those measured in his study would have no significant damaging effect on Long House and similar sites. USAF National Environment Policy Act documents have examined the potential impacts on historic properties that might result from subsonic and supersonic overflights. In 1995, USAF published the Environmental Assessment for Continued Supersonic Operations in the Black Mountain Supersonic Corridor and the Alpha/Precision Impact Range Area. Eligible and potentially eligible cultural resources in the area of potential effect include petroglyph and pictograph panels located on a variety of rock types, historic adobe and non-adobe structures with standing walls, and historic mines (which contain tunnels) and wells. The report concludes that supersonic low-altitude flights have occurred over these corridors for 25 years or more and have resulted in no significant impacts on cultural resources. The California State Historic Preservation Office agreed, and during National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 review of this undertaking, concurred with USAF’s finding that continued supersonic overflights would have no effect on historic properties. As noted above for the noise effects of noise-induced vibrations on normal structures, assessments of noise exposure levels for normally compatible land uses should also be protective of historic and archaeological sites. C.3 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE MODELING An aircraft in subsonic flight generally emits noise from two sources: the engines and flow noise around the airframe. Noise generation mechanisms are complex and, in practical models, the noise sources must be based on measured data. The USAF has developed a series of computer models and aircraft noise databases for this purpose. The models include NOISEMAP (Moulton 1992), which is used to model noise around airbases. This model uses the NOISEFILE database developed by USAF. NOISEFILE data include SEL and Lmax as a function of speed and power setting for aircraft in straight flight. Noise from an individual aircraft is a time-varying continuous sound. It is first audible as the aircraft approaches, increases to a maximum when the aircraft is near its closest point, then diminishes as it departs. The noise depends on the speed and power setting of the aircraft and its trajectory. The models noted above divide the trajectory into segments whose noise can be computed from the data in NOISEFILE. The contributions from these segments are summed. Supporting routines from NOISEMAP were used to calculate SEL and Lmax for various flight altitudes and lateral off-sets from a ground receiver position. Sound intensity at a point on the ground is also affected by several environmental factors, such as atmospheric conditions and properties of the terrain being overflown. C.4 REFERENCES Andersen, D.E., O.J. Rongstad, and W.R. Mytton. 1989. Response of Red-Tailed Hawks to Helicopter Overflights. The Condor, Volume 91: 296-299. Andrus, W.S., M.E. Kerrigan, and K.T. Bird. 1975. Hearing and Para-Airport Children. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, Volume 46, Number 5: 740-742. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1980. Sound Level Descriptors for Determination of Compatible Land Use. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S3.23-1980. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1988. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound, Part 1. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-1988. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2002. Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools. Vol. S12.60-2002. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2005. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound, Part 4. Noise Assessment and Prediction of Long-term Community Response. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-2005. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2008. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound – Part 6: Methods for Estimation of Awakenings Associated with Outdoor Noise Events Heard in Homes. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-2008. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2009. Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.60-2002. ASA (Acoustical Society of America). 2000. Acoustics of Classrooms. Technical Committee on Architectural Acoustics. August. Austin, O.L., Jr., W.B. Robertson, Jr. and G.E. Woolfenden. 1970. Mass hatching failure in Dry Tortugas Sooty Terns. Proceedings of the International Ornithological Congress, Volume 15: 627. Battis, J.C. 1988. Effects of Low-Flying Aircraft on Archeological Structures. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, Air Force Systems Command AFGL-TR-0263. Environmental Research Paper 1013. Berger, E. H., W.D. Ward, J.C. Morrill, and L.H. Royster. 1995. Noise and Hearing Conservation Manual, Fourth Edition. American Industrial Hygiene Association, Fairfax, Virginia. Black, B., M. Collopy, H. Percivial, A. Tiller, and P. Bohall. 1984. Effects of Low-Altitude Military Training Flights on Wading Bird Colonies in Florida. Florida Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Technical Report No. 7. Bond, J., C.F. Winchester, L.E. Campbell, and J.C. Webb. 1963. The Effects of Loud Sounds on the Physiology and Behavior of Swine. U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Technical Bulletin 1280. Bowles, A.E., C. Book, and F. Bradley. 1990. Effects of Low-Altitude Aircraft Overflights on Domestic Turkey Poults. U.S. Air Force, Wright-Patterson AFB, AL/OEBN Noise Effects Branch. Bowles, A.E., F.T. Awbrey, and J.R. Jehl. 1991. The Effects of High-Amplitude Impulsive Noise On Hatching Success: A Reanalysis of the Sooty Tern Incident, HSD-TP-91-0006. Hubbs Marine Research Center, Sea World Research Center. February. Bowles, A.E., M. Knobler, M.D. Sneddon, and B.A. Kugler. 1994. Effects of Simulated Sonic Booms on the Hatchability of White Leghorn Chicken Eggs. Occupational and Environmental Health Directorate Bioenvironmental Engineering Division, Wright Patterson AFB, AL/OE-TR-1994-0179. Bowles, A.E. 1995. Responses of Wildlife to Noise. In: Wildlife and Recreationists: Coexistence Through Management and Research, R.L. Knight and K.J. Gutzwiller eds. Island Press, Washington, DC. Bronzaft, A.L. 1997. Beware: Noise is Hazardous to Our Children’s Development. Hearing Rehabilitation Quarterly, Volume 22, Number 1. Brown, A.L. 1990. Measuring the Effect of Aircraft Noise on Sea Birds. Environment International, Volume 16: 587-592. Bullock, T.H., D.P. Donning, and C.R. Best. 1980. Evoked Brain Potentials Demonstrate Hearing in a Manatee (Trichechus inunguis). Journal of Mammals, Volume 61, Number 1: 130-133. Burger, J. 1981. Behavioral Responses of Herring Gulls (Larus argentatus) to Aircraft Noise. Environmental Pollution (Series A), Volume 24: 177-184. Burger, J. 1986. The Effect of Human Activity on Shorebirds in Two Coastal Bays in Northeastern United States. Environmental Conservation, Volume 13, Number 2: 123-130. CHABA (Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics). 1977. Guidelines for Preparing Environmental Impact Statements on Noise. Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics, and Biomechanics. National Research Council/National Academy of Sciences (NRC/NAS). CHABA (Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics). 1981. Assessment of Community Noise Response to High-Energy Impulsive Sounds. Report of Working Group 84, Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics, Assembly of Behavioral and Social Sciences. National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences. Washington, DC. Chen, T., S. Chen, P. Hsieh, and H. Chiang. 1997. Auditory Effects of Aircraft Noise on People Living Near an Airport. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 52, Number 1: 45-50. Chen, T., and S. Chen. 1993. Effects of Aircraft Noise on Hearing and Auditory Pathway Function of School-Age Children. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, Volume 65, Number 2: 107-111. Cogger, E.A., and E.G. Zegarra. 1980. Sonic Booms and Reproductive Performance of Marine Birds: Studies on Domestic Fowl as Analogues. In Jehl, J.R., and C.F. Cogger, eds., Potential Effects of Space Shuttle Sonic Booms on the Biota and Geology of the California Channel Islands: Research Reports, San Diego State University Center for Marine Studies Technical Report No. 80-1. Cohen, S., G.W. Evans, D.S. Krantz, and D. Stokols. 1980. Physiological, Motivational, and Cognitive Effects of Aircraft Noise on Children: Moving from Laboratory to Field. American Psychologist, Volume 35: 231-243. Conomy, J.T., J.A. Dubovsky, J.A. Collazo, and W.J. Fleming. 1998. Do Black Ducks and Wood Ducks Habituate to Aircraft Disturbance? Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 62, Number 3: 1135-1142. Cottereau, P. 1978. Effect of sonic boom from aircraft on wildlife and animal husbandry. In: Effects of Noise on Wildlife. Academic Press, New York, New York. Davis, R.W., W.E. Evans, and B. Wursig. 2000. Cetaceans, Sea Turtles, and Seabirds in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: Distribution, Abundance, and Habitat Associations. Volume II of Technical Report, prepared by Texas A&M University at Galveston and the National Marine Fisheries Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, and Minerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region, New Orleans, Louisiana, OCS Study MMS 2000-003. DoD (U.S. Department of Defense). 2009. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense, Ashton B. Carter, re: “Methodology for assessing Hearing Loss Risk and Impacts in DoD Environmental Impact Analysis,” 16 June. DoL (U.S. Department of Labor). 1971. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Occupational Noise Exposure, Standard No. 1910.95. Dooling, R.J. 1978. Behavior and psychophysics of hearing in birds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Supplement 1, Volume 65: S4. DOT (United States Department of Transportation). 1984. Airport Noise Compatibility Planning; Development of Submission of Airport Operator’s Noise Exposure Map and Noise Compatibility Program; Final Rule and Request for Comments. 14 CFR Parts 11 and 150, Federal Register, Volume 49, Number 244. 18 December. Dufour, P.A. 1980. Effects of Noise on Wildlife and Other Animals: Review of Research Since 1971. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Noise Abatement and Control. July. Edmonds, L.D., P.M. Layde, and J.D. Erickson. 1979. Airport Noise and Teratogenesis. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 34, Number 4: 243-247. Edwards, R.G., A.B. Broderson, R.W. Harbour, D.F. McCoy, and C.W. Johnson. 1979. Assessment of the Environmental Compatibility of Differing Helicopter Noise Certification Standards. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC. Eldred, K, and H. von Gierke. 1993. Effects of Noise on People. Noise/News International, Volume 1, Number 2: 67-89. June. Ellis, D.H., C.H. Ellis, and D.P. Mindell. 1991. Raptor Responses to Low-Level Jet Aircraft and Sonic Booms. Environmental Pollution, Volume 74: 53-83. Evans, G.W., and L. Maxwell. 1997. Chronic Noise Exposure and Reading Deficits: The Mediating Effects of Language Acquisition. Environment and Behavior, Volume 29, Number 5: 638-656. Evans, G.W., and S.J. Lepore. 1993. Nonauditory Effects of Noise on Children: A Critical Review. Children’s Environment, Volume 10: 31-51. Evans, G.W., M. Bullinger, and S. Hygge. 1998. Chronic Noise Exposure and Physiological Response: A Prospective Study of Children Living under Environmental Stress. Psychological Science, Volume 9: 75-77. FICAN (Federal Interagency Committee on Aircraft Noise). 1997. Annual Report. U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory Report AFRL-HE-WP-TR-1998-0144. February. FICON (Federal Interagency Committee on Noise). 1992. Federal Agency Review of Selected Airport Noise Analysis Issues. August. FICUN (Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise). 1980. Guidelines for Considering Noise in Land-Use Planning and Control. June. Fidell, S., D.S. Barger, and T.J Schultz. 1989. Updating a Dosage-Effect Relationship for the Prevalence of Annoyance Due to General Transportation Noise. Noise and Sonic Boom Impact Technology, Human Systems Division, Air Force Systems Command, Brooks AFB, Texas. December. Fidell, S., K. Pearson, R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, L. Silvati, and D. Barber. 1994. Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance in Residential Settings. Technical Report. Armstrong Laboratory, Air Force Materiel Command. Final Report for July 1992 to February 1994. Fidell, S., K. Pearsons, R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, L. Silvati, and D.S. Barber. 1995a. Field Study of Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 96. Number 2, Part 1. August. Fidell, S., R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, K. Pearsons, and M. Sneddon. 1995b. Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance in Residences Near Two Civil Airports. NASA Langley Research Center. NASA Contractor Report 198252. Hampton, Virginia. December. Fidell, S., B. Tabachnick, and L. Silvati. 1996. Effects of Military Aircraft Noise on Residential Property Values. 16 October. Finegold, L.S., C.S. Harris, and H.E. von Gierke. 1994. Community Annoyance and Sleep Disturbance: Updated Criteria for Assessing the Impacts of General Transportation Noise on People. Noise Control Engineering Journal, Volume 42, Number 1: 25-30. January-February. Fisch, L. 1977. Research Into Effects of Aircraft Noise on Hearing of Children in Exposed Residential Areas Around an Airport. Acoustics Letters, Volume 1: 42-43. Fraser, J.D., L.D. Franzel, and J.G. Mathiesen. 1985. The Impact of Human Activities on Breeding Bald Eagles in North-Central Minnesota. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 49: 585-592. Frerichs, R.R., B.L. Beeman, and A.H. Coulson. 1980. Los Angeles Airport Noise and Mortality: Faulty Analysis and Public Policy. American Journal of Public Health, Volume 70, Number 4: 357-362. April. Gladwin, D.N., K.M. Manci, and R. Villella. 1988. Effects of Aircraft Noise and Sonic Booms on Domestic Animals and Wildlife. Bibliographic Abstracts. NERC-88/32. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Ecology Research Center, Fort Collins, Colorado. Grandin, T., 1991. An Inside View of Autism. Available online at http://www.autism.com/fam_ inside_view.asp. Green, K.B., B.S. Pasternack, and R.E. Shore. 1982. Effects of Aircraft Noise on Reading Ability of School-Age Children. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 37, Number 1: 24-31. Grubb, T.G., and R.M. King. 1991. Assessing Human Disturbance of Breeding Bald Eagles with Classification Tree Models. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 55, Number 3: 500- 511. Gunn, W.W.H., and J.A. Livingston. 1974. Disturbance to Birds by Gas Compressor Noise Simulators, Aircraft, and Human Activity in the MacKenzie Valley and the North Slope. Chapters VI-VIII, Arctic Gas Biological Report, Series Volume 14. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, and B. Berglund. 1998. Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure and Child Cognitive Performance and Stress. In Carter, N.L., and R.F. Job, eds., Proceedings of Noise as a Public Health Problem, Volume 1, Sydney, Australia University of Sydney, pp. 329-335. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, B. Berglund, and J. Head. 2001a. A Follow-up Study of Effects of Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure on Child Stress Responses and Cognition. International Journal of Epidemiology, Volume 30: 839-845. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, B. Berglund, and J. Head. 2001b. Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure, Stress Responses, Mental Health and Cognitive Performance in School Children. Psychological Medicine, Volume 31: 265-277. February. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, S. Brentnall, J. Head, B. Berry, M. Jiggins, and S. Hygge. 2001c. The West London Schools Study: the Effects of Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure on Child Health. Psychological Medicine, Volume 31: 1385-1396. November. Harris, C.M. (editor). 1979. Handbook of Noise Control. McGraw-Hill: New York, New York. Harris, C.S. 1997. The Effects of Noise on Health. Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, AL/OE-TR-1997-0077. Hershey, R.L., R.J. Kevala, and S.L. Burns. 1975. Analysis of the Effects of Concorde Aircraft Noise on Historic Structures. FAA RD-75-118. July. Hygge, S., G.W. Evans, and M. Bullinger. 2002. A Prospective Study of Some Effects of Aircraft Noise on Cognitive Performance in School Children. Psychological Science, Volume 13: 469-474. Ising, H., Z. Joachims, W. Babisch, and E. Rebentisch. 1999. Effects of Military Low-Altitude Flight Noise I Temporary Threshold Shift in Humans. Zeitschrift fur Audiologie (Germany), Volume 38, Number 4: 118-127. Jehl, J.R., and C.F. Cooper, eds. 1980. Potential Effects of Space Shuttle Sonic Booms on the Biota and Geology of the California Channel Islands. Research Reports, Center for Marine Studies, San Diego State University, San Diego, California, Technical Report No. 80-1. Jones, F.N., and J. Tauscher. 1978. Residence Under an Airport Landing Pattern as a Factor in Teratism. Archives of Environmental Health, 10-12. January/February. Kovalcik, K., and J. Sottnik. 1971. Vplyv Hluku Na Mliekovú Úzitkovost Kráv [The Effect of Noise on the Milk Efficiency of Cows]. Zivocisná Vyroba, Volume 16, Number 10-11: 795-804. Kryter, K.D. 1984. Physiological, Psychological, and Social Effects of Noise. NASA Reference Publication 1115, 446. July. Kryter, K.D., and F. Poza. 1980. Effects of Noise on Some Autonomic System Activities. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 67, Number 6: 2036-2044. Kushlan, J.A. 1979. Effects of Helicopter Censuses on Wading Bird Colonies. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 43, Number 3: 756-760. LeBlanc, M.M., C. Lombard, S. Lieb, E. Klapstein, and R. Massey. 1991. Behavioral and Physiological Responses of Horses to Simulated Aircraft Noise. U.S. Air Force, NSBIT Program for University of Florida. Lynch, T.E., and D.W. Speake. 1978. Eastern Wild Turkey Behavioral Responses Induced by Sonic Boom. In: Effects of Noise on Wildlife. Academic Press: New York, New York, pp. 47-61. Manci, K.M., D.N. Gladwin, R. Villella, and M.G. Cavendish. 1988. Effects of Aircraft Noise and Sonic Booms on Domestic Animals and Wildlife: A Literature Synthesis. U.S. Air Force Engineering and Services Center and U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. June. Meacham, W.C., and N. Shaw. 1979. Effects of Jet Noise on Mortality Rates. British Journal of Audiology, Volume 13: 77-80. August. Michalak, R., H. Ising, and E. Rebentisch. 1990. Acute Circulatory Effects of Military Low- Altitude Flight Noise. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, Volume 62, Number 5: 365-372. Moulton, C.L. 1992. Air Force Procedure for Predicting Noise Around Airbases: Noise Exposure Model (NOISEMAP). Technical Report AL-TR-1992-59. NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization). 2000. The Effects of Noise from Weapons and Sonic Booms, and the Impact on Humans, Wildlife, Domestic Animals and Structures. Final Report of the Working Group Study Follow-up Program to the Pilot Study on Aircraft Noise, Report No. 241. June. Nelson, J. 2003. Meta-Analysis of Airport Noise and Hedonic Property Values: Problems and Prospects. July Newman, J.S., and K.R. Beattie. 1985. Aviation Noise Effects. U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration Report No. FAA-EE-85-2. Nixon, C.W., D.W. West, and N.K. Allen. 1993. Human Auditory Responses to Aircraft Flyover Noise. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Congress on Noise as a Public Problem, Volume 2, Vallets, M., ed. Arcueil, France: INRETS. NPS (National Park Service). 1994. Report to Congress: Report on Effects of Aircraft Overflights on the National Park System. Prepared Pursuant to Public Law 100-91, The National Parks Overflights Act of 1987. 12 September. Ollerhead, J.B., C.J. Jones, R.E. Cadoux, A. Woodley, B.J. Atkinson, J.A. Horne, F. Pankhurst, L. Reyner, K.I. Hume, F. Van, A. Watson, I.D. Diamond, P. Egger, D. Holmes, and J. McKean. 1992. Report of a Field Study of Aircraft Noise and Sleep Disturbance. Commissioned by the United Kingdom (UK) Department of Transport for the 36th UK Department of Safety, Environment and Engineering, London, England: Civil Aviation Authority. December. Parker, J.B., and N.D. Bayley. 1960. Investigations on Effects of Aircraft Sound on Milk Production of Dairy Cattle, 1957-58. U.S. Agricultural Research Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Technical Report Number ARS 44-60. Pater, L.D., D.K. Delaney, T.J. Hayden, B. Lohr, and R. Dooling. 1999. Assessment of Training Noise Impacts on the Red-cockaded Woodpecker: Preliminary Results – Final Report. Report Number 99/51, ADA Number 367234. U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Construction Engineering Research Laboratory, Champaign, Illinois. February. Pearsons, K.S., Barber, D.S., and Tabachick, B.G. 1989. Analyses of the Predictability of Noise- Induced Sleep Disturbance. USAF Report HSD-TR-89-029. October. Plotkin, K.J., L.C. Sutherland, and J.A. Molino. 1987. Environmental Noise Assessment for Military Aircraft Training Routes, Volume II: Recommended Noise Metric. Wyle Research Report WR 86-21. January. Pulles, M.P.J., W. Biesiot, and R. Stewart. 1990. Adverse Effects of Environmental Noise on Health: An Interdisciplinary Approach. Environment International, Volume 16: 437-445. Richardson, W.J., C.R. Greene, Jr., C.I. Malme, and D.H. Thomson. 1995. Marine Mammals and Noise. Academic Press: San Diego, California. Rosenlund, M., N. Berglind, G. Bluhm, L. Jarup, and G. Pershagen. 2001. Increased Prevalence of Hypertension in a Population Exposed to Aircraft Noise. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Volume 58, Number 12: 769-773. December. Schultz, T.J. 1978. Synthesis of Social Surveys on Noise Annoyance. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 64: 377¬405. August. Schwarze, S., and S.J. Thompson. 1993. Research on Non-Auditory Physiological Effects of Noise Since 1988: Review and Perspectives. In Vallets, M., ed., Proceedings of the 6th International Congress on Noise as a Public Problem, Volume 3, Arcueil, France: INRETS. Shield, B.M., and J.E. Dockrell. 2008. The Effects of Environmental and Classroom Noise on the Academic Attainments of Primary School Children. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 123(1). January. Stusnick, E., D.A. Bradley, J.A. Molino, and G. DeMiranda. 1992. The Effect of Onset Rate on Aircraft Noise Annoyance. Volume 2: Rented Own-Home Experiment. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR 92-3. March. Stusnick, E., D.A. Bradley, M.A. Bossi, and D.G. Rickert. 1993. The Effect of Onset Rate on Aircraft Noise Annoyance. Volume 3: Hybrid Own-Home Experiment. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR 93-22. December. Sutherland, L.C. 1989. Assessment of Potential Structural Damage from Low Altitude Subsonic Aircraft. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR89-16. June. Tang, J.C., C.H. Kennedy, A. Koppekin, and M. Caruso. 2002. Functional Analysis of Stereotypical Ear Covering in a Child with Autism. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, Volume 35, Number 1: 95-98. Ting, C., J. Garrelick, and A. Bowles. 2002. An analysis of the response of Sooty Tern eggs to sonic boom overpressures. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 111, Number 1, Part 2: 562-568. Trimper, P.G., N.M. Standen, L.M. Lye, D. Lemon, T.E. Chubbs, and G.W. Humphries. 1998. Effects of low-level jet aircraft noise on the behavior of nesting osprey. Journal of Applied Ecology, Volume 35, 122-130. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 1993. The Impact of Low Altitude Flights on Livestock and Poultry. Air Force Handbook. Volume 8, Environmental Protection. 28 January. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 1994. Air Force Position Paper on the Effects of Aircraft Overflights on Large Domestic Stock. Approved by HQ USAF/CEVP. 3 October. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 2000. Preliminary Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for Homestead Air Force Base Closure and Reuse. Prepared by SAIC. 20 July. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1974. Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect the Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Report 550/9-74-004. March. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1978. Protective Noise Levels. Office of Noise Abatement and Control, Washington, DC. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Report 550/9-79-100. November. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1982. Guidelines for Noise Impact Analysis. USEPA Report 550/9-82-105. April. USFS (United States Forest Service). 1992. Report to Congress: Potential Impacts of Aircraft Overflights of National Forest System Wilderness. Prepared pursuant to Public Law 100-91, The National Parks Overflights Act of 1987. von Gierke, H.R. 1990. The Noise-Induced Hearing Loss Problem. NIH Consensus Development Conference on Noise and Hearing Loss, January 22-24. Washington, DC. Ward, D.H., E.J. Taylor, M.A. Wotawa, R.A. Stehn, D.V. Derksen, and C.J. Lensink. 1986. Behavior of Pacific Black Brant and Other Geese in Response to Aircraft Overflights and Other Disturbances at Izembek Lagoon, Alaska. 1986 Annual Report, p. 68. Ward, D.H., and R.A. Stehn. 1990. Response of Brant and Other Geese to Aircraft Disturbances at Izembek Lagoon, Alaska. Final Technical Report, Number MMS900046. Alaska Fish and Wildlife Research Center, Anchorage, Alaska. Minerals Management Service, Anchorage, Alaska, Alaska Outer Continental Shelf Office. Weisenberger, M.E., P.R. Krausman, M.C. Wallace, and D.W. De Young, and O.E. Maughan. 1996. Effects of Simulated Jet Aircraft Noise on Heart Rate and Behavior of Desert Ungulates. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 60, Number 1: 52-61. Wever, E.G., and J.A. Vernon. 1957. Auditory Responses in the Spectacled Caiman. Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology, Volume 50: 333-339. WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. Guidelines for Community Noise. B. Berglund, T. Lindvall, and D. Schwela, eds. Wu, T.N., J.S. Lai, C.Y. Shen, T.S Yu, and P.Y. Chang. 1995. Aircraft Noise, Hearing Ability, and Annoyance. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 50, Number 6: 452-456. November-December. PUBLIC DOCUMENTS Air Force Instructions AFI 32-7063 – Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Program Air Force Manuals AFMAN 32-1123 – Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design Executive Orders Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK ATTACHMENT C-1 REPRESENTATIVE LOCATIONS POINT ANALYSIS THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK pages_A-3_to_A-4_2013-06840_Published NOI_PDFofPDF_2pages_Page_1.pngAPPENDIX A CORRESPONDENCE A.1 NOTICE OF INTENT AND NEWSPAPER ADVERTISEMENT  pages_A-3_to_A-4_2013-06840_Published NOI_PDFofPDF_2pages_Page_2.pngA.1 NOTICE OF INTENT AND NEWSPAPER ADVERTISEMENT (CONTINUED)  A.1 NOTICE OF INTENT AND NEWSPAPER ADVERTISEMENT (CONTINUED)  The U.S. Air Force Invites You to Attend Public Scoping Meetings for the Proposed Beddown of KC-46A Tanker Aircraft for the Formal Training Unit and the First Main Operating Base Proposed Action and Alternatives The United States Air Force (Air Force) is proposing to beddown KC-46A tanker aircraft, associated infrastructure and manpower for the Formal Training Unit (FTU) and the First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) at existing active duty Air Force installations within the continental United States. The proposed basing alternatives for the FTU are Altus Air Force Base (AFB), Oklahoma and McConnell AFB, Kansas. The FTU squadron will consist of up to eight KC-46A aircraft with a mission to train personnel to safely and effectively fly and operate the KC-46A aircraft. The proposed basing alternatives for MOB 1 are Altus AFB, Oklahoma; Fairchild AFB, Washington; Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota; and McConnell AFB, Kansas. The MOB 1 will consist of 36 KC-46A aircraft with a mission to provide worldwide refueling, cargo, or aeromedical evacuation support. Each candidate base is an alternative. Altus AFB and McConnell AFB are being considered for either the FTU or MOB 1 missions. No base would receive both the FTU and MOB 1 missions. The KC-46A mission could be an additive or replacement mission depending on where the aircraft is located. In addition, the Air Force would use auxiliary airfields in the vicinity of the bases proposed for the FTU mission. The KC-46A aircraft will replace a portion of the aging KC-135 aircraft fleet which have been the Air Force’s primary refueling aircraft for more than 50 years. With more refueling capacity and enhanced capabilities, improved efficiency and increased capabilities for cargo and aeromedical evacuation, the KC-46A will provide aerial refueling support to the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps, as well as allied nation coalition force aircraft. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) Pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act, the Air Force will prepare an EIS, which will assess the potential environmental consequences of the KC-46A aircraft beddown, which will require personnel, facilities to support aircraft operations and pilot and operator requirements. Public Scoping Meetings – Please Attend Public come and go open house scoping meetings are being held to inform the public about the proposed action and alternatives under consideration, and to “scope” important issues to evaluate in the EIS. The meetings will be arranged in a “come and go” open house format with no formal Air Force presentation or opportunity for public testimony. Written comments will be accepted and a comment recording station will be available to accept verbal comments. Your input is valuable and assists the Air Force in making more informed decisions. Open House: Drop in anytime between 5-8 p.m. April 9, 2013, Altus AFB, Southwest Technology Center, 711 West Tamarack Road, Altus, OK 73521 April 11, 2013, McConnell AFB, Eugene M. Hughes Metropolitan Complex, Room 180, 5015 E. 29th Street N., Wichita, KS 67260 April 16, 2013, Fairchild AFB, The Lincoln Center, Lincoln Ballroom, 1316 N. Lincoln Street, Spokane, WA 99201 April 18, 2013, Grand Forks AFB, Grand Forks Ramada Inn, 1205 North 43rd Street, 1-29 And Exit 141, Grand Forks, ND 58203 Public Comment For more information or to submit written comments, please visit the project website at www.KC-46A-beddown.com or contact: Ms. Jean Reynolds, United States Air Force, AFCEC/CZN Midwest Office, 507 Symington Drive, Scott AFB, Illinois 62225-5022. The Air Force will accept comments at any time during the environmental process. However, to ensure the Air Force has sufficient time to consider public input in the preparation of the draft EIS, please submit comments by May 17, 2013!  page_A-13_FINAL_IICEP_LETTER_with__NO_Signature Sample.pngFTU-MOB1.KC-46A Example IICEP Letter_Page_2.pngA.2 INTERAGENCY/INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING (IICEP) A.2.1 IICEP Letter    pages_A-3_to_A-4_2013-06840_Published NOI_PDFofPDF_2pages_Page_2.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_1.pngA.2.1 IICEP Letter (Continued)   3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_2.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_3.pngA.2.1 IICEP Letter (Continued)    3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_4.pngA.2.1 IICEP Letter (Continued)   A.2.2 IICEP Mailing List A.2.2.1 Altus AFB IICEP Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip The Honorable Frank D. Lucas Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Oklahoma District 3 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Tom Coburn Senator U.S. Senate, Oklahoma Washington DC 20510 The Honorable John Cornyn Senator U.S. Senate, Texas Washington DC 20510 The Honorable John Cornyn Senator U.S. Senate, Texas Lubbock TX 79401 The Honorable Ted Cruz Senator U.S. Senate, Texas Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Ted Cruz Senator U.S. Senate, Texas Houston TX 77002 The Honorable James M. Inhofe Senator U.S. Senate, Oklahoma Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Rick Perry Governor Texas Governor's Office Austin TX 78711 The Honorable John M. Frullo Representative Texas House of Representatives, District 84 Lubbock TX 79414 The Honorable Charles Perry Representative Texas House of Representatives, District 83 Lubbock TX 79424 The Honorable Four Price Representative Texas House of Representatives, District 87 Amarillo TX 79101 The Honorable Jonathan Strickland Representative Texas House of Representatives, District 92 Austin TX 78768 The Honorable Wendy Davis Senator Texas Senate, District 10 Fort Worth TX 76107 The Honorable Robert L. Duncan Senator Texas Senate, District 28 Lubbock TX 79401 The Honorable Kelly Hancock Senator Texas Senate, District 9 Austin TX 78711 The Honorable Kel Seliger Senator Texas Senate, District 31 Amarillo TX 79105    Councilmembers Altus City Council Altus OK 73522    Commissioners of Jackson County Board of County Commissioners Altus OK 73521    Councilmembers City of Altus City Council Altus OK 73521 The Honorable Paul Harpole Mayor City of Amarillo Mayor's Office Amarillo TX 79101 The Honorable Betsy Price Mayor City of Fort Worth Mayor's Office Fort Worth TX 76102 The Honorable Glen Robertson Mayor City of Lubbock Mayor's Office Lubbock TX 79457 The Honorable David Webb Mayor City of Altus Mayor's Office Altus OK 73521 Ms. Catherine Coke  City of Altus, Attorney Altus OK 73521     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 6 Dallas TX 75202-2733    Intermountain Regional Office National Park Service Denver CO 80225 Dr. Benjamin Tuggle  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Southwest Region Albuquerque NM 87103-1306 Executive Director Zak Covar Executive Director Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Austin TX 78711-3087 A.2.2.1 Altus AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip    Wildlife Division, Nongame & Species Program Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Austin TX 78744 The Honorable Kenny Marchant Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 12 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Kenny Marchant Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 12 Irving TX 75063 The Honorable Randy Neugebauer Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 19 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Randy Neugebauer Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 19 Lubbock TX 79401 The Honorable Mac Thornberry Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 13 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Mac Thornberry Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Texas District 13 Amarillo TX 79101 Ms. Elizabeth Gray Administrator City of Altus Altus OK 73521 Ms. Kelly Pinion  Lubbock County Clerk's Office Lubbock TX 79401 Ms. Julie Smith  Potter County Clerk's Office Amarillo TX 79105 Ms. Mary Louise Garcia  Tarrant County Clerk's Office Fort Worth TX 76196 Ms. Teresa Bruner Administrator Federal Aviation Administration, Southwest Region Fort Worth TX 76137  Brian Ness Director Department of Transportation, Texas Boise ID 83707-1129  Mike Patterson Chief of Police Altus Police Department Altus OK 73521  Shane Hokett Director Military Affairs Committee, Hokett Construction Blair OK 73526  Barbara Burleson Planning Director City of Altus Planning and Development Altus OK 73521  Randall Harwood Director City of Fort Worth Planning and Development Fort Worth TX 76102    Planning Commission & Board of Adjustments City of Elk City Elk City OK 73644  Kelley Shaw Planning Director City of Amarillo Planning Department Amarillo TX 79105-1971     City of Clinton Planning Department Clinton OK 73601    Code of Ordinances Planning Department City of Lubbock Lubbock TX 79401 Mr. Tim Murphy  Altus Police Department Altus OK 73521 Sherriff Roger Levick  Jackson County Sheriff Altus OK 73521 Mr. Johnny Freeman  Oklahoma Highway Patrol in Altus Altus OK 73521 Mr. Jantz Bain Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Humphrey's Co-Op Altus OK 73521 Mr. Kerry Bull Board Member, Chamber of Commerce First National Bank Altus OK 73521  Dana Darby Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Altus Christian Academy Altus OK 73521 A.2.2.1 Altus AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip  N. Lee Doughty Board Member, Chamber of Commerce First State Bank Altus OK 73521  Jim Gover Board Member, Chamber of Commerce NBC Oklahoma Altus OK 73521 Mr. Shane Hokett Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Hokett Construction Blair OK 73526 Mr. Rodger Kerr Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Southwest Technology Center Altus OK 73521 Colonel Anthony B. Krawietz Board Member, Chamber of Commerce 97th AMW/CC Altus AFB OK 73523 Ms. Mary Kruska Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Tamarack Retirement Center Altus OK 73521 Dr. Joe Leverett Board Member Chamber of Commerce Altus OK 73521  Krystal Martin Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Belles & Beaux Altus OK 73521 Board Member Jim Norris Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Boeing Altus OK 73522 Reverend David Player Board Member, Chamber of Commerce First United Methodist Church Altus OK 73521 Board Member Brenda Pruitt Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Integris Family Care Altus Altus OK 73521 Board Member Danny Robbins Board Member, Chamber of Commerce Agriculture Affairs Committee Altus OK 73521 Mayor David Webb Board Member, Chamber of Commerce City of Altus Altus OK 73521 Ms. Eva Lucas Chairman Committee of 100, Lucas Farms Elmer OK 73539 Dr. Joe Leverett President, Chairman Military Affairs Committee Altus OK 73521     Altus/Quartz Mountain Regional Airport Altus OK 73521     Fort Worth Meacham International Airport Fort Worth TX 76106     Lubbock International Airport Lubbock TX 79404 Director Patrick Rhodes Aviation Director Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport Amarillo TX 79111 Director James Loomis Aviation Director Preston Smith International Airport Lubbock TX 79401     Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark/OSIDA Burns Flat OK 73624 Mr. Christopher Ash  Fort Worth Alliance Airport Fort Worth TX 76102 A.2.2.1 Altus AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Mr. Mark Haught  Altus High School Altus OK 73521 Ms. Kristy Greer  Western Oklahoma State College Altus OK 73521 Mr. Lloyd Colston  Altus Emergency Management Services Altus OK 73521 Mr. Shaun Cecil  Jackson County EMS Altus OK 73521    Agency Representative Oklahoma Biological Survey Oklahoma Natural Heritage Inventory Norman OK 73019-0575     Texas Historical Commission Austin TX 78711-2276 The Honorable Frank D. Lucas Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Oklahoma District 3 Yukon OK 73099 The Honorable Tom Coburn Senator U.S. Senate, Oklahoma Oklahoma City OK 73102 The Honorable James M. Inhofe Senator U.S. Senate ,Oklahoma Enid OK 73701 The Honorable Mary Fallin Governor Oklahoma Governor's Office Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Charles L. Ortega Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 052 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Charles L. Ortega Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 052 Altus OK 73521 The Honorable Todd Russ Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 055 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Todd Russ Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 055 Cordell OK 73632 The Honorable G. Harold Wright Jr. Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 057 Weatherford OK 73096 The Honorable G. Harold Wright Jr. Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 057 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Tom Ivester Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 026 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Tom Ivester Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 026 Elk City OK 73648 The Honorable Mike Schulz Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 038 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Mike Schulz Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 038 Altus OK 73521 The Honorable Teresa Mullican Mayor City of Elk City Mayor's Office Elk City OK 73644 Ms. Cheryl Snipes City Clerk City of Elk City Elk City OK 73648 Ms. Lisa Anders City Clerk Clinton City Clinton OK 73601    Oklahoma Field Office Bureau of Land Management Tulsa OK 74145-1352    Oklahoma Field Office Environmental Protection Agency Tulsa OK 74128-4629    Oklahoma Ecological Services Field Office U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Tulsa OK 74129-1428     Oklahoma Dept. of Environmental Quality Oklahoma City OK 73101-1677    Environmental Restoration Mission, Tulsa District U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Tulsa OK 74128-4609 Ms. Jeanette Hannah Muskogee Area Director U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs Muskogee OK 74401 A.2.2.1 Altus AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Mr. Ron L. Hillard State Conservationist Natural Resources Conservation Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Stillwater OK 74075-2655    Altus Service Center USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Altus OK 73521-1305    Southern Plains Regional Office Bureau of Indian Affairs Anadarko OK 73005     Great Plains State Park MountaiNorth Park OK 73559 Ms. Margaret Graham Consumer Assistance Program Oklahoma Dept. of Environmental Quality Oklahoma City OK 73201     Oklahoma Dept. of Wildlife Conservation Oklahoma City OK 73152    Agency Representative Natural Resources Section Oklahoma Dept. of Wildlife Conservation Oklahoma City OK 73505 Mr. Gary Ridley Director Oklahoma Dept. of Transportation Oklahoma City OK 73105     Oklahoma Tourism & Recreation Dept. Oklahoma City OK 73102  Melvina Heisch Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Oklahoma Historical Society State Historic Preservation Office Oklahoma City OK 73105    Oklahoma Historical Society State Historic Preservation Office Oklahoma City OK 73105   A.2.2.2 Fairchild AFB IICEP Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip The Honorable Raul R. Labrador Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Idaho District 1 Coeur d'Alene ID 83814 The Honorable Raul R. Labrador Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Idaho District 1 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Cathy McMorris Rodgers Congresswoman U.S. House of Representatives, Washington District 5 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Cathy McMorris Rodgers Congresswoman U.S. House of Representatives, Washington District 5 Spokane WA 99201 The Honorable Maria Cantwell Senator U.S. Senate, Washington Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Maria Cantwell Senator U.S. Senate, Washington Spokane WA 99201 The Honorable Mike Crapo Senator U.S. Senate, Idaho Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Mike Crapo Senator U.S. Senate, Idaho Coeur d'Alene ID 83814 The Honorable Patty Murray Senator U.S. Senate, Washington Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Patty Murray Senator U.S. Senate, Washington Spokane WA 99201 The Honorable James E. Risch Senator U.S. Senate, Idaho Washington DC 20510 The Honorable James E. Risch Senator U.S. Senate, Idaho Coeur d'Alene ID 83814 The Honorable Jay Inslee Governor Washington Governor's Office Olympia WA 98504-0002 The Honorable C.L. "Butch" Otter Governor Idaho Governor's Office Boise ID 83720 The Honorable Larry Crouse Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 4 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Jeff Holy Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 6 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Timm Ormsby Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 3 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Kevin Parker Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 6 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Marcus Riccelli Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 3 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Matt Shea Representative Washington House of Representatives, District 4 Olympia WA 98504-0600 The Honorable Michael Baumgartner Senator Washington Senate, District 6 Olympia WA 98504-0406 The Honorable Andy Billig Senator Washington Senate, District 3 Olympia WA 98504-0403 The Honorable Mike Padden Senator Washington Senate, District 4 Olympia WA 98504-0404 The Honorable David Condon Mayor City of Spokane Mayor's Office Spokane WA 99201    County Clerk Spokane County Spokane WA 99260 Ms. Laura Jo West Supervisor Colville National Forest Colville WA 99114 Mr. Dennis E. McLerran Regional Administrator U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 10 Seattle WA 98101 Ms. Robyn Thorson Regional Director, Pacific Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Portland OR 97232 Director Jose Linares Region 6, Pacific Northwest U.S. Forest Service Portland OR 97204-3440 A.2.2.2 Fairchild AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip    NEPA Program Coordinator Upper Columbia Fish and Wildlife Office Spokane Valley WA 99206 Ms. Kathryn Vernon Regional Administrator, Northwest Mountain Federal Aviation Administration Renton WA 98057 Mr. John Townsley Legislative Director Washington Pilots Association Spokane WA 99205 Mr. John Andrews Regional Director Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Spokane Valley WA 99216-1566 Mr. Dave Duncan Water Quality Washington State Department of Ecology Spokane WA 99205-1295 Ms. Lynn Peterson Secretary of Transportation Washington Department of Transportation Olympia WA 98504 Mr. Phil Wilson Executive Director Idaho Department of Transportation Austin TX 78701 Dr. Allyson Brooks State Historic Preservation Officer Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation Olympia WA 98501 Mr. Joe Southwell Air Quality Engineer Spokane Regional Clean Air Agency Spokane WA 99207-5384     City of Airway Heights Planning Department Airway Heights WA 99001 Mr. Scott Chesney Planning Director City of Spokane Planning and Development Spokane WA 99201 Mr. Dave Yadon Planning Director City of Coeur d'Alene Planning Commission Coeur d'Alene ID 83814 Mr. Derrick Braaten City Planner City of Airway Heights Planning Department Airway Heights WA 99001    Public Works Building and Planning Spokane County Planning Department Spokane WA 99260 Ms. E. Susan Meyer  Spokane Transit Authority Spokane WA 99201-2686 Mr. Rob Higgins  Spokane Association of Realtors Spokane WA 99205-4206 Mr. David Holmes  Spokane International Airport Spokane WA 99224     Washington Air National Guard Fairchild AFB WA 99011-9621 Mr. Terrance Brown  Spokane Community College Spokane WA 99217-5410     Blair Elementary School Fairchild AFB WA 99011 Ltc Russell Pritchard, Jr.  Gonzaga University Spokane WA 99258-0001 Mr. Terry Munther  Medical Lake School District Medical Lake WA 99022-9737     Park College 92 MSS/DPE Fairchild AFB WA 99011-9469   A.2.2.3 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip The Honorable Kevin Cramer Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, North Dakota Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Kevin Cramer Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, North Dakota Grand Forks ND 58202 The Honorable Heidi Heitkamp Senator U.S. Senate, North Dakota Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Heidi Heitkamp Senator U.S. Senate, North Dakota Grand Forks ND 58201 The Honorable John Hoeven Senator U.S. Senate, North Dakota Washington DC 20510 The Honorable John Hoeven Senator U.S. Senate, North Dakota Grand Forks ND 58201 The Honorable Jack Dalrymple Governor North Dakota Governor's Office Bismarck ND 58505-0001 The Honorable Eliot Glasheim Representative North Dakota House of Representatives, District 18 Grand Forks ND 58203-3203 The Honorable Mark S. Owens Representative North Dakota House of Representatives, District 17 Grand Forks ND 58201-2820 The Honorable Mark S. Sanford Representative North Dakota House of Representatives, District 17 Grand Forks ND 58201-2904 The Honorable Marie Strinden Representative North Dakota House of Representatives, District 18 Grand Forks ND 58201-4765 The Honorable Ray Holmberg Senator North Dakota State Senate, District 17 Grand Forks ND 58201-7717 The Honorable Constance Triplett Senator North Dakota State Senate, District 18 Grand Forks ND 58206-5178 Commissioner Harvey Hope Commissioner Cavalier County Commission Langdon ND 58249 Mr. Hal Gershman Councilmember Grand Forks City Council Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. Eliot Glassheim Councilmember Grand Forks City Council Grand Forks ND 58203    Commissioners Grand Forks Commissioners Grand Forks ND 58201-4715 Ms. Constance Triplett Commission Chair Grand Forks County Board of Commissioners Grand Forks ND 58206-6372 Mr. Gary Malm Commission Chairman Grand Forks County Commissioners Grand Forks ND 58201 The Honorable Lynn Stauss Mayor City of East Grand Forks Mayor's Office East Grand Forks MN 56721 Commissioners   Commissioners Polk County Board of County Commissioners Crookston MN 56716 The Honorable Michael Brown Mayor City of Grand Forks Grand Forks ND 58206-5200 Ms. Vivian Drees Clerk/Treasurer Grand Forks County Grand Forks ND 58201 Mr. Robert W. Johnson Commissioner Bureau of Reclamation Washington DC 20240-0001 Mr. Dennis E. Breitzman Area Manager Bureau of Reclamation, Dakotas Area Office Bismarck ND 58501 Mr. Michael J. Ryan Regional Director Bureau of Reclamation, Great Plains Regional Office Billings MT 59107-6900 Mr. Horst Greczmiel  Council on Environmental Quality Washington DC 20501 Ms. Dana Allen  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8 Denver CO 80202-1129 Mr. James Hanley  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9 Denver CO 80202-1129 Acting Regional Administrator Carol Rushin Acting Regional Administrator U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 10 Denver CO 80202-1129 A.2.2.3 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Regional Director Noreen Walsh Regional Director U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Lakewood CO 80228 Mr. Jeff Towner  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, North Dakota Field Office Bismarck ND 58501-7926 Mr. Jim Alfonso  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Devils Lake ND 58301 Mr. Shawn Bayless  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Bismarck ND 58501 Mrs. Michael Ramirez  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Devils Lake ND 58301 Ms. Diane Blair  Base Realignment Impact Center Grand Forks ND 58201    Deputy Regional Director Bureau of Indian Affairs, Great Plains Regional Office Aberdeen SD 57401-4384 Mr. Kelly Nelson  FAA Minneapolis Air Route Traffic Control Center Minneapolis MN 55450-2704 Mr. Barry Cooper Regional Administrator Federal Aviation Administration, Great Lakes Region Des Plaines IL 60018 Mr. Steve Obenauer  Federal Aviation Administration Bismarck ND 58504 Mr. Dan Cimarosti  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Bismarck ND 58504 Mr. Jason M. Lambrecht Supv Hydrologist U.S. Geological Survey Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. Don Kilma  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation Washington DC 20004  L. Noehre District Engineer, Grand Forks North Dakota Department of Transportation, District 6 Grand Forks ND 58208-3077  W. Swenson District Engineer, Devils Lake North Dakota Department of Transportation, District 3 Devils Lake ND 58301-3628  J R Flores State Conservationist Natural Resources Conservation Service Bismarck ND 58501 Mr. Brenton Sampson   Pikeville NC 27863 Mr. Roger Johnson Agriculture Commissioner North Dakota Department of Agriculture Bismark ND 58505-0020 Mr. Larry Kotchman State Forester North Dakota Forest Service Bottineu ND 58318 Mr. Jeff Faught  North Dakota Game and Fish Department Bismarck ND 58504  Terry Steinwand Director North Dakota Game and Fish Department Bismarck ND 58501-5095 Mr. Douglass Prchal Director North Dakota Parks and Recreation Department Bismarck ND 58503-0649 Mr. Larry Knudtson Research Analyst North Dakota State Water Commission Bismarck ND 58505-0850 Mr. Grant Levi Interim Director North Dakota Department of Transportation Bismarck ND 58505-0700    Division of Community Services North Dakota Department of Commerce Bismarck ND 58502-2057 Dr. Terry Dwelle  North Dakota Department of Health Bismarck ND 58505-0200 Mr. Paul Govig Director, Division of Community Services North Dakota Department of Commerce Bismarck ND 58503  A.2.2.3 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Mr. Jeff Rotenberger Energy and Information Security Program Manager North Dakota Energy Department Bismarck ND 58502-2057  Merlan Paaverud, Jr. State Historic Preservation Officer State Historical Society of North Dakota Bismarck ND 58505-0830 Mr. Curt Kreun  City of Grand Forks Grand Forks ND 58201 Mr. Mark R. Fisher District Wildlife Biologist Devils Lake Wetland Management District Devils Lake ND 58301 Mr. Barry Wilfahrt President & CEO Grand Forks Chamber of Commerce Grand Forks ND 58203  Klause Thiessen President Economic Development Corporation, Grand Forks Region Grand Forks ND 58201  Lane Magnunson County Planner County of Grand Forks Planning & Zoning Grand Forks ND 58201 Mr. Brad Gengler City Planner City of Grand Forks Planning Department Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. Eric Giltner  Small Business Administration Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. Duaine Ash   Devils Lake ND 58301 Mr. Paul Brusseau   Walhalla ND 58282 Mr. David Kragnes   Felton MN 56536 Ms. Anna Spivey   Langdon ND 58249 Mr. Skip Greenberg  Greenberg Realty Grand Forks ND 58201 Mr. Danny Holwerda Chairperson GF-EGF Chamber of Military Appreciation Committee Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. John Colter  Grand Forks Board of Realtors Grand Forks ND 58201     Alpine Aviation, Inc Provo UT 84601 Mr. Ken Schuler  Civil Air Patrol (CAP) Grand Forks ND 58201 Mr. Roger McGrath  Federal Aviation Administration, Southwest Region Fort Worth TX 76137 Mr. John H. Page, Jr. Air Traffic Organization Federal Aviation Administration Washington DC 20591 Mr. David Cink  Federal Aviation Administration Grand Forks ND 58203     GFK Flight Support Grand Forks ND 58203 Mr. Steve Johnson Facility Manager Grand Forks Regional Airport Authority Grand Forks ND 58203     Grand Forks Regional Airport Authority Grand Forks ND 58203     National Air Transportation Assoc. Alexandria VA 22302     National Association of State Aviation Officials Silver Spring MD 20910-5600     National Association of State Aviation Officials Washington National Airport Washington DC 20001     National Business Aviation Assoc. Washington DC 20036 A.2.2.3 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Ms. Cindy Schreiber-Beck Executive Director North Dakota Aerial Agricultural Association Wahpeton ND 58075 Mr. Gary R. Ness Executive Director North Dakota Aeronautics Commission Bismarck ND 58502-5020 Mr. Robert Simmers Chairman North Dakota Aviation Association Bismarck ND 58504 Mr. Darrel Pittman Chairman North Dakota Aviation Council Bismarck ND 58503-6409 Mr. Rod Brekken President North Dakota Aviation Mechanics Association Casselton ND 58012     North Dakota National Guard Bismarck ND 58502 Mr. Paul Hanson President North Dakota Pilots Association Emerado ND 58228 Mr. Trent Teets Chairman North Dakota Sports Aviation Association West Fargo ND 58078 Mr. Ben Trapnell  University of North Dakota Aerospace Grand Forks ND 58202-9007 Ms. Vicki Ericson  Grand Forks School Board Grand Forks ND 58201-8835 Mr. Bob Concannon  University of North Dakota GFAFB ND 58204 General Al Palmer  University of North Dakota Grand Forks ND 58203    USPFO ND Camp Grafton North Dakota Army National Guard Devils Lake ND 58301-8500 Mr. David Sprynczynatyk Adjutant General North Dakota Department of Emergency Services Bismark ND 58506  Arlen Lancaster Chief Natural Resources Conservation Service Washington DC 20250 Ms. Mike Myers Director U.S. Geological Survey National Center Reston VA 20192 Mr. Larry Taborsky Director National Association of State Aviation Officials Bismarck ND 58502 Ms. Deborah A. Painte  Indian Affairs Commission Bismarck ND 58505-0300   A.2.2.4 McConnell AFB IICEP Mailing List The Honorable Mike Pompeo Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Kansas District 4 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Mike Pompeo Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Kansas District 4 Wichita KS 67207 The Honorable Jerry Moran Senator U.S. Senate, Kansas Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Jerry Moran Senator U.S. Senate, Kansas Wichita KS 67226 The Honorable Pat Roberts Senator U.S. Senate, Kansas Washington DC 20510 The Honorable Pat Roberts Senator U.S. Senate, Kansas Wichita KS 67202 The Honorable Lynn Jenkins Congresswoman U.S. House of Representatives, Kansas District 2 Washington DC 20515 The Honorable Lynn Jenkins Congresswoman U.S. House of Representatives, Kansas District 2 Topeka KS 66606 The Honorable Sam Brownback Governor Kansas Governor's Office Topeka KS 66603-3434 The Honorable John Alcala Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 57 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Nile Dillmore Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 92 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Gail Finney Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 84 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Ramon Gonzalez Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 47 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Harold Lane Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 58 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Annie Tietze Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 56 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Ponka-We Victors Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 103 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Les Donovan Senator Kansas State Senate, District 27 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Oletha Faust-Goudeau Senator Kansas State Senate, District 29 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Anthony Hensley Senator Kansas State Senate, District 19 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Laura Kelly Senator Kansas State Senate, District 18 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Ty Masterson Senator Kansas State Senate, District 16 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Carolyn McGinn Senator Kansas State Senate, District 31 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Mike Peterson Senator Kansas State Senate, District 28 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Vicki Schmidt Senator Kansas State Senate, District 20 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Susan Wagle Senator Kansas State Senate, District 30 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Carl Brewer Mayor City Council, Mayor Wichita KS 67202 The Honorable Carl Brewer Mayor City of Wichita Mayor's Office Wichita KS 67202 The Honorable William Bunten Mayor City of Topeka Mayor's Office Topeka KS 66603 Mr. Kelly Arnold County Clerk Sedgewick County Wichita KS 67203 Ms. Cyndi Beck County Clerk Shawnee County Topeka KS 66603    Rocky Mountain Region U.S. Forest Service Golden CO 80401  A.2.2.4 McConnell AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Mr. Joe Cothern Environmental Review Coordinator U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region VII Kansas City KS 66101 Ms. Noreen Walsh Regional Director U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Lakewood CO 80228 Mr. Joe Miniace Regional Administrator Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region Kansas City MO 64106-2641 Mr. John Mitchell Director, Division of Environment Kansas Department of Health and Environment Topeka KS 66612-1367    Operations Office USFWS Kansas Dept. of Wildlife, Parks & Tourism Pratt KS 67124 Mr. Mike King Secretary of Transportation Kansas Department of Transportation Topeka KS 66603-3754 Ms. Jennie Chinn Executive Director Kansas State Historical Society, State Historic Preservation Office Topeka KS 66615-1099 The Honorable Dion Avello Mayor City of Derby Mayor's Office Derby KS 67037-3533 Mr. Cody Bird City Planner City of Derby Planning Department Derby KS 67037-3533 Ms. Allison Moeding Director City of Derby Economic Development Derby KS 67037-3533 Ms. Kathy Sexton City Manager City of Derby City Manager's Office Derby KS 67037-3533 Mr. Dan Squires City Engineer City of Derby Derby KS 67037-3533  Shawn Maloney Interim Environmental Health Manager City of Wichita, Office of Environmental Health Wichita KS 67214 Ms. Kristi Zukovich  Sedgwick County Community Development Wichita KS 67203 Mr. Bill Fiander Director City of Topeka Planning Department Topeka KS 66607     Shawnee County Planning Department Topeka KS 66618     Wichita-Sedgwick County Planning Department Wichita KS 67202 Mr. Bill Buchanan  Sedgwick County Manager's Office Wichita KS 67203 Mr. John Schlegel Director of Planning Wichita Sedgwick County Wichita KS 67202-1688  Marty Miller Executive Director Botanica Wichita KS 67203-3199  Jan Harper Chief Financial Officer Wichita Art Museum Wichita KS 67203-3296 Mr. Bernie Koch  Kansas Economic Progress Council Topeka KS 66612    Forbes Field Metropolitan Topeka Airport Authority Topeka KS 66619 Mr. Victor D. White Director of Airports Wichita Airport Authority Wichita KS 67209 The Honorable Judith Loganbill Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 86 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Jean Schodorf Senator Kansas Senate, District 25 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Annie Mah Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 53 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Benny Boman Representative Kansas House of Representatives, District 95 Topeka KS 66612 The Honorable Dick Kelsey Senator Kansas Senate, District 26 Topeka KS 66612  A.2.2.4 McConnell AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip The Honorable Frank D. Lucas Congressman U.S. House of Representatives, Oklahoma District 3 Yukon OK 73099 The Honorable Tom Coburn Senator U.S. Senate, Oklahoma Oklahoma City OK 73102 The Honorable James M. Inhofe Senator U.S. Senate, Oklahoma Enid OK 73701 The Honorable Mary Fallin Governor Oklahoma Governor's Office Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Charles L. Ortega Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 52 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Charles L. Ortega Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 52 Altus OK 73521 The Honorable Todd Russ Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 55 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Todd Russ Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 55 Cordell OK 73632 The Honorable G. Harold Wright Jr. Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 57 Weatherford OK 73096 The Honorable G. Harold Wright Jr. Representative Oklahoma House of Representatives, District 57 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Tom Ivester Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 026 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Tom Ivester Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 026 Elk City OK 73648 The Honorable Mike Schulz Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 038 Oklahoma City OK 73105 The Honorable Mike Schulz Senator Oklahoma Senate, District 038 Altus OK 73521 The Honorable Teresa Mullican Mayor City of Elk City Mayor's Office Elk City OK 73644 Ms. Cheryl Snipes City Clerk City of Elk City Elk City OK 73648 Ms. Lisa Anders City Clerk Clinton City Clinton OK 73601    Oklahoma Field Office Bureau of Land Management Tulsa OK 74145-1352    Oklahoma Field Office Environmental Protection Agency Tulsa OK 74128-4629    Oklahoma Field Office U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Tulsa OK 74129-1428     Oklahoma Dept. of Environmental Quality Oklahoma City OK 73101-1677    Environmental Restoration Mission Tulsa District U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Tulsa OK 74128-4609 Ms. Jeanette Hannah Muskogee Area Director Muskogee Area Office U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs Muskogee OK 74401 Mr. Ron L. Hillard State Conservationist Natural Resources Conservation Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Stillwater OK 74075- 2655    Altus Service Center USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Altus OK 73521- 1305    Southern Plains Regional Office Bureau of Indian Affairs Anadarko OK 73005  A.2.2.4 McConnell AFB IICEP Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip     Great Plains State Park MountaiNorth Park OK 73559 Ms. Margaret Graham Consumer Assistance Program Oklahoma Dept. of Environmental Quality Oklahoma City OK 73201     Oklahoma Dept. of Wildlife Conservation Oklahoma City OK 73152    Agency Representative Natural Resources Section Oklahoma Dept. of Wildlife Conservation Oklahoma City OK 73505 Mr. Gary Ridley Director Oklahoma Dept. of Transportation Oklahoma City OK 73105     Oklahoma Tourism & Recreation Dept. Oklahoma City OK 73102  Melvina Heisch Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Oklahoma Historical Society State Historic Preservation Office Oklahoma City OK 73015     Oklahoma Historical Society State Historic Preservation Office Oklahoma City OK 73105  A.2.2.5 All Bases IICEP Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization City State Zip Mr. Stephen L. Johnson Administrator U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC 20460 Mr. Richard Sanderson  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC 20460 Mr. Michael D. Huerta Administrator Federal Aviation Administration Washington DC 20591  A_iicep_B_A-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.3 Altus IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\A_iicep_B_A-R2.pngA.2.3 Altus AFB IICEP Responses    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.3 Altus IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\A_iicep_B_A-R3.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.3 Altus IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\A_iicep_B_A-R4.pngA.2.3 Altus AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.4 Fairchild IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\F_iicep_B_A-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.4 Fairchild IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\F_iicep_B_A-R2.pngA.2.4 Fairchild AFB IICEP Responses    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.4 Fairchild IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\F_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.4 Fairchild IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\F_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_2.pngA.2.4 Fairchild AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R2.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_2.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)      U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_3.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_4.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_5.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_6.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_7.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_8.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)      U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R4_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R4_Page_2.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R5.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R6_Page_1.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R6_Page_2.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R6_Page_3.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R7_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R7_Page_2.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R7_Page_3.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R8.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)   U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R9.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.5 Grand Forks IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\G_iicep_B_A-R10.pngA.2.5 Grand Forks AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R2.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses        U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R3_Page_2.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)       U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R4.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R5_Page_1.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)      U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R5_Page_2.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R5_Page_3.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)       U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R5_Page_4.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.2. IICEP\A.2.6 McConnell IICEP Correspondence\PNGs\M_iicep_B_A-R6.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_001_B_A-R1.pngA.2.6 McConnell AFB IICEP Responses (Continued)       A.3 TRIBAL CORRESPONDENCE To support this EIS, the USAF continues to consult on a government-to-government basis with potentially affected tribes in the Region of Influence (ROI) for each base associated with the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios. For the MOB 1 scenarios at Altus, Fairchild, Grand Forks, and McConnell AFB, the ROI includes the areas surrounding the base; for the Altus and McConnell AFB FTU scenarios, the ROI includes the areas surrounding the base and around the auxiliary airfields where FTU aircrews would operate. The table below provides a list of USAF communication with tribes. All tribes listed in Table A-1 received notification letters as well as letters requesting consultation under Section 106 of the NHPA. Where ongoing consultation is indicated, the consultation may include additional telephone, e-mail or letter correspondence, or meetings with interested tribes. Unless requested otherwise, all tribes will receive a copy of the Draft EIS. Table A-1. Tribal Consultation Tribe Summary Response Initial Notification Letter Sec. 106 Consultation Letter Follow Up Correspondence (email/phone calls) Altus AFB Apache Tribe of Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Caddo Indian Nation of Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Cherokee Nation, Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes Requested meeting at tribal facilities. 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Chickasaw Nation No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Comanche Nation, Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Kaw Nation, Oklahoma Tribal Chair requested additional project information. THPO indicated that the area is not in historic or prehistoric properties of the Kaw Nation. 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Sec. 106 consultation considered complete. Will provide copies of Draft EIS and Final EIS. Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Osage Nation Requested copy of Draft EIS and any associated cultural resource survey reports for the proposed action. 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Copies of the Draft EIS and any survey reports will be provided. Wichita and Affiliated Tribes No response 29 March 2013 19 June 2013 Ongoing Fairchild AFB Coeur d’Alene Tribe No response 29 March 2013 21 June 2013 Ongoing Confederated Tribe of the Colville Reservation No response 29 March 2013 21 June 2013 Ongoing Kalispel Indian Community No response 29 March 2013 21 June 2013 Ongoing Spokane Tribe of Indians No response 29 March 2013 21 June 2013 Ongoing Table A-1. Tribal Consultation (Continued) Tribe Summary Response Initial Notification Letter Sec. 106 Consultation Letter Follow Up Correspondence (email/phone calls) Grand Forks AFB Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe Desires meeting, no response on request for meeting dates. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Multiple emails and phone calls. Crow Creek Sioux Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Flandreau Santee Sioux Questionnaire returned by mail. The tribe wants to be part of the public process and indicated that the undertaking may have historical significance. They would like to receive additional information. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing. A Draft EIS will be provided. Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Responded by email and indicated they would like to receive additional information. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing. A Draft EIS will be provided. Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Responded by letter (5 April 2013). No issues. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Section 106 consultation complete Lower Brule Sioux Indian Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Lower Sioux Indian Community Council Responded via email. There are no issues and do not want to consult. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Section 106 consultation complete Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Responded by letter (10 April 2013). No issues 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Section 106 consultation complete Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, Grand Portage Band No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Oglala Sioux Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Prairie Island Sioux Community No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Red Lake Band of Chippewa No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Rosebud Sioux Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community Responded via email. Does not want to consult/no issues. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Section 106 consultation complete Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate Responded via email. Does not want to consult/no issues. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Section 106 consultation complete Spirit Lake Tribal Council/Spirit Lake Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Council Tribe responded by letter (27 May 2013). Requested that the analysis consider noise impacts to fasting and prayers. 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Follow up letter will be sent along with a separate mailing to include a copy of the Draft EIS  Table A-1. Tribal Consultation (Continued) Tribe Summary Response Initial Notification Letter Sec. 106 Consultation Letter Follow Up Correspondence (email/phone calls) Grand Forks AFB (Continued) Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold Reservation, North Dakota or the Mandan, Hidatsa & Arikara Nation No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Upper Sioux Indian Community No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing Yankton Sioux Tribe No response 29 March 2013 29 July 2013 Ongoing McConnell AFB Apache Tribe of Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Caddo Indian Nation of Oklahoma Phone conversation with Robert Cast 7/18/13. Remove from list 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 No further Section 106 consultation required. Cherokee Nation, Oklahoma Phone conversation with Pat Gwin, temporary THPO. No known issues. 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Chickasaw Nation No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Comanche Nation, Oklahoma Phone conversation with Jimmy Arterberry. He will look for letters but doubted they would comment. 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Kaw Nation, Oklahoma No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma Phone conversation with Amie Tah-Bone but no comment on the project. 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Osage Nation Requested copy of Draft EIS and any associated cultural resource survey reports for the proposed action. 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Copies of the Draft EIS and any survey reports will be provided. Sac & Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing Wichita and Affiliated Tribes No response 29 March 2013 17 July 2013 Ongoing page_B-17_KC-46A_IICEP_Tribal_TEMPLATE_Letters saample.pngpages_A-3_to_A-4_2013-06840_Published NOI_PDFofPDF_2pages_Page_1.pngA.3.1 Tribal Notification Letter    pages_A-3_to_A-4_2013-06840_Published NOI_PDFofPDF_2pages_Page_2.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_1.pngA.3.1 Tribal Notification Letter (Continued)     3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_2.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_3.pngA.3.1 Tribal Notification Letter (Continued)     3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_4.pngA.3.1 Tribal Notification Letter (Continued)    A.3.2 Altus AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip Mr. Jimmy Arterberry  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Comanche Nation Lawton OK 73502 Mr. James Munkres  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Osage Tribe Pawhuska OK 74056 Director Donna Prengiss Director  Apache Tribe Andarko OK 73005 Mr. Robert Cast  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Caddo Nation of Oklahoma Binger OK 73009 Chairperson Brenda Edwards Chairperson  Caddo Nation of Oklahoma Binger OK 73009 Principal Chief Bill John Baker Principal Chief  Cherokee Nation Tahlequah OK 74464  Pat Gwin Historic Preservation Tribal Officer Tribal Historic Preservation Office Cherokee Nation Tahlequah OK 74465 Governor Janice Boswell Governor  Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes Concho OK 73022 Ms. Lynette Gray  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes Concho OK 73022 Governor Bill Anoatubby Governor  Chickasaw Nation Ada OK 74280 Chairman Wallace Coffey Chairman  Comanche Nation Lawton OK 73502 Ms. Crystal Douglas  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Kaw Nation Kaw City OK 74641 Mr. Guy Munroe Chairman & CEO  Kaw Nation Kaw City OK 74641 Ms. Amie Tah-Bone Museum Director & Acting NAGPRA Representative, The Kiowa Museum & NAGPRA Program Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma Carnegie OK 73015 Chairman Ronald "Dawes" Twohatchet Chairman  Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma Carnegie OK 73015 Mr. John D. Red Eagle Principal Chief  Osage Tribe Pawhuska OK 74056  Terri Parton President  Wichita and Affiliated Tribes (Wichita, Keechi, Waco and Tawakonie) Anadarko OK 73005  A.3.3 Fairchild AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip  Chief Allen Chairman  Coeur D’Alene Tribe of the Coeur D’Alene Reservation Plummer ID 83851 Dr. Jill Wagner  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Coeur D’Alene Tribe of the Coeur D’Alene Reservation Plummer ID 83851 Mr. Michael Finley Business Council Chairman  Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation Nespelem WA 99155-0150 Mr. Guy Moura Acting Tribal Historic Preservation Officer Tribal Historic Preservation Office Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation Nespelem WA 99155-0150 Mr. Glen Nenema Chairman  Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation Usk MN 99180-0039  Randy Abrahamson  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Spokane Tribe of the Spokane Reservation Wellpinit WA 99040 Mr. Rudy Peone Chairman  Spokane Tribe of the Spokane Reservation Wellpinit WA 99040  A.3.4 Grand Forks AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip Ms. Rosemary Berens  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Bois Forte Band (Nett Lake) of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Nett Lake MN 55772 Chairman Kevin Leecy Chairman  Bois Forte Band (Nett Lake) of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Nett Lake MN 55772 Mr. Kevin Keckler Chairman  Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of the Cheyenne River Reservation Eagle Butte SD 57625 Mr. Steve Vance  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of the Cheyenne River Reservation Eagle Butte SD 57625 Mr. Brandon Sazue, Sr. Chairman  Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of the Crow Creek Reservation Fort Thompson SD 57339 Ms. Wanda Wells  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of the Crow Creek Reservation Fort Thompson SD 57339 Mr. Anthony Reider President  Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe of South Dakota Flandeau SD 57028 Mr. James B. "JB" Weston  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe of South Dakota Flandeau SD 57028 Mr. LeRoy Defoe  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Fond du Lac Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Cloquet MN 55720 Ms. Karen R. Diver Chairwoman  Fond du Lac Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Cloquet MN 55720 Mr. Norman W. Deschampe Chairman  Grand Portage Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Grand Portage MN 55605 Ms. Mary Ann Gagnon  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Grand Portage Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Grand Portage MN 55605 Ms. Carri Jones Chairwoman  Leech Lake Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Cas Lake MN 56633 Ms. Gina Lemon  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Leech Lake Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Cas Lake MN 56633 Ms. Clair Green  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation Lower Brule SD 57548-0187   A.3.4 Grand Forks AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip Mr. Michael Jandrequ Chairman  Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation Lower Brule SD 57548-0187 Mr. Anthony Morse  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Lower Sioux Indian Community in the State of Minnesota Morton MN 56270 Mr. Denny Prescott Tribal President  Lower Sioux Indian Community in the State of Minnesota Morton MN 56270 Mr. Elgin Crowsbreast  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold Reservation New Town ND 58763 Mr. Tex G. Hall Chairman  Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold Reservation New Town ND 58763  Benjamin Melanie Chief Executive  Mille Lacs Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Onamia MN 56359 Ms Natalie Weyaus  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Mille Lacs Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe Onamia MN 56359 Mr. Bryan Brewer President  Oglala Sioux Tribe of the Pine Ridge Reservation Pine Ridge SD 57770-2070  Wilmer Mesteth  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Oglala Sioux Tribe of the Pine Ridge Reservation Pine Ridge SD 57770 Ms. Audrey Kohnen Tribal Chairperson  Prairie Island Indian Community in the State of Minnesota Welch MN 55089 Mr. Floyd Jourdain Chairman  Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians Red Lake MN 56671 Mr. Russell Eagle Bear  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Rosebud Sioux Tribe of the Rosebud Indian Reservation Rosebud SD 57570 Mr. Cyril Scott President  Rosebud Sioux Tribe of the Rosebud Indian Reservation Rosebud SD 57570 Mr. Charlie Vig Chairman  Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community of Minnesota Prior Lake MN 55372  A.3.4 Grand Forks AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List (Continued) Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip Mr. Leonard Wabasha  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community of Minnesota Prior Lake MN 55372 Ms. Dianne Desrosiers  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse Reservation Sisseton SD 57262 Mr. Robert Shepherd Chairman  Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse Reservation Agency Village SD 57262-0509 Mr. Roger Yankton Chairperson  Spirit Lake Tribe Fort Totten ND 58335 Mr. Charles Murphy Chairman  Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (North Dakota and South Dakota) Fort Yates ND 58538  Waste'Win Young  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (North Dakota and South Dakota) Fort Yates ND 58538 Mr. Kade Ferris  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians of North Dakota Belcourt ND 58316 Mr. Merle St. Clair Chairman  Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians of North Dakota Belcourt ND 58316 Mr. Kevin Jensvold Chairman  Upper Sioux Community Granite Falls MN 56241  Marlow LaBatte  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Upper Sioux Community Granite Falls MN 56241 Mr. Renee Lampi  Tribal Historic Preservation Office White Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe White Earth MN 56591 Ms. Erma Vizenor Chairwoman  White Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe White Earth MN 56591 Mr. Thurman Cournoyer Chairman  Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota Wagner SD 57380 Ms. Lana M. Gravatt THPO Tribal Historic Preservation Office Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota Wagner SD 57380  A.3.5 McConnell AFB Tribal Notification Mailing List Salutation First Name Last Name Title Organization Tribe City State Zip Mr. F. Martin Fee  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Iowa Tribe (Kansas and Nebraska) White Cloud KS 66094 Mr. Timmothy Rhodd Chairman  Iowa Tribe (Kansas and Nebraska) White Cloud KS 66094  Twen Barton Chairperson  Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri (Kansas and Nebraska) Reserve KS 66434 Director Donna Prengiss Director  Apache Tribe Andarko OK 73005 Mr. Robert Cast  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Caddo Nation of Oklahoma Binger OK 73009 Chairperson Brenda Edwards Chairperson  Caddo Nation of Oklahoma Binger OK 73009 Principal Chief Bill John Baker Principal Chief  Cherokee Nation Tahlequah OK 74464  Pat Gwin Historic Preservation Officer Tribal Historic Preservation Office Cherokee Nation Tahlequah OK 74465 Governor Janice Boswell Governor  Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes Concho OK 73022 Ms. Lynette Gray  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes Concho OK 73022 Governor Bill Anoatubby Governor  Chickasaw Nation Ada OK 74280 Chairman Wallace Coffey Chairman  Comanche Nation Lawton OK 73502 Ms. Crystal Douglas  Tribal Historic Preservation Office Kaw Nation Kaw City OK 74641 Mr. Guy Munroe Chairman & CEO  Kaw Nation Kaw City OK 74641 Ms. Amie Tah-Bone Museum Director & Acting NAGPRA Representative The Kiowa Museum & NAGPRA Program Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma Carnegie OK 73015 Chairman Ronald "Dawes" Twohatchet Chairman  Kiowa Indian Tribe of Oklahoma Carnegie OK 73015 Mr. John D. Red Eagle Principal Chief  Osage Tribe Pawhuska OK 74056  Terri Parton President  Wichita and Affiliated Tribes (Wichita, Keechi, Waco and Tawakonie) Anadarko OK 73005  A_001_C_A Sample_Page_1.pngA_001_C_A Sample_Page_2.pngA.4 NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT (NHPA) SECTION 106 TRIBAL CONSULTATION A.4.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter   A_001_C_A  1_Vicinity Map of Altus AFB.png2_Auxiliary Field Locations Altus AFB.pngA.4.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued)  A_001_C_A  A_001_C_A  3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_1.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_2.pngA.4.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) A_001_C_A  A_001_C_A   3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_3.png3_KC-46A_BROCHURE_Page_4.pngA.4.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) A_001_C_A   A_001_C_A   4_Tribal Consultation Questionnaire draft 05-08-2013 SAMPLE.pngA.4.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) A_001_C_A   U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.3 Altus Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\A_006_C_T-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.3 Altus Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\A_011_C_T-R1.pngA.4.1.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.3 Altus Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\A_012_C_T-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.3 Altus Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\A_notification-iicep_C_T-R1.pngA.4.1.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses (Continued)    F_001_C_A sample_Page_1.pngF_001_C_A sample_Page_2.pngA.4.2 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter  F_001_C_A  4_Tribal Consultation Questionnaire draft 05-08-2013 SAMPLE.pngA.4.2 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) F_001_C_A A.4.2.1 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses  No tribal responses have been received.  G_001_C_A Sample_Page_1.pngG_001_C_A Sample_Page_2.pngA.4.3 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter     1_Vicinity Map of Grand Forks AFB.png4_Tribal Consultation Questionnaire draft 05-08-2013 SAMPLE.pngA.4.3 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) G_001_C_A  G_001_C_A  U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.5 Grand Forks Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\G_001_C_T-R1_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.5 Grand Forks Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\G_001_C_T-R1_Page_2.pngA.4.3.1 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses       U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.5 Grand Forks Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\G_notification-iicep_C_T-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.5 Grand Forks Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\G_notification-iicep_C_T-R2.pngA.4.3.1 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.5 Grand Forks Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\G_notification-iicep_C_T-R3.pngquestionnaire returned flandreau santee sioux tribe6 Aug 2013.pngA.4.3.1 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Responses (Continued)      G_006_T-R1  M_001_C_A Sample_Page_1.pngM_001_C_A Sample_Page_2.pngA.4.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter   1_Vicinity Map of McConnell AFB.png2_Auxiliary Field Locations McConnell AFB.pngA.4.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) M_001_C_A  M_001_C_A   M_001_C_A_Att 3 KC-46A_BROCH_Page_1.pngM_001_C_A_Att 3 KC-46A_BROCH_Page_2.pngA.4.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) M_001_C_A   M_001_C_A   M_001_C_A_Att 3 KC-46A_BROCH_Page_3.pngM_001_C_A_Att 3 KC-46A_BROCH_Page_4.pngA.4.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Letter (Continued) M_001_C_A  M_001_C_A  U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.3 Tribal Consultation\A.3.6 McConnell Tribal Correspondence\PNGs\M_notification-iicep_C_T-R1.pngA.4.4.1 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 Tribal Consultation Response    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_2.pngA.5 NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT (NHPA) SECTION 106 STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE (SHPO) CONSULTATION A.5.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_3.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_4.pngA.5.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_5.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_6.pngA.5.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued)    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_7.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_8.pngA.5.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued)   U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A_Page_9.pngA.5.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued)   U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.1 Altus\PNGs\A_018_C_A-R1.pngA.5.1.1 Altus AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Response   U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_005_C_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_005_C_A_Page_2.pngA.5.2 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_005_C_A_Page_3.pngA.5.3 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued) F_005_C_A U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_005_C_A-R1.pngA.5.2.1 Fairchild AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Response  U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_025_C_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_025_C_A_Page_2.pngA.5.3 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_025_C_A_Page_3.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_025_C_A_Page_4.pngA.5.3 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter (Continued)  U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.4 Section 106 Consultation (SHPO)\A.4.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_025_C_A-R1.pngA.5.3.1 Grand Forks AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Response     M_014_C_A_Page_1.pngM_014_C_A_Page_2.pngA.5.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letters A.5.4.1 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 1  M_014_C_A   M_014_C_A_Page_3.pngM_014_C_A_Page_4.pngA.5.4.1 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 1 (Continued) M_014_C_A  M_014_C_A M_014_C_A_Page_5.pngM_014_C_A_Page_6.pngA.5.4.1 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 1 (Continued) M_014_C_A  M_014_C_A   M_014_C_A_Page_7.pngM_014_C_A_Page_8.pngA.5.4.1 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 1 (Continued) M_014_C_A  M_014_C_A  M_014_C_A-R1.pngA.5.4.2 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 1 Response       M_015_C_A_Page_01.pngM_015_C_A_Page_02.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2  M_015_C_A   M_015_C_A_Page_03.pngM_015_C_A_Page_04.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 (Continued) M_015_C_A   M_015_C_A   M_015_C_A_Page_05.pngM_015_C_A_Page_06.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 (Continued)  M_015_C_A  M_015_C_A  M_015_C_A_Page_07.pngM_015_C_A_Page_08.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 (Continued)  M_015_C_A   M_015_C_A  M_015_C_A_Page_09.pngM_015_C_A_Page_10.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 (Continued)  M_015_C_A  M_015_C_A  M_015_C_A_Page_11.pngA.5.4.3 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 (Continued)  M_015_C_A      M_015_C-A-R1.pngA.5.4.4 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 2 Response  M_015_C_A-R1     M_016_C_A_Page_01.pngM_016_C_A_Page_02.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3   M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A_Page_03.pngM_016_C_A_Page_04.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3 (Continued)  M_016_C_A   M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A_Page_05.pngM_016_C_A_Page_06.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3 (Continued)  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A_Page_07.pngM_016_C_A_Page_08.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3 (Continued)  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A_Page_09.pngM_016_C_A_Page_10.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3 (Continued)  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A_Page_11.pngM_016_C_A_Page_12.pngA.5.4.5 McConnell AFB NHPA Section 106 SHPO Consultation Letter 3 (Continued)  M_016_C_A  M_016_C_A  U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.1 Altus\PNGs\A_001_B_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.1 Altus\PNGs\A_001_B_A_Page_2.pngA.6 NATURAL RESOURCES CONSULTATION A.6.1 Altus AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter        U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.1 Altus\PNGs\A_001_B_A-R1.pngA.6.1.1 Altus AFB Natural Resources Consultation Response      U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_001_B_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_001_B_A_Page_2.pngA.6.2 Fairchild AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.2 Fairchild\PNGs\F_001_B_A_Page_3.pngA.6.2 Fairchild AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter (Continued)  F_002_B_A-R1.pngA.6.2.1 Fairchild AFB Natural Resources Consultation Response  G_001_B_A page 1-5 Sample Letter_Page_1.pngG_001_B_A page 1-5 Sample Letter_Page_2.pngA.6.3 Grand Forks AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter   G_001_B_A page 1-5 Sample Letter_Page_3.pngG_001_B_A page 1-5 Sample Letter_Page_4.pngA.6.3 Grand Forks AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter (Continued)    G_001_B_A page 1-5 Sample Letter_Page_5.pngA.6.3 Grand Forks AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter (Continued)       U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_001_B_A-R1_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.3 Grand Forks\PNGs\G_001_B_A-R1_Page_2.pngA.6.3.1 Grand Forks AFB Natural Resources Consultation Response     G_001_B_A-R1 2 pages rotated_Page_3.pngG_001_B_A-R1 2 pages rotated_Page_4.pngA.6.3.1 Grand Forks AFB Natural Resources Consultation Response (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_003_B_A_Page_1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_003_B_A_Page_2.pngA.6.4 McConnell AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter    U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_003_B_A_Page_3.pngA.6.4 McConnell AFB Natural Resources Consultation Letter (Continued)     U:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_003_B_A-R1.pngU:\DIV6158 OFFSITE\KC-46A Tom Daues\2 EIS Prelim and Interim Draft\Appendices\Appendix A - Public Involvement NEW 08-2013\A.5 Natural Resources Consultation\A.5.4 McConnell\PNGs\M_004_B_A_R1.pngA.6.4.1 McConnell AFB Natural Resources Consultation Response      A.7 DRAFT EIS DISTRIBUTION LIST BY BASE . A.7.1 Altus AFB, Oklahoma, Draft EIS Distribution List . A.7.2 Fairchild AFB, Washington, Draft EIS Distribution List . A.7.3 Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota, Draft EIS Distribution List . A.7.4 McConnell AFB, Kansas, Draft EIS Distribution List  A.7.1 Altus AFB, Oklahoma, Draft EIS Distribution List UNITED STATES CONGRESS U.S. Senate The Honorable John Cornyn, Texas The Honorable Ted Cruz, Texas The Honorable Tom Coburn, Oklahoma The Honorable James M. Inhofe, Oklahoma  U.S. House of Representatives The Honorable Frank D. Lucas, Oklahoma 3rd District The Honorable Kenny Marchant, Texas 12th District The Honorable Randy Neugebauer, Texas 19th District The Honorable Mac Thornberry, Texas 13th District FEDERAL AGENCIES Federal Aviation Administration Michael D. Huerta, FAA Administrator Teresa Bruner, Administrator, Southwest Region, Fort Worth, Texas U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Stephen L. Johnson, EPA Administrator Richard Sanderson, Director, Office of Federal Activities Oklahoma Field Office, Tulsa Region 6, Dallas, Texas U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Southwest Region, Dr. Benjamin Tuggle, Albuquerque, New Mexico Oklahoma Ecological Services Field Office, Tulsa U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Environmental Restoration Mission Tulsa District U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs Muskogee Oklahoma Area Office, Robert Impson, Director Southern Plains Regional Office, Dan Deerinwater, Regional Director, Anadarko, Oklahoma U.S. Bureau of Land Management Oklahoma Field Office, Tulsa U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, Ron L. Hilliard, State Conservationist Altus Oklahoma Service Center, Natural Resources Conservation Service National Park Service Intermountain Regional Office, Denver, Colorado STATE GOVERNMENT State Officials Governor Rick Perry, Texas Governor Mary Fallin, Oklahoma State Senators Kelly Hancock, Texas District 9 Wendy Davis, Texas District 10 Robert L. Duncan, Texas District 28 Kel Seliger, Texas District 31 Tom Ivester, Oklahoma District 26 Mike Schultz, Oklahoma District 38 State Representatives John M. Frullo, Texas District 84 Charles Perry, Texas District 83 Four Price, Texas District 87 Jonathan Strickland, Texas District 92 Charles L. Ortega, Oklahoma District 52 Todd Russ, Oklahoma District 55 G. Harold Wright, Jr., Oklahoma District 57 A.7.1 Altus AFB, Oklahoma, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) STATE GOVERNMENT (CONTINUED) State Agencies Fish and Wildlife Texas Parks and Wildlife, Wildlife Division, Nongame & Species Program, Austin, Texas Agency Representative, Natural Resources Section, Oklahoma Deptartment of Wildlife Conservation Agency Representative, Oklahoma Natural Heritage Inventory, Oklahoma Biological Survey Tourism, Parks, and Recreation Oklahoma Tourism and Recreation Department., Oklahoma City Great Plains State Park, Mountain Park, Oklahoma Transportation Texas Department of Transportation, Brian Ness, Director Oklahoma Department of Transportation Gary Ridley, Director Environmental Quality Zak Covar, Executive Director, Austin Texas Margaret Graham, Consumer Assistance Program, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma    STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION REPRESENTATIVES Oklahoma Melvina Heisch, Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Oklahoma History Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Texas Texas Historical Commission, Austin, Oklahoma     LOCAL GOVERNMENT Mayors Paul Harpole, City of Amarillo, Texas Betsy Price, City of Fort Worth, Texas Glen Robertson, City of Lubbock, Texas David Webb, City of Altus, Oklahoma Teresa Mullican, City of Elk City, Oklahoma Board of Commissioners Jackson County, Oklahoma City Council City of Altus, Oklahoma City/County Clerks Cheryl Snipes, City of Elk City, Oklahoma Lisa Anders, Clinton City, Oklahoma Kelly Pinion, Lubbock County, Texas Julie Smith, Potter County, Texas Mary Louise Garcia, Tarrant County, Texas Planning and Development Barbara Burleson, Planning Director, City of Altus, Oklahoma Randall Harwood, Director, City of Fort Worth, Texas Planning Commission and Board of Adjustments, City of Elk City, Oklahoma Kelley Shaw, Planning Director, City of Amarillo, Texas City of Clinton, Oklahoma Code of Ordinances, City of Lubbock, Texas Other Local Government Agencies City Administrator, Elizabeth Gray, City of Altus, Oklahoma City Attorney. Catherine Coke, Altus, Oklahoma A.7.1 Altus AFB, Oklahoma, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBAL REPRESENTATIVES Apache Tribe of Oklahoma, Donna Prengiss, Director Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, Brenda Edwards, Chairperson Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, Robert Cast, THPO Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, Bill John Baker, Principal Chief Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, Pat Gwin, THPO Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, Janice Boswell, Governor Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, Lynette Gray, THPO Chickasaw Nation, Bill Anoatubby, Governor Comanche Nation of Oklahoma, Wallace Coffey, Chairman Comanche Nation of Oklahoma, Jimmy Arterberry, THPO Kaw Nation of Oklahoma, Guy Munroe, Chairman & CEO Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma, Ronald “Dawes” Twohatchet, Chairman Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma, Amie Tah-Bone, Museum Director & Acting NAGPRA Representative Osage Nation, John D. Red Eagle, Principal Chief Osage Nation, James Munkres, THPO Wichita and Affiliated Tribes of Oklahoma, Terri Parton, President ORGANIZATIONS/INTERESTED PARTIES Chamber of Commerce Jantz Bain, Humphrey’s Co-Op Kerry Bull, First National Bank Dana Darby, Altus Christian Academy N. Lee Doughty, First State Bank Jim Gover, NBC Oklahoma Shane Hokett, Hokett Construction Rodger Kerr, Southwest Technology Center Col. Anthony B. Krawietz, 97th AMW/CC Mary Kruska, Tamarack Retirement Center Dr. Joe Leverett Krystal Martin, Belles & Beaux Jim Norris, Boeing Rev. David Player, First United Methodist Church Brenda Pruitt, Integris Family Care Altus Danny Robbins, Agriculture Affairs Committee Mayor David Web, City of Altus Committee of 100 Eva Lucas, Chairman, Lucas Farms Military Affairs Committee Dr. Joe Leverett, President/Chairman Shane Hokett, Director, Hokett Construction Media Lawton Constitution, Mitch Meador KWHN/KQ106, Mary Esparza Aviation/Airport Altus/Quartz Mountain Regional Airport Fort Worth Meacham International Airport Lubbock International Airport Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport, Patrick Rhodes, Aviation Director, Preston Smith International Airport, James Loomis, Aviation Director, Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark/OSIDA Fort Worth Alliance Airport, Christopher Ash Emergency Management Altus Oklahoma Police Department, Tim Murphey Jackson County Sherriff Roger Levick, Altus, Oklahoma Oklahoma Highway Patrol, Johnny Freeman, Altus, Oklahom Altus Oklahoma Emergency Management Services, Lloyd Colston Jackson County Emergency Management Services, Shaun Cecil, Altus, Oklahoma Research/Education/University Altus High School, Mark Haught Western Oklahoma State College, Kristy Greer Southwest Technical College, Douglas McCormack A.7.1 Altus AFB, Oklahoma, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) INDIVIDUALS Kevin Baker Christopher and Deanna Jones Tom Moore  ALTUS AFB LIBRARIES Altus Public Library Lawton Public Library Altus AFB Library Amarillo Public Library Western Plains Public Library Mahon Public Library Summerglen Library  A.7.2 Fairchild AFB, Washington, Draft EIS Distribution List UNITED STATES CONGRESS U.S. Senate The Honorable Mike Crapo, Idaho The Honorable James E. Risch, Idaho The Honorable Maria Cantwell, Washington The Honorable Patty Murray, Washington U.S. House of Representatives The Honorable Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Washington 5th District The Honorable Raul R. Labrador, Idaho 1st District FEDERAL AGENCIES Federal Aviation Administration Michael D. Huerta, FAA Administrator Kathryn Vernon, Regional Administrator, Northwest Mountain U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Stephen L. Johnson, EPA Administrator Richard Sanderson, Director, Office of Federal Activities Dennis, E. McLerran, Regional Administrator, District 10 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Robyn Thorson, Regional Director, Pacific Region NEPA Program Coordinator, Upper Columbia Office U.S. Forest Service Jose Linares, Director, Region 6, Pacific Northwest Laura Jo West, Supervisor, Coleville National Forest STATE GOVERNMENT State Officials Governor Jay Inslee, Washington Governor C.L. “Butch” Otter, Idaho State Senators Andy Billig, Washington District 3 Mike Padden, Washington District 4 Michael Baumgartner, Washington District 6 State Representatives Timm Ormsby, Washington District 3 Marcus Riccelli, Washington District 3 Larry Crouse, Washington District 4 Matt Shea, Washington District 4 Jeff Holy, Washington District 6 Kevin Parker, Washington District 6 State Agencies Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife John Gamon, Regional Director Transportation Phil Wilson, Executive Director, Idaho Lynn Peterson, Secretary of Transportation, Washington Environmental Quality Department of Ecology, Dave Duncan, Water Quality Other State Agencies Washington Air National Guard  STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION REPRESENTATIVES Dr. Allyson Brooks, SHPO, Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation  A.7.2 Fairchild AFB, Washington, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) LOCAL GOVERNMENT Mayors David Condon, City of Spokane Board of Commissioners Spokane County Commissioner, Albert French City/County Clerks Spokane County Clerk Planning and Development City of Airway Heights, Derrick Braaten, City Planner City of Spokane, Kathleen Weinard City of Couer d’Alene, Dave Yadon, Planning Director City of Spokane, Scott Chesney, Planning Director Spokane County Planning Department, Public Works Building and Planning Other Local Government Agencies Spokane Regional Clean Air Agency, Joe Southwell, Air Quality Engineer, Spokane Transit Authority, E. Susan Meyer City of Airway Heights, Albert Tripp NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBAL REPRESENTATIVES Coeur d’Alene Tribe, Chief Allen, Chairman Coeur d’Alene Tribe, Jill Wagner, THPO Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Michael Finley, Business Council Chairman Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Guy Moura, Acting THPO Kalispell Indian Community, Glen Nenema, Chairman Spokane Tribe of Indians, Rudy Peone, Chairman Spokane Tribe of Indians, Randy Abrahamson, THPO  ORGANIZATIONS/INTERESTED PARTIES Aviation/Airport Spokane International Airport, David Holmes Washington Air National Guard Washington Pilots Association, John Townsley Research/Education/University Spokane Community College, Terrance Brown Blair Elementary School Gonzaga University, Ltc. Russell Pritchard, Jr. Medical Lake School District, Terry Munther Park College, 92 MSS/DPE Other Organizations/Interested Parties Spokane Assn. of Realtors, Rob Higgins Forward Fairchild, Greg Bever International Trade Alliance, Matt McCoy Neighborhood Alliance, Paul Krupp Fairfield Inn and Suites, Paul Swavely Garco Construction, Hollis Barnett GSI, Sandra Jawara Lydig Construction, Tom Reese STRATA, James Murphey INDIVIDUALS Christy Brantner Richard Sawdy FAIRCHILD AFB LIBRARIES Spokane Public Library Fairchild AFB Library A.7.3 Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota, Draft EIS Distribution List UNITED STATES CONGRESS U.S. Senate The Honorable Heidi Heitkamp The Honorable John Hoeven U.S. House of Representatives The Honorable Kevin Cramer FEDERAL AGENCIES Federal Aviation Administration Michael D. Huerta, FAA Administrator Kelly Nelson, Minneapolis Air Route Traffic Control Center Steve Obenauer, Great Lakes Region Barry Cooper, Regional Administrator, Great Lakes Region John H. Page, Jr., Air Traffic Organization David Cink, Great Lakes Region Roger McGrath, Southwest Region U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Stephen L. Johnson, EPA Administrator Richard Sanderson, Director, Office of Federal Activities Dana Allen, Region 8 James Hanley, Region 9 Carol Rushin, Region 10 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Noreen Walsh, Regional Director, Mountain- Prairie Region Jim Alfonso, Deputy Project Leader, Devils Lake Jeff Towner, North Dakota Field Office U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Dan Cimarosti U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs Deputy Regional Director, Great Plains Region National Park Service Dan Cimarosti, North Dakota Regulatory Program Manager U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Reclamation Robert W. Johnson, Commissioner Dennis E. Breitzman, Area Manager, Dakotas Area Office Michael J. Ryan, Regional Director, Great Plains Region U.S. Geological Survey Jason M. Lambrecht, Supervising Hydrologist Suzette Kimball, Acting Director, National Center Other Federal Agencies Base Realignment Impact Center, Diane Blair U.S. Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Don Kilma Council on Environmental Quality, Horst Greczmiel STATE GOVERNMENT State Officials Jack Dalrymple, Governor State Senators Ray Holmberg, District 17 Constance Triplett, District 18 State Representatives Eliot Glasheim, District 18 Mark S. Owens, District 17 Mark Sanford, District 17 Marie Strinden, District 18 A.7.3 Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) STATE GOVERNMENT (CONTINUED) State Agencies Fish and Wildlife North Dakota Game and Fish Department Terry Steinwand, Director Tourism, Parks, and Recreation North Dakota Parks and Recreation Department, Mark Zimmerman, Director Forest Service, Larry Kotchman, State Forester Transportation Grant Levi, Interim Director Environmental Quality Natural Resources Conservation Service, Jason Weller, Acting Chief Natural Resources Conservation Service, J.R. Flores, State Conservationist Health Department, Dr. Terry Dwelle State Water Commission, Larry Knudtson, Research Analyst Other State Agencies Commission on Indian Affairs Division, Deborah Painte, Executive Director Department of Agriculture, Doug Goehring, Commissioner Department of Commerce, Paul Govig, Director, Division of Community Services Department of Energy, Jeff Rotenberger, Energy and Information Security North Dakota Small Business Development Center, Chuck Randall  STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION REPRESENTATIVES North Dakota Merlan Paaverud, Jr., State Historic Preservation Officer  LOCAL GOVERNMENT Mayors Lynn Strauss, City of East Grand Forks Michael Brown, City of Grand Forks Board of Commissioners Grand Forks County, Constance Triplett, Chair Grand Forks County, Gary Malm, Chairman Grand Forks County, Commissioners Cavalier County Commissioners Polk County Commissioners City Council Grand Forks City Council Hal Gershman Eliot Glassheim Curt Kreun City/County Clerks Grand Forks County, Vivian Drees, Clerk/Treasurer Planning and Development City of Grand Forks Planning Department, Brad Gengler, City Planner County of Grand Forks Planning and Zoning, Lane Madnunson, County Planner Other Local Government Agencies Small Business Administration, Eric Giltner, Devils Lake Wetland Management District, Mark R. Fisher, District Wildlife Biologist Grand Forks Small Business Development Center, Chuck Randall City of Grand Forks Budget Office, Maureen Storstad Grand Forks Region Economic Development, Klause Thiessen, President Transportation Department, W. Swenson, District 3, Devil’s Lake Barry Wilfahrt, Grand Forks Chamber of Commerce Grand Forks Chamber of Commerce, Kimberly Strom A.7.3 Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBAL REPRESENTATIVES Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians, Kevin Leecy, Chairman Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians, RosemaryBerens, THPO Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, Kevin Keckler, Chairman Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, Steve Vance, THPO Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, Brandon Sazue, Sr., Chairman Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, Wanda Wells, THPO Flandreau Santee Sioux, Anthony Reider, President Flandreau Santee Sioux, James B. “JB” Weston, THPO Fond du Lanc Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, Karen R. Diver, Chairwoman Fond du Lanc Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, LeRoy Defoe, THPO Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, Norman W. Deschampe, Chairman Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, Mary Ann Gagnon, THPO Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, Carri Jones, Chairwoman Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, Gina Lemon, THPO Lower Brule Sioux Tribe, Michael Jandrequ, Chairman Lower Brule Sioux Tribe, Clair Green, THPO Mandan, Hidatsa & Arikara Nation, Tex G. Hall, Chairman Mandan, Hidatsa & Arikara Nation, Elgin Crowsbreast, THPO Oglala Sioux Tribe, Bryan Brewer, President Oglala Sioux Tribe, Wilmer Mesteth, THPO Prairie Island Indian Community, Audrey Kohnen, Tribal Chairperson Red Lake Band of Chippewa, Floyd Jourdain, Chairman Rosebud Sioux Tribe of Indians, Cyril Scott, President Rosebud Sioux Tribe of Indians, Russell Eagle Bear, THPO Spirit Lake Tribe, Roger Yankton, Chairperson Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, Charles Murphy, Chairman Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, Waste'Win Young, THPO Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa, Merle St. Clair, Chairman Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa, Kade Ferris, THPO Upper Sioux Indian Community, Kevin Jensvold, Chairman Upper Sioux Indian Community, Marlow LaBatte, THPO White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, Erma Vizenor, Chairwoman White Earth Band of Minnesota Chippewa, ReneeLampi, THPO Yankton Sioux Tribe, Thurman Cournoyer, Chairman Yankton Sioux Tribe, Lana M. Gravatt, THPO A.7.3 Grand Forks AFB, North Dakota, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) ORGANIZATIONS/INTERESTED PARTIES Aviation/Airport Alpine Aviation, Inc. Civil Air Patrol, Ken Schuler Grand Forks Flight Support Grand Forks Regional Airport Authority, Steve Johnson National Air Transportation Association National Association of State Aviation Officials, Larry Taborsky National Business Aviation Association North Dakota Aerial Agricultural Association, Cindy Schreiber-Beck North Dakota Aeronautics Commission, Gary R. Ness North Dakota Aviation Association, Robert Simmers North Dakota Aviation Council, Darrel Pittman North Dakota Aviation Mechanics Association, rod Brekken North Dakota Pilots Association, Paul Hanson North Dakota Sports Aviation Association, Trent Teets University of North Dakota Aerospace, Ben Trapnell Emergency Services David Sprynczynatyk, Adjutant General University of North Dakota, Bob Concannon Grand Forks School Board, Vicki Ericson Unmanned Applications Institute International, Doug McDonald Media Leighton Broadcasting, Duaine Sanden Other Organizations/Interested Parties Greenberg Realty, Skip Greenberg Grand Forks Realtors, John Colter Military Appreciation Com Dan Holwerda Grand Forks Am. Legion #6, Bob Green MAC Committee, Pam Schorsch Veterans Service Office, Lou Lombardi Grand Forks AFB, Ken Towers, Base Ambassador Job Service North Dakota, Roy Fillion Nokak Electric Cooperative, Steve Breidenbach North Dakota Army National Guard, USPFO North Dakota Camp Grafton Research/Education/University University of North Dakota, General Al Palmer   INDIVIDUALS Duaine Ash Anna Spivey Paul Brusseau T. Richards David Kragnes Randy Richards GRAND FORKS AFB LIBRARIES Grand Forks Public Library Grand Forks AFB Library A.7.4 McConnell AFB, Kansas, Draft EIS Distribution List UNITED STATES CONGRESS U.S. Senate The Honorable Jerry Moran, Kansas The Honorable Pat Roberts, Kansas The Honorable Tom Coburn, Oklahoma The Honorable James M. Inhofe, Oklahoma U.S. House of Representatives The Honorable Mike Pompeo, Kansas, 4th District The Honorable Lynn Jenkins, Kansas, 2nd District The Honorable Frank D. Lucas, Oklahoma 3rd District FEDERAL AGENCIES Federal Aviation Administration Michael D. Huerta, FAA Administrator Joe Miniace, Regional Administrator, Central Region U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Stephen L. Johnson, EPA Administrator Richard Sanderson, Director, Office of Federal Activities Joe Cothem, Environmental Review Coordinator, Region VII Oklahoma Field Office, Tulsa, Oklahoma U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Noreen Walsh, Regional Director Kansas Department of Wildlife, Operations Office Oklahoma Ecological Services Field Office, Tulsa, Oklahoma U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Environmental Restoration Mission Tulsa District U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs Jeanette Hannah, Muskogee Area Office, Muskogee, Oklahoma Southern Plains Regional Office, Anadarko, Oklahoma U.S. Bureau of Land Management Oklahoma Field Office, Tulsa, Oklahoma U.S. Department of Agriculture Ron L. Hilliard, State Conservationist, Natural Resources Conservation Service Altus Oklahoma Service Center, Natural Resources Conservation Service U.S. Forest Service Rocky Mountain Region STATE GOVERNMENT State Officials Governor Sam Brownback, Kansas City Manager Kathy Sexton, Kansas City Engineer Dan Squires, Kansas Governor Mary Fallin, Oklahoma State Senators Ty Masterson, Kansas District 16 Laura Kelly, Kansas District 18 Anthony Hensley, Kansas District 19 Vicki Schmidt, Kansas District 20 Michael O’Donnell, Kansas District 25 Dan Kerschen, Kansas District 26 Les Donovan, Kansas District 27 Mike Peterson, Kansas District 28 Oletha Faust-Goudeau, Kansas District 29 Susan Wagle, Kansas District 30 Carolyn McGinn, Kansas District 31 Ramon Gonzalez, Kansas District 47 Annie Tietze, Kansas District 53 Virgil Weigel, Kansas District 56 John Alcala, Kansas District 57 Harold Lane, Kansas District 58 Gail Finney, Kansas District 84 Jim Ward, Kansas District 86 Nile Dillmore, Kansas District 92 Tom Sawyer, Kansas District 95 Ponka-We Victors, Kansas District 103 Tom Ivester, Oklahoma District 26 Mike Schultz, Oklahoma District 38 State Representatives Jim Howell, Kansas District 81 A.7.4 McConnell AFB, Kansas, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) STATE GOVERNMENT (CONTINUED) State Agencies Fish and Wildlife Kansas Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism Ecological Services Section Agency Representative, Natural Resources Section, Oklahoma Dept. of Wildlife Conservation Tourism, Parks, and Recreation Oklahoma Tourism & Recreation Dept., Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Great Plains State Park, Mountain Park, Oklahoma Transportation Kansas Department of Transporation, Mike King, Secretary of Transportation Oklahoma Department of Transportation, Gary Ridley, Director Environmental Quality Kansas Department of Health and Environment, John Mitchell Margaret Graham, Consumer Assistance Program, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION REPRESENTATIVES Kansas Jennie Chin, Executive Director, Kansas State Historical Society Oklahoma Melvina Heisch, Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Oklahoma History Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma LOCAL GOVERNMENT Mayors Carl Brewer, City of Wichita, Kansas William Bunten, City of Topeka, Kansas Dion Avello, City of Derby, Kansas Teresa Mullican, City of Elk City, Oklahoma City Council City of Wichita, Carl Brewer, Mayor City of Darby, Darrell Downing City of Darby, Chuck Warren City/County Clerks Cheryl Snipes, City of Elk City, Oklahoma Lisa Anders, Clinton City, Oklahoma Local Government Agencies Sedgwick County Clerk, Kelly Arnold Shawnee County Clerk, Cyndi Beck Commerce City of Derby Economic Development, Allison Moeding, Director Environmental Quality City of Wichita, Shawn Maloney, Interim Environmental Health Manager Planning and Development City of Derby, Cody Bird, City Planner City of Topeka, Bill Fiander, Director Wichita Sedgwick County, John Schlegel, Director of Planning Shawnee County Sedgwick County Community Development, Kristi Zukovich Sedgwick County Manager’s Office, Bill Buchanan  A.7.4 McConnell AFB, Kansas, Draft EIS Distribution List (Continued) NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBAL REPRESENTATIVES Apache Tribe of Oklahoma, Donna Prengiss, Director Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, Bill John Baker, Principal Chief Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, Pat Gwin, THPO Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, Janice Boswell, Governor Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, Lynette Gray, THPO Chickasaw Nation, Bill Anoatubby, Governor Comanche Nation of Oklahoma, Wallace Coffey, Chairman Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, Timmothy Rhodd, Chairman Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, F. Martin Fee, THPO Kaw Nation of Oklahoma, Crystal Douglas, THPO Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma, Ronald “Dawes” Twohatchet, Chairman Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma, Amie Tah-Bone, Museum Director & Acting NAGPRA Representative Osage Nation, John D. Red Eagle, Principal Chief Sac & Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska, Twen Barton, Chairperson Wichita and Affiliated Tribes of Oklahoma, Terri Parton, President ORGANIZATIONS/INTERESTED PARTIES Aviation/Airport Wichita Airport Auth., Victor D. White, Metropolitan Topeka Airport Authority, Forbes Field Research/Education/University Friends University, Arlen Honts National Institute for Aviation Research, Richard Schwasinger Other Organizations/Interested Parties Wichita Art Museum, Jan Harper Botanica, Mary Miller, Wichita Independent Business Association, Suellen Joachims Beechcraft, Jeffery Houk Best Value Services, Solomon Tafessee Spirit, Joan Holup Roberts and Roberts Properties, J. Roberts Kansas Progress Council, Bernie Koch INDIVIDUALS Robert Alford Dave Dahl Tom and Judy Foster Tom Heiman David Hitchcock Margarita LaFarelle-Hunt Alan Mackey Joann Pottorff Dana Shifflett Ronald L. Wolf MCCONNELL AFB LIBRARIES Topeka & Shawnee County Public Library Central Library McConnell AFB Library THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX B DEFINITION OF RESOURCE AND METHODOLOGY FOR ANALYSIS This appendix directly corresponds to the environmental resource areas described in Chapter 3 as the baseline conditions, and the analysis of consequences, as described in Chapter 4, for each of the four bases under consideration. The environmental resource areas are ordered according to the order in Chapters 3 and 4. For each environmental resource area, this appendix provides a definition of the resource, the regulatory setting, if applicable, and a description of the methodology used to evaluate the environmental resource area. Because the same resource areas were analyzed for each of the four bases, the definition, regulatory setting, and methodology are the same for all four bases. The analysis methodology addresses both the context of the environmental resource and the intensity of potential consequences to the resource resulting from implementation of the KC-46A missions. B.1 NOISE B.1.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Sound is tiny vibrations in a medium such as air or water that are detected by the ear. Noise is specifically unwanted sound or, alternatively, a lack of ‘peace and quiet.’ There is a wide variety of types of noises. Reactions to noises depend not only on the qualities of the noise (e.g., intensity, pitch, duration, or time of day) but also on the characteristics of the listener (e.g., sensitivity of the individual and attitude toward the noise source) and the activity in which the listener is engaged at the time the noise occurs. B.1.2 REGULATORY SETTING Since legal limits on allowable noise levels could, in some cases, reduce the combat effectiveness of military equipment, military equipment has been exempted from regulations that impose noise limitations. However, several policies and regulations are in place to limit the effects of military noise. The U.S. Air Force (USAF) recognizes that noise-sensitive land uses are not compatible with elevated aircraft noise levels and has implemented the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) program, as described in Air Force Instruction (AFI) 32-7063 and Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 4165.57, to minimize incompatible land use. In 1992, the Federal Interagency Committee on Noise (FICUN) established a set of guidelines detailing which land uses are compatible at which noise levels; these guidelines have been adopted as part of the AICUZ program. In June 1980, an ad hoc Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise (FICUN) published guidelines (FICUN 1980) relating day-night average sound level (DNL) to compatible land uses. The FICUN guidelines consider areas with noise levels of 75 decibels (dB) DNL or greater as unacceptable living environments. Areas between 65–74 dB DNL are considered “generally unacceptable” for noise-sensitive land uses such as residences, schools, hospitals, and public services. Houses located in areas between 65–74 dB DNL may not qualify for Federal mortgage insurance without additional costs associated with installing noise attenuation. In the outdoor noise environment, levels greater than 65 dB DNL may be annoying to some people during communications. Generally, residential development is not recommended in areas experiencing noise levels of 65 A-weighted decibels (dBA) or greater. Although discouraged, residential development is compatible within the 65–69 dBA and 70–74 dBA contours, provided noise reduction levels of 25 dB and 30 dB, respectively, are achieved. Commercial/retail businesses are compatible without restrictions up to 69 dBA, and up to 79 dBA, provided that noise reduction levels of 25 dB and 30 dB, respectively, are achieved for public areas. Industrial/manufacturing, transportation, and utility companies have a high noise level compatibility, and, therefore, can be located within the higher noise zones. Additional discussion of the relationship between land use and noise can be found in Chapter 3, Sections 3.1.7, 3.2.7, 3.3.7, and 3.4.7, which are the land use sections for each of the four bases. Noise in certain locations near the four bases may exceed levels at which long-term noise-induced hearing loss is possible, and workers in known high noise exposure locations may be required to wear hearing protection devices including, but not limited to, earplugs and earmuffs. The hearing conservation programs at each base are conducted in accordance with Air Force Occupational Safety and Health Standard 48-20, “Occupational Noise and Hearing Conservation Program,” DoDI 6055.12, “DoD Hearing Conservation Program,” and Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 1910.95, “Occupational Noise Exposure.” The Bioenvironmental Engineering Office administers the Hearing Conservation Program at each of the candidate bases. Representatives from the Bioenvironmental Engineering Office visit facilities in which workers could potentially be exposed to noise levels exceeding noise exposure thresholds. A health risk assessment is conducted involving dosimeter testing of a representative sample of employees. An audiometric monitoring program is initiated if noise exposure exceeds established thresholds. U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) policy for assessing hearing loss risk pursuant to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) is to use the 80 dB DNL noise contour to identify populations at the most risk of potential hearing loss (USD 2009). B.1.3 METHODOLOGY B.1.3.1 Base Vicinity Noise levels in the vicinity of the Formal Training Unit (FTU) and First Main Operating Base (MOB 1) bases were modeled using NOISEMAP Version 7.2. In accordance with current USAF policy, NOISEMAP runs were conducted using the topographic effects module. This module accounts for the effects of local terrain and ground surface type on the propagation of sound. The areas exposed to elevated noise levels are shown using DNL noise contours at 5 dB increments from 65 dB to 85 dB. Elevated DNL implies that overflight noise is particularly frequent and intense. In general, noise levels are highest on and near the airfield itself and decrease with distance from the airfield. However, in a few instances, the overlapping of two or more flight paths generates a geographically separated area in which noise exceeds 65 DNL. These instances appear as small noise contour polygons separated from the larger noise contour set. The number of off-base persons exposed to noise level increments was estimated using 2010 U.S. Census data. Noise contours were overlaid on census blocks to determine the fraction of each census block that lies within each noise level increment. Census block population was apportioned to inside or outside of the noise level increment based on the fraction of the census block affected. This method assumes even distribution of population with the census block. The U.S. Census counts permanent residents; non-permanent residents are not counted using this method. B.1.3.2 Auxiliary Airfields Aircrews associated with the KC-46A FTU scenario would make use of auxiliary airfields to provide aircrews with varied training experiences. The auxiliary airfields proposed for regular use by the KC-46A FTU are heavily used underbaseline conditions. At each auxiliary airfield proposed for use, the current level of operations was compared against proposed additional operations to determine potential DNL increase. KC-46A operations at auxiliary airfields would be expected to use the same procedures being used by other aircraft at the airfields currently. The KC-46A would be expected to overfly the same ground areas, use the same pattern altitudes, and conform to the same runway usage patterns as current operations. To ensure that the noise level increase threshold of 0.5 dB DNL would not be exceeded as a result of temporary or longer-term increases in KC-46A operations tempo, a mission evolution factor was applied. The mission evolution factor chosen was 150 percent of proposed averaged KC-46A operations. In calculation of the DNL metric, noise events occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. are assessed a 10 dB penalty. As a result, an aircraft operation occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. has the same effect on cumulative DNL as 10 of the same operations occurring during other time periods. The KC-46A would not be expected to conduct operations at auxiliary airfields between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. Each aircraft type operating at the auxiliary airfields was categorized as being either “as loud or louder than a KC-46A” or “less loud than a KC-46A” based on comparison of noise level at a 1,000-foot distance and a standard aircraft configuration type. In calculation of potential DNL change, all aircraft classified as “loud or louder” than a KC-46A were treated as if they were exactly as loud as a KC-46A and aircraft “less loud than a KC-46A” were disregarded. This approach generates conservative results. The potential DNL increase was calculated using the formula below, and results are shown in Table B-1. DNLincrease = 10 LOG (Nday KC46 + [10*Nnight KC46]) - 10 LOG (Nday existing + [10*Nnight existing]) Table B-1. Calculation of Potential DNL Increase Base Proposed KC-46Aa Existing Conclusion Annual Airfield Operations Annual Operations After Mission Evolution Factor Existing Annual Operations Percent Existing Operations as Loud or Louder than KC-46 Percent 2200-0700 (Aircraft Types as Loud or Louder) DNL Change Not Expected to Be Exceeded Requires Further Analysis (Yes/No [Y/N]) Altus AFB FTU Scenario Auxiliary Airfields AMA 517 776 54,115 31% 3% 0.15 N CSM 3,681 5,522 28,485 92% 3% 0.66 Y AFW 2,170 3,255 100,756 12% 15% 0.45 N LBB 148 222 67,919 25% 4% 0.04 N McConnell AFB FTU Scenario Auxiliary Airfields CSM 977 1,466 28,485 92% 3% 0.18 N FOE 977 1,466 24,742 73% 11% 0.18 N ITC 4,561 6,842 165,035 34% 11% 0.26 N a No KC-46A operations would be conducted at night (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.). Key: AMA= Rick Husband Amarillo International Airport; AFW= Fort Worth Alliance Airport; CSM= Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark; FOE= Forbes Field; ICT= Wichita Mid-Continental Airport; LBB=Lubbock Preston Smith International Airport As shown in the Table B-1, the potential DNL increase would exceed 0.5 dB only at Clinton-Sherman Industrial Airpark (CSM) under the Altus Air Force Base (AFB) FTU scenario. Increases of less than 0.5 dB would not be expected to be noticed by people near the airfield, and noise impacts would be minimal. No further noise analysis was conducted at these locations. B.2 AIR QUALITY B.2.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Air quality in a given location is defined by the size and topography of the air basin, the local and regional meteorological influences, and the types and concentrations of pollutants in the atmosphere. The significance of a pollutant concentration often is determined by comparing its concentration to an appropriate national or state ambient air quality standard. These standards represent the allowable atmospheric concentrations at which the public health and welfare are protected and include a reasonable margin of safety to protect the more sensitive individuals in the population. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) established the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) to regulate the following criteria pollutants: ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), particulate matter less than or equal to 10 microns in diameter (PM10), particulate matter less than or equal to 2.5 microns in diameter (PM2.5), and lead. The NAAQS generally may not be exceeded more than once per year, except for annual standards, which may never be exceeded. Units of concentration for these standards generally are expressed in parts per million (ppm) or micrograms per cubic meter (.g/m3). Table B-2 presents the NAAQS. Table B-2. National Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time National Standards Primarya, b Secondarya, c Ozone 8-hour 0.075 ppm (147 .g/m3) Same as primary Carbon monoxide 8-hour 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) – 1-hour 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) – Nitrogen dioxide Annual 0.053 ppm (100 .g/m3) Same as primary 1-hour 0.10 ppm (188 .g/m3) – Sulfur dioxide 3-hour – 0.5 ppm (1,300 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.075 ppm (105 .g/m3) – PM10 24-hour 150 .g/m3 Same as primary PM2.5 Annual 12 .g/m3 15 .g/m3 24-hour 35 .g/m3 35 .g/m3 Lead Rolling 3-month period 0.15 .g/m3 Same as primary a Concentrations are expressed first in units in which they were promulgated. Equivalent units given in parenthesis. b Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety to protect the public health. c Secondary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects of a pollutant. The NAAQS 8-hour O3 standard is attained when the measured average of the annual fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour average concentration is less than or equal to 0.075 ppm. For CO and PM10, the NAAQS are not to be exceeded more than once per year. The NAAQS annual NO2 standard is attained when the annual arithmetic mean concentration in a calendar year is less than or equal to 0.053 ppm. The 1-hour NO2 standard is attained when the 3-year average of the 98th percentile of the daily maximum 1-hour average concentration does not exceed 0.10 ppm. For SO2, the primary NAAQS is attained if the 1-hour concentration is less than or equal to 0.075 .g/m3. The NAAQS PM2.5 standards are attained when the annual arithmetic mean concentration is less than or equal to 12 .g/m3 and when the 98th percentile of 24-hour concentration is less than or equal to 65 .g/m3. O3 concentrations are the highest during the warmer months of the year and coincide with the period of maximum insolation. Maximum O3 concentrations tend to be homogeneously spread throughout a region, as it often takes several hours to convert precursor emissions to O3 (mainly nitrogen oxides [NOx] and photochemically reactive volatile organic compounds [VOCs]) in the atmosphere. Inert pollutants, such as CO, tend to have the highest concentrations during the colder months of the year, when light winds and nighttime/early morning surface-based temperature inversions inhibit atmospheric dispersion. Maximum inert pollutant concentrations are usually found near an emission source. B.2.1.1 Greenhouse Gases Greenhouse gases (GHGs) are gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. These emissions are generated by both natural processes and human activities. The accumulation of GHGs in the atmosphere regulates the earth’s temperature. The U.S. Global Change Research Program report, Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, states the following: . Observations show that warming of the climate is unequivocal. The global warming observed over the past 50 years is due primarily to human-induced emissions of heat-trapping gases. These emissions come mainly from the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas), with important contributions from the clearing of forests, agricultural practices, and other activities. . Warming over this century is projected to be considerably greater than over the last century. The global average temperature since 1900 has risen by about 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit (oF). By 2100, it is projected to rise another 2 ºF to 11.5 oF. The U.S. average temperature has risen by a comparable amount and is very likely to rise more than the global average over this century, with some variation from place to place. Several factors will determine future temperature increases. Increases at the lower end of this range are more likely if global heat-trapping gas emissions are cut substantially. If emissions continue to rise at or near current rates, temperature increases are more likely to be near the upper end of the range. Volcanic eruptions or other natural variations could temporarily counteract some of the human-induced warming, slowing the rise in global temperature, but these effects would only last a few years. . Reducing emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) would lessen warming over this century and beyond. Sizable early cuts in emissions would significantly reduce the pace and the overall amount of climate change. Earlier cuts in emissions would have a greater effect in reducing climate change than comparable reductions made later. In addition, reducing emissions of some shorter-lived heat-trapping gases, such as methane (CH4), and some types of particles, such as soot, would begin to reduce warming within weeks to decades. . Climate-related changes have already been observed globally and in the United States. These include increases in air and water temperatures, reduced frost days, increased frequency and intensity of heavy downpours, a rise in sea level, and reduced snow cover, glaciers, permafrost, and sea ice. A longer ice-free period on lakes and rivers, lengthening of the growing season, and increased water vapor in the atmosphere have also been observed. Over the past 30 years, temperatures have risen faster in winter than in any other season, with average winter temperatures in the Midwest and northern Great Plains increasing more than 7 ºF. Some of the changes have been faster than previous assessments had suggested. . These climate-related changes are expected to continue while new ones develop. Likely future changes for the United States and surrounding coastal waters include more intense hurricanes with related increases in wind, rain, and storm surges (but not necessarily an increase in the number of these storms that make landfall), as well as drier conditions in the Southwest and Caribbean. These changes will affect human health, water supply, agriculture, coastal areas, and many other aspects of society and the natural environment. (USGCRP 2009). GHGs include water vapor, CO2, CH4, nitrous oxide, O3, and several hydrocarbons and chlorofluorocarbons. Each GHG has an estimated global warming potential (GWP), which is a function of its atmospheric lifetime and its ability to absorb and radiate infrared energy emitted from the earth’s surface. The GWP of a particular gas provides a relative basis for calculating its carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) or the amount of CO2 that emissions of that gas would be equal to. CO2 has a GWP of 1, and is, therefore, the standard by which all other GHGs are measured. The potential effects of GHG emissions from the project scenarios are by nature global. Given the global nature of climate change and the current state of the science, it is not useful at this time to attempt to link the emissions quantified for local actions to any specific climatological change or resulting environmental impact. Nonetheless, the GHG emissions from the project scenarios have been quantified to the extent feasible in this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for information and comparison purposes. B.2.1.2 Ozone Depleting Substances The 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer prohibited production of all Class I ozone depleting substances (ODSs) in signatory countries by 1996. The Clean Air Act (CAA) amendments of 1990 govern the consumption, transportation, use, and disposal of ODSs. Section 326 of the fiscal year 1993 National Defense Authorization Act requires Senior Acquisition Official approval for contracts requiring use of ODSs. The KC-46A will be the first Air Mobility Command (AMC) aircraft to be completely free of ODSs. The USAF-approved halon alternative is HSC-125. Handheld extinguishers used in the KC-46A also will be ODS-free, whereas commercial aircraft use ODS for all fire suppression systems. B.2.2 REGULATORY SETTING The CAA and its subsequent amendments establish air quality regulations and the NAAQS and delegate the enforcement of these standards to the states. The CAA establishes air quality planning processes and requires areas in nonattainment of an NAAQS to develop a State Implementation Plan (SIP) that details how the state will attain the standard within mandated timeframes. The requirements and compliance dates for attainment are based on the severity of the nonattainment classification of the area. The following summarizes the air quality rules and regulations that apply to the project scenarios. B.2.2.1 Federal Regulations CAA Section 176(c) and USEPA’s General Conformity implementing regulation generally prohibit federal agencies from engaging in, supporting, permitting, or approving any activity that does not conform to the most recent USEPA-approved SIP in nonattainment or maintenance areas. This means that federal projects in such areas or other activities using federal funds or requiring federal approval (1) will not cause or contribute to any new violation of an NAAQS; (2) will not increase the frequency or severity of any existing violation; or (3) will not delay the timely attainment of any standard, interim emission reduction, or other milestone. CAA Section 176(c) (42 U.S. Code [USC] 7506(c)) and 40 CFR Part 93, Subpart B, implement the USEPA General Conformity Rule. The General Conformity Rule applies to Federal actions affecting areas that are in nonattainment of an NAAQS and to designated maintenance areas (attainment areas that have been reclassified from a previous nonattainment status and are required to prepare an air quality maintenance plan). Conformity requirements only apply to nonattainment and maintenance pollutants and their precursor emissions. Conformity determinations are required when the annual direct and indirect emissions from a proposed Federal action equal or exceed an applicable de minimis threshold. These thresholds vary by pollutant and the severity of nonattainment conditions in the region affected by the proposed action. The General Conformity Rule applies to proposed KC-46A operations within the following project regions: (1) for actions proposed at Altus AFB, the serious O3 nonattainment area that encompasses the Fort Worth Alliance Airport (AFW) auxiliary airfield and (2) for actions proposed at Fairchild AFB, the Spokane CO and PM10 maintenance areas, about 4 miles east of the eastern portion of Fairchild AFB. Proposed KC-46A operations within these areas would conform to the applicable SIP if their annual emissions remain below (1) 50 tons per year of VOCs or NOx for the AFW auxiliary airfield and (2) 100 tons per year of CO and PM10 for the Spokane area. Under the CAA, state and local agencies may establish air quality standards and regulations of their own, provided these are at least as stringent as the Federal requirements. These state and local standards and regulations are described in the affected environment sections for each base in Chapter 3. In addition, Table B-3 presents state ambient air quality standards promulgated by the Washington Department of Ecology and North Dakota Department of Health. B.2.2.2 Greenhouse Gases The USEPA has promulgated several final regulations involving GHGs either under the authority of the CAA, or as directed by Congress, but none of them apply directly to the project scenarios. On 18 February 2010, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) released its Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions (CEQ 2010), which suggests that proposed actions that would be reasonably anticipated to emit 25,000 metric tons or more per year CO2e should be evaluated by quantitative and qualitative assessments. This is not a threshold of significance, but rather an indicator that a quantitative and qualitative assessment should be included in the NEPA documentation. The purpose of quantitative analysis of CO2e emissions in this EIS is for its potential usefulness in making reasoned choices among scenarios. Table B-3. Washington and North Dakota Ambient Air Quality Standards Pollutant Averaging Time State Standards Washington North Dakota Ozone 8-hour  0.075 ppm (147 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.12 ppm (235 .g/m3)  Carbon monoxide 8-hour 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) 9 ppm (10 mg/m3) 1-hour 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) 35 ppm (40 mg/m3) Nitrogen dioxide Annual 0.05 ppm (100 .g/m3) 0.05 ppm (100 .g/m3) 1-hour  0.10 ppm (188 .g/m3) Sulfur dioxide Annual 0.02 ppm  24-hour 0.10 ppm  3-hour  0.5 ppm (1,300 .g/m3) 1-hour 0.40 ppma  1-hour 0.25 ppmb 0.075 ppm (196 .g/m3) PM10 Annual 50 .g/m3  24-hour 150 .g/m3 150 .g/m3 PM2.5 Annual  15 .g/m3 24-hour  35 .g/m3 Total Suspended Particulates Annual 60 .g/m3  24-hour 150 .g/m3  Annualc 0.02 ppm 28 .g/m3  24-hour 0.1 ppm 140 .g/m3  1-hourd 0.2 ppm 280 .g/m3  Instantaneous 10 ppm (14 mg/m3)  a Not to be above this level more than once in a calendar year. b Not to be above this level more than twice in a consecutive 7-day period. c Maximum arithmetic mean concentration averaged over 3 consecutive months. d Not to be exceeded more than once per month. B.2.3 METHODOLOGY The air quality analysis estimated the magnitude of emissions that would occur from proposed KC-46A construction and operational activities at each proposed base location. Depending on the project scenario, the estimation of proposed operational impacts is based on (1) the net increase in emissions due to the addition of KC-46A aircraft or (2) the net change in emissions due to the replacement of existing KC-135 operations with operations from the beddown of KC-46A aircraft. Potential impacts on air quality are evaluated with respect to the extent, context, and intensity of the impact in relation to relevant regulations, guidelines, and scientific documentation. The CEQ defines significance in terms of context and intensity in 40 CFR Section 1508.27. This requires that the significance of an action must be analyzed in respect to the setting of the action and based relative to the severity of the impact. The CEQ NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1508.27(b)) provide 10 key factors to consider in determining the intensity of an impact. In the case of criteria pollutants for which the project region is in attainment of an NAAQS, the analysis compared the net increase in annual air pollutant emissions estimated for each project scenario to the USEPA Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) threshold for new major sources of 250 tons per year of a pollutant as an indicator of significance or non-significance of projected air quality impacts. In the case of criteria pollutants for which the project region does not attain an NAAQS, the analysis compared the net increase in proposed annual emissions to the applicable pollutant threshold that requires a conformity determination for that region. If proposed emissions exceed a PSD or conformity threshold, further analysis was conducted to determine whether impacts were significant. In such cases, if proposed emissions (1) do not contribute to an exceedance of an ambient air quality standard or (2) conform to the approved SIP, then impacts would be less than significant. B.2.3.1 Construction The KC-46A project scenarios at each proposed basing location would require construction and/or renovation of airfield facilities, including training facilities, hangars, taxiways, and maintenance and fueling facilities. Air quality impacts due to proposed construction activities would occur from (1) combustive emissions due to the use of fossil fuel-powered equipment and (2) fugitive dust emissions (PM10/PM2.5) due to the operation of equipment on exposed soil. Construction activity data were developed to estimate proposed construction equipment usages and associated combustive and fugitive dust emissions for each project scenario. Factors needed to derive construction source emission rates were obtained from the Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, Volume I (USEPA 1995); the USEPA NONROAD2008a model for nonroad construction equipment (USEPA 2009); and the USEPA MOVES2010b model for on-road vehicles (USEPA 2013). Inclusion of standard construction practices and Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver certification into proposed construction activities would potentially reduce fugitive dust emissions generated from the use of construction equipment on exposed soil by 50 percent from uncontrolled levels. The standard construction practices for fugitive dust control include the following: 1. Use water trucks to keep areas of vehicle movement damp enough to minimize the generation of fugitive dust. 2. Minimize the amount of disturbed ground area at a given time. 3. Suspend all soil disturbance activities when winds exceed 25 miles per hour or when visible dust plumes emanate from the site and stabilize all disturbed areas with water application. 4. Designate personnel to monitor the dust control program and to increase watering, as necessary, to minimize the generation of dust. B.2.3.2 Operations Sources associated with operation of the proposed KC-46A scenarios at each basing location would include (1) operations and engine maintenance/testing of aircraft, (2) onsite privately owned vehicles (POVs) and government motor vehicles (GMVs), (3) offsite POV commutes, (4) aerospace ground equipment (AGE), (5) nonroad mobile equipment, (6) mobile fuel transfer operations, and (7) stationary and other sources. Operational data used to calculate projected KC-46A aircraft emissions were obtained from data used in the project noise analyses. Factors used to calculate combustive emissions for the KC-46A aircraft are based on emissions data developed by Pratt and Whitney for the PW4062 engine (ICAO 2013). The operational times in mode for the KC-46A engine are based on those for the KC-135 aircraft (Air Force Civil Engineer Center 2013). Emissions from non-aircraft sources due to the proposed KC-46A scenarios at each basing location were estimated by the following methods: 1. Emissions from the usage of AGE by KC-46A aircraft at Altus AFB are based on AGE usages for existing C-17 and KC-135 aircraft at Altus AFB. Emissions from the usage of AGE by KC-46A aircraft at all other base locations are based on AGE usages for existing KC-135 aircraft at Fairchild AFB. 2. Emissions from POVs, GMVs, and stationary sources were estimated by multiplying existing emissions generated at each base for these sources by the ratio of total base employment populations associated with each proposed scenario and baseline conditions. 3. The emission estimations for AGE, POVs, GMVs, and nonroad equipment simulated the gradual turnover of these sources in the future to vehicle and equipment fleets with new and cleaner USEPA emission standards. 4. Emissions from mobile fuel transfer operations were estimated by multiplying existing emissions for this source at Altus AFB by the ratio of total base employment populations associated with each proposed scenario and baseline conditions at Altus AFB. The air quality analysis uses calendar year 2012 to define existing emissions, as it includes the most recent calendar year of operational activities at each basing location. The analysis of proposed aircraft operations is limited to operations that occur within the lowest 3,000 feet (914 meters) of the atmosphere, as this is the typical depth of the atmospheric mixing layer where the release of aircraft emissions would affect ground-level pollutant concentrations. In general, aircraft emissions released above the mixing layer would not appreciably affect ground-level air quality. B.3 SAFETY B.3.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Ground and flight safety involving aviation operations conducted by the USAF are addressed in this section. Because of the proposal to construct within portions of the airfield environment, the focus of this section is on safety-of-flight issues associated with airfield operations. Within the ground safety section, issues involving operations and maintenance (O&M) activities that support operation of the airfield are addressed. Also considered in this section is the safety of personnel and facilities on the ground that may be placed at risk from flight operations. Within the aircraft mishaps/flight safety section for each base, aircraft flight risks and safety issues associated with conducting aviation activities at the respective bases are addressed. Historic information on aircraft accidents for the KC-135 at each base is also presented to give the reader perspective as to the frequency of major mishaps, which occurred during the lengthy service of the existing tanker aircraft. KC-46A flight risks and safety issues associated with conducting aviation activities at the base and in the near-base airspace are addressed. Any KC-46A accidents at the airfield would have direct impacts on the ground in the immediate vicinity of the mishap as a result of explosion/fire and debris spread. B.3.2 REGULATORY SETTING Numerous Federal, civil, and military laws and regulations govern operations at bases and in the surrounding airspace. Individually and collectively, they prescribe measures, processes, and procedures required to ensure safe operations and to protect the public, military, and property. B.3.3 METHODOLOGY A variety of elements associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios at any of the four bases that could potentially affect safety are evaluated relative to the degree to which the action increases or decreases safety risks to the public or private property. Flight and ground safety are assessed for the potential to increase risk and the capability to manage that risk by responding to emergencies. Impacts to safety are assessed according to the potential to increase or decrease in safety risks to personnel, the public and property. The development activities associated with the proposed KC-46A missions are considered to determine whether additional or unique safety risks are associated with its undertaking. If any activity associated with the KC-46A scenarios indicates a major variance from baseline conditions, it would be considered a significant safety impact. B.3.3.1 Flight Safety The primary public concern with regard to flight safety is the potential for aircraft accidents. Such mishaps may occur as a result of mid-air collisions, collisions with man-made structures or terrain, weather-related accidents, mechanical failure, pilot error, or bird-aircraft collisions. Collisions with structures around the airfield are controlled through airfield setbacks and safety zones that restrict construction around the airfield so that both the ground surface is clear for ground maneuvering and the airspace is clear of obstructions such as groves of trees, poles and power lines, and tall structures. The AICUZ defines the accident potential zones (APZs) around the airfield and prescribes restrictions on any construction in the clear zone (CZ) (see Figure B-1). Land use restrictions are recommended for APZs I and II, based mostly on the intensity of use. That is, activities where people congregate are not recommended, and uses where people spend a high percentage of time (such as residential) are also not recommended. The USAF defines five major categories of aircraft mishaps: Classes A, B, C, D, and E, which includes high accident potential. Class A mishaps result in a loss of life, permanent total disability, a total cost in excess of $2 million, and/or destruction of an aircraft. Class B mishaps result in permanent partial disability or inpatient hospitalization of three or more personnel and/or a total cost of between $500,000 and up to $2 million. Class C mishaps involve an injury resulting in any loss of time from work beyond the day or shift on which it occurred, an occupational illness that causes loss of time from work at any time, or an occupational injury or illness resulting in permanent change of job and/or reportable damage of between $50,000 and up to $500,000. High accident potential events are any hazardous occurrence that has a high potential for becoming a mishap. Class C mishaps and high accident potential, the most common types of accidents, represent relatively unimportant incidents because they generally involve minor damage and injuries, and rarely affect property or the public. Class D mishaps result in total cost of property damage of $20,000 or more, but less than $50,000; or a recordable injury or illness not otherwise classified as a Class A, B, or C mishap. Note that in 2010, the threshold for determining the class of mishaps was raised from $1 to $2 million for Class A mishaps, and the ceiling was raised for Class B from $1 million to $2 million. Accident rates for commercial aircraft are determined using accidents per million departures (or flight cycles) since there is a stronger statistical correlation between accidents and departures than there is between accidents and flight hours, between accidents and the number of airplanes in service, or between accidents and passenger miles or freight miles. This EIS focuses on USAF Class A mishaps because of their potentially catastrophic results. Based on historical data on mishaps at all bases, and under all conditions of flight, the military services calculate Class A mishap rates per 100,000 flying hours for each type of aircraft in the inventory. Mishap rates do not consider combat losses due to enemy action. In evaluating this information, it should be emphasized that data presented are only statistically predictive. The actual causes of mishaps are due to many factors, not simply the amount of flying time of the aircraft. Mishap rates are statistically assessed as an occurrence rate per 100,000 flying hours. For the purposes of this analysis, C-135 aircraft include the RC-135, EC-135, and the KC-135 since they share a common airframe based upon the Boeing 707, as modified for military use. Table B-4 reflects the cumulative annual USAF Class A mishap rates of the C-135 for the periods for which accident records have been established. Cargo and Command and Control type aircraft were included since their Mission-Design-Series are similar. The KC-135 entered service with the USAF in 1957; it is one of six military fixed-wing aircraft with over 50 years of continuous service with its original operator. Since the R model conversion of some of the fleet in the 1990s, the safety record of the KC-135 has been on par with that of any modern airliner. Table B-4. Air Force Class A Accident History for Selected Models of Transport Modified Mission Design/Code Aircraft Aircraft Reporting Period Accident Rate per 100,000 Hours Lifetime Hours Flown C-135a CY57-FY12 0.56 14,753,417 C-141 CY64-FY12 0.32 10,641,974 C-17 FY91-FY12 1.10 2,726,728 C-5 CY68-FY12 1.03 2,531,479 C-10 CY81-FY12 1.03 1,558,325 a Includes all variants such as EC and KC types, including EC-135, RC-135, and KC-135 Key: CY = calendar year; FY = fiscal year Source: AFSC 2013 An aircraft crash is what is known in the probability analysis world as a low probability, high consequence risk. Aircraft are designed to ensure that aircraft accidents are rare events. To minimize these accidents, factors causing or contributing to accidents must be understood and prevented. Previous research has studied accident data to determine these factors. The low rate of accidents, however, makes it difficult to discover repeating patterns of these factors. Levels of safety for commercial airframes are typically measured by the number of accidents and incidents and their rates. An aircraft accident is defined as an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft in which people suffer death or injury, and/or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage. There have been many scholarly papers written, and complex mathematical calculations developed, to try and predict where and when an aircraft or other low probability, high consequence risk might occur. However, none of these efforts have resulted in a consensus or an agreed upon methodology within the risk assessor community. The methodology of using accident rates as a predictor of the likelihood of a crash is what is commonly used. The accident rates are based upon accidents per 100,000 hours of flight for military aircraft. For commercial aircraft, in general, this expression is a measure of accidents per million departures. The accident rates for the KC-46A were determined using the accident rate for the B-767 jetliner, which is currently in service. The accident rate for commercial airliners is based upon departures (flight cycles). Using the operational data contained in Chapter 2 for each base (takeoffs are assumed to be one-half of the total projected departure airfield operations). Using the formula CrxAo = 1/X where Cr = crash rate and Ao = departure airfield operations, it is shown that the frequency of an accident, even with increased operations, is not likely to occur in the foreseeable future. While it is counterintuitive, an increase in operation tempo (OPTEMPO) may not result in higher accident rates, and no correlation has been proved or disproved. In a 2002 report to Congress on military aviation safety, the Congressional Research Service concluded, “While no correlation between high OPTEMPO and increased mishaps has been proved, it also hasn’t been disproved. A great degree of uncertainty remains. Little is known, for example, of the OPTEMPO effects on maintenance, ammunition, training in country, living conditions, or personnel tempo” (CRS 2002). In other words, there are numerous unpredictable factors that may or may not contribute to an accident. Bird/Wildlife-Aircraft Strike Hazard (BASH). Bird/wildlife-aircraft strikes constitute a safety concern for the USAF because they can result in damage to aircraft or injury to aircrews or local human populations if an aircraft crashes. Aircraft may encounter birds at altitudes up to 30,000 feet mean sea level (MSL) or higher. However, most birds fly close to the ground. More than 97 percent of reported bird strikes occur below 3,000 feet above ground level (AGL). Approximately 30 percent of bird strikes happen in the airport environment, and almost 55 percent occur during low-altitude flight training (AFSC 2013). To address the issues of aircraft bird strikes, the USAF has developed the Avian Hazard Advisory System to monitor bird activity and forecast bird strike risks. Using Next Generation Radar (NEXRAD) weather radars and models developed to predict bird movement, the Avian Hazard Advisory System is an online, near real time, geographic information system (GIS) used for bird strike risk flight planning across the continental United States and Alaska. Additionally, as part of an overall strategy to reduce BASH risks, the USAF has developed a Bird Avoidance Model using GIS technology as a key tool for analysis and correlation of bird habitat, migration, and breeding characteristics and is combined with key environmental and man.made geospatial data. The model was created to provide USAF pilots and flight schedulers/planners with a tool for making informed decisions when selecting flight routes. The model was created in an effort to protect human lives, wildlife, and equipment during air operations. This information is integrated into required pilot briefings that take place prior to any sortie. Fuel Jettison. The KC-46A, like the KC-135 aircraft, has the ability to jettison fuel in cases of emergency and non-emergency situations. Data on historical KC-135 operations show that slightly less than two sorties per thousand resulted in a release of fuel (USAF 2013). The main environmental concern from fuel released from an aircraft is fuel deposition onto the ground and/or surface waters and any possible negative impacts on human health or natural resources. The results of a definitive study on the fate of jettisoned fuel from large USAF aircraft (such as the KC-135) (Deepti 2003) were used to identify a reasonably conservative ground-level fuel deposition value for the KC-46A. This study used the Fuel Jettison Simulation model developed by the USAF to estimate the ground deposition of fuel from jettison events (Teske and Curbishley 2000). This maximum ground-level fuel deposition value identified for the KC-46A would result in effects that are well below known natural resource and human health thresholds for jet fuel. Therefore, the maximum fuel deposition value expected from the KC-46A would not produce substantial or significant impacts on human or natural resources. It is the policy of the Air Force Major Commands to follow AFIs or supplement those established AFIs. These policies require that pilots avoid fuel jettison, unless safety of flight dictates immediate jettison. For example, AMC policy, which covers all USAF tanker assets, requires that any fuel released from an aircraft must occur above 20,000 feet AGL (AMC 2004, 2012). Similar policy from AETC covers aircrews during training (AFI 11-2KC-135V3). These policies are designed to minimize potential impacts of fuel jettison events. In view of this, no further analysis is included in this section. B.3.3.2 Ground Safety Day-to-day O&M activities conducted at AFBs are performed in accordance with applicable USAF safety regulations, published Air Force Technical Orders, and standards prescribed by Air Force Occupational Safety and Health requirements. These are intended to standardize procedures and practices in all activities on USAF property to reduce occupational risks to government personnel and contractors and to protect other persons that reside on or visit the base or the vicinity of the base. Anti-Terrorism/Force Protection. Anti-Terrorism/Force Protection (AT/FP) is a security program designed to protect USAF active-duty personnel, civilian employees, family members, and facilities and equipment in all locations and situations. The program is accomplished through the planned and integrated application of anti-terrorism measures, physical security, operations security, and personal protective services. It is supported by intelligence, counterintelligence, and other security programs. In response to terrorist attacks, several regulations have been promulgated to ensure that force protection standards are incorporated into the planning, programming, and budgeting for the design and construction of Military Construction-funded facilities. Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) 04-010-01, DoD Minimum Antiterrorism Standards for Buildings (published in 2003 and updated in 2007) (DoD 2007) establishes minimum standoff distances that must be maintained between several categories of structures and areas that are relatively accessible to terrorists. The intent of AT/FP and design guidance is to improve security, minimize fatalities, and limit damage to facilities in the event of a terrorist attack. Many military bases, including those under consideration for beddown of the KC-46A, were developed before such considerations became a critical concern. Thus, under current conditions, many units are not able to completely comply with all present AT/FP standards. However, as new construction and modification of facilities occurs, AT/FP standards would be incorporated to the maximum extent practicable.  Construction/Demolition Safety. Short-term safety risks are associated with any demolition and construction activity, including those activities proposed as part of this action. However, adherence to standard safety practices would minimize any potential risks. Airfield Safety. Accident potential relies on identifying where most accidents have occurred in the past at military airfields (USAF 2002). This approach does not produce accident probability statistics since the question of probability involves too many variables for an accurate prediction model to be developed. The analysis of the history of military aircraft accidents focuses on determining where (within the airfield environments) an accident is likely to occur and estimates the size of the impact area that is likely to result from any single accident. As per DoDI 4165.57, “AICUZ, Ground Obstructions,” all structures on the ground have the potential to create hazards to flight. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) provides detailed instructions for the marking of obstructions (i.e., paint schemes and lighting) to warn pilots of their presence. Any temporary or permanent structure, including all appurtenances, that exceeds an overall height of 200 feet AGL or exceeds any obstruction standard contained in 14 CFR Part 77 should normally be marked and/or lighted. The FAA may also recommend marking and/or lighting a structure that does not exceed 200 feet AGL or 14 CFR Part 77 standards because of its particular location. The obstruction standards in 14 CFR Part 77 are primarily focused on structures in the immediate vicinity of airports and approach and departure corridors from airports (14 CFR 77). B.4 SOILS AND WATER B.4.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The term “soils” refers to unconsolidated materials formed from the underlying bedrock or other parent material. Soils play a critical role in both the natural and human environment. Water resources include surface water, groundwater, and floodplains. Surface water resources include lakes, rivers, and streams and are important for a variety of reasons, including economic, ecological, recreational, and human health factors. Groundwater includes the subsurface hydrologic resources of the physical environment; its properties are often described in terms of depth to aquifer or water table, water quality, and surrounding geologic composition. B.4.2 REGULATORY SETTING The Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1977 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and the USEPA Storm Water General Permit regulate pollutant discharges. Pollutants regulated under the CWA include “priority” pollutants, including various toxic pollutants, such as biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fecal coliform, oil and grease, and pH. Wetlands are discussed under the Biological Resources section below. Federal agencies are also required to comply with Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) for any project exceeding 5,000 square feet. Section 438 of the EISA instructs Federal agencies to use site planning, design, construction, and maintenance strategies for the property to maintain or restore, to the maximum extent technically feasible, the predevelopment hydrology of the property. With respect to soil erosion, Section 402(p) of the CWA regulates non-point source discharges of pollutants, under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, or state equivalent program. This section of the CWA was amended to require the USEPA to establish regulations for discharges from active construction sites. NPDES General Construction Permits require preparation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan for projects greater than 1 acre. Prime farmland is protected under the Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 (7 CFR 658). Prime farmland is defined as land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops, and is also available for these uses. The land could be cropland, pasture, rangeland, or other land, but not urban built-up land (defined by the U.S. Census Bureau, or U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps) or water. The project area at all four bases is classified by the U.S. Census Bureau as urbanized lands. B.4.3 METHODOLOGY Impacts on soils and surface water can result from earth disturbance that would expose soil to wind or water erosion. Analysis of impacts on soils and surface water examines the potential for such erosion at each base and describes typical measures employed to minimize erosion. In addition, soil limitations and associated typical engineering remedial measures are evaluated with respect to proposed construction. Criteria for evaluating impacts related to soil resources associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios are impacts on unique soil resources, minimization of soil erosion, and the siting of facilities relative to potential soil limitations. If development proposed in the Draft EIS were to substantially affect any of these features, impacts would be considered significant. Soil disturbance at each base was calculated by summing the square footages of additions/alterations and new construction. Criteria for evaluating impacts related to water resources associated with implementation of the KC-46A scenarios are water availability, water quality, adherence to applicable regulations, and existence of floodplains. Impacts are measured by the potential to reduce water availability to existing users; to endanger public health or safety by creating or worsening health hazards or safety conditions; or to violate laws or regulations adopted to protect or manage water resources. Flooding impacts are evaluated by determining whether proposed construction is located within a designated floodplain. Groundwater impacts are evaluated by determining whether groundwater beneath the project site would be used for implementing the KC-46A mission, and if so, by determining the potential to adversely affect those groundwater resources. Soils and water resource impacts are not evaluated for the areas below where the KC-46A would be operated or at the auxiliary airfields because no ground-disturbing activities or use of water resources would occur at these locations. B.5 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES B.5.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Biological resources include the native and introduced terrestrial and aquatic plants and animals found within the region of influence (ROI). The ROI for biological resources is defined as the land area (habitats) and airspace that could potentially be affected by infrastructure and construction projects, as well as airspace operations. The ROI generally includes the developed cantonment and airfield areas of the respective bases, but may also include areas near but outside the base boundary. Examples of off-base areas include managed wildlife areas and surface waters that could be indirectly affected by noise or water quality alteration, respectively. Habitat types are based on floral, faunal, and geophysical characteristics. Sensitive habitats include areas that the Federal government, state governments, or the DoD have designated as worthy of special protection due to certain characteristics such as high species diversity, special habitat conditions for rare species, or other unique features. For purposes of analysis, biological resources were organized into four categories: vegetation, wildlife, special-status species, and wetlands. Vegetation includes existing terrestrial plant communities but does not include special-status plants, which are discussed below. Plant species composition within an area generally defines ecological communities and indicates the type of wildlife that may be present. Wildlife includes all vertebrate animal species, with the exception of special-status species, which are discussed below. Typical wildlife includes animal groups such as large and small mammals, songbirds, waterfowl, reptiles, amphibians, and fish. The attributes and quality of available habitats influences the composition, diversity, and abundance of wildlife communities. Special-status species are defined as those plant and animal species protected by various regulations established by Federal and state agencies. These regulations, and the species addressed by them, are described in the Regulatory Setting section below. Wetlands are areas of transition between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water (Mitsch and Gosselink 2000). B.5.2 REGULATORY SETTING “Integrated Natural Resources Management,” AFI 32-7064, explains how to manage natural resources on USAF property in compliance with Federal, state, and local standards. The chief tool for managing base ecosystems is the Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan (INRMP). Based on an interdisciplinary approach to ecosystem management, the INRMP ensures the successful accomplishment of the military mission by integrating all aspects of natural resources management with each other and the rest of the base’s mission. Special-status plant and wildlife species are subject to regulations under the authority of Federal and state agencies. Special-status species include species designated as threatened, endangered, or candidate species by state or Federal agencies. Under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) (16 U.S.C. 1536), an endangered species is defined as any species in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. A threatened species is defined as any species likely to become an endangered species in the foreseeable future. Candidate species are those species for which the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) has sufficient information on their biological status and threats to propose them as endangered or threatened under the ESA, but for which development of a proposed listing regulation is precluded by other higher-priority listing activities. Although candidate species receive no statutory protection under the ESA, the USFWS believes it is important to advise government agencies, industry, and the public that these species are at risk and could warrant protection under the ESA. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) of 1918 (16 U.S.C. 703-712) is the domestic law that affirms, or implements, the United States’ commitment to four international conventions (with Canada, Japan, Mexico, and Russia) for the protection of a shared migratory bird resource. Each of the conventions protect selected species of birds that are common to both countries (i.e., species occur in both countries at some point during their annual life cycle). The act protects all migratory birds and their parts (including eggs, nests, and feathers). The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (BGEPA) (16 U.S.C. 668-668d) is legislation in the United States that protects two species of eagles. The BGEPA prohibits anyone without a permit issued by the Secretary of the Interior from “taking” bald eagles. Taking involves molesting or disturbing birds, their parts, nests, or eggs. The BGEPA provides criminal penalties for persons who “take, possess, sell, purchase, barter, offer to sell, purchase or barter, transport, export or import, at any time or any manner, any bald or golden eagles ... [or any golden eagle], alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof.” Section 404 of the CWA established a program to regulate the discharge of dredged and fill material into waters of the United States, including wetlands. Activities in waters of the United States that are regulated under this program include fills for development, water resource projects (such as dams and levees), infrastructure development (such as highways and airports), and conversion of wetlands to uplands for farming and forestry. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is the lead agency in protecting wetland resources. This agency maintains jurisdiction over Federal wetlands (33 CFR 328.3) under Section 404 of the CWA (30 CFR 320-330) and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act (30 CFR 329). The USEPA assists the USACE (in an administrative capacity) in the protection of wetlands (40 CFR 225.1 to 233.71). In addition, the USFWS and the National Marine Fisheries Service provide support with important advisory roles. Furthermore, Executive Order (EO) 11990, Protection of Wetlands, requires Federal agencies, including the USAF, to minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands and to preserve and enhance the natural and beneficial values of wetlands. EO 11990 requires Federal agencies to avoid, to the extent possible, the long- and short-term adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands and to avoid direct or indirect support of new construction in wetlands wherever there is a practicable alternative; if construction in wetlands cannot be avoided, the USAF will issue a Finding of No Practicable Alternative. Under CWA Section 401, applicants for a Federal license or permit to conduct activities that may result in the discharge of a pollutant into waters of the United States must obtain certification from the state in which the discharge would originate or, if appropriate, from interstate water pollution control agency with jurisdiction over affected waters at the point where the discharge would originate. Therefore, all projects that have a Federal component and may affect state water quality (including projects that require Federal agency approval, such as issuance of a Section 404 permit) must also comply with CWA Section 401. The following state agencies issue Section 401 certifications in their respective states: the Department of Environmental Quality in Oklahoma; the Department of Ecology in Washington; the Department of Health, Division of Water Quality, in North Dakota; and the Department of Health and Environment in Kansas. B.5.3 METHODOLOGY The first step in the analysis of potential impacts on biological resources was to determine the locations of sensitive habitats and species in relation to the proposed action. Maps were examined to locate sensitive habitats and species, and where necessary, site visits and additional surveys were conducted to confirm locations. Next, areas of overlap for the proposed development and sensitive habitats and species were identified. Scientific literature was reviewed for studies that examined similar types of impacts on biological resources. The literature review included a review of basic characteristics and habitat requirements of each sensitive species. Where available, information was also gathered relative to management considerations, incompatible resource management activities, and threats to each sensitive species. Impact analyses were then conducted based on the information gathered from the literature review. The analyses included an assessment of the impacts on biological resources resulting from both construction activities and daily operations. Measures to avoid and/or minimize adverse impacts on biological resources are also presented. The following criteria were evaluated when determining the significance of an effect on biological resources resulting from implementation of actions described in Chapter 2: . The direct impact or taking of a protected special-status species, including habitat alteration . The importance (legal, commercial, ecological, or scientific) of the resource . The relative sensitivity of biological resources to potential effects of the actions . The quantity or percentage of biological resources affected by the actions relative to overall abundance in the ROI . The expected duration of potential impacts resulting from implementation of the actions Determination of the significance of wetland impacts is based on (1) loss of wetland acreage, (2) the function and value of the wetland, (3) the proportion of the wetland that would be affected relative to the occurrence of similar wetlands in the region, (4) the sensitivity of the wetland to proposed activities, and (5) the duration of ecological ramifications. Impacts on wetland resources are considered significant if high-value wetlands would be adversely affected or if wetland acreage is lost. B.6 CULTURAL RESOURCES B.6.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Cultural resources are historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects considered important to a culture, subculture, or community for scientific, traditional, religious, or other purposes. They include archaeological resources, historic architectural/engineering resources, and traditional resources. Only significant cultural resources are considered for potential adverse impacts from an action. Significant cultural resources are those eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4, or identified as important to tribes or other traditional groups, as outlined in the American Indian Religious Freedom Act; the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act; and EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites. Historic properties are any prehistoric or historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects included or eligible for inclusion in the NRHP because of their historic or cultural significance. For a cultural resource to be considered eligible for the NRHP, it must possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association, and it must meet one or more of the following criteria (36 CFR 60.4): . Association with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history (criterion a). . Association with the lives or persons significant in our past (criterion b). . Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction (criterion c). . Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history (criterion d). In general, these resources must be more than 50 years old; however, younger resources may be eligible if they are exceptionally significant. Section 101(d)(6)(A) of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) states that properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to a tribe or Native Hawaiian organization may be determined to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. NRHP Bulletin 38 (NPS 1998) defines traditional cultural property (TCP), generally, as one that is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP. Reasons for eligibility could be because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that are rooted in that community’s history and are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community. TCPs can include archaeological resources, buildings, neighborhoods, prominent topographic features, habitats, plants, animals, and minerals that tribes and other groups consider essential for the continuance of traditional cultures. However, properties of traditional religious and cultural importance need not be determined eligible for the NRHP to be a significant cultural resource considered for potential adverse impacts from an action. On 21 November 1999, the DoD promulgated its American Indian and Alaska Native Policy, which emphasizes the importance of respecting and consulting with tribal governments on a government-to-government basis (DoD 1999). The policy requires an assessment, through consultation, of the effect of proposed DoD actions that may have the potential to significantly affect protected tribal resources, tribal rights, and tribal and Alaska Native lands, before decisions are made by the services. DoDI 4710.02, “DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes,” implements DoD policy, assigns responsibilities, and provides procedures for DoD interactions with federally recognized tribes in accordance with its American Indian and Alaska Native Policy and other DoD directives and policies. EO 13007 defines sacred sites as any specific, discrete, narrowly delineated location on Federal land that is identified by a tribe or individual as sacred by virtue of its established religious significance to or ceremonial use by a tribal religion and identified as such to the land managing agency. EO 13007 also requires agencies to accommodate access to, and ceremonial use of, sacred sites by tribal religious practitioners and to avoid adversely affecting their physical integrity. B.6.2 REGULATORY SETTING “Cultural Resources Management,” DoDI 4715.16, (DoD 2008), and AFI 32-7065, “Cultural Resources Management,” (USAF 2004) outline and specify proper procedures for cultural resource management on USAF bases. Laws pertinent to the proposed action include the NHPA of 1966, as amended; the Antiquities Act of 1906; the Historic Sites Act of 1935; NEPA; the Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974; the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979; the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990; and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978. Under Section 106 of the NHPA, the USAF is required to consider the effects of its undertakings at each location on historic properties listed, or eligible for listing, in the NRHP and to consult with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), Tribal Historic Preservation Office, and others regarding potential effects as per 36 CFR 800. Under AFI 32-7065, recorded cultural resources not evaluated for NRHP eligibility must be managed as eligible. Under Section 110 of the NHPA, each location is mandated to maintain an active historic preservation program and provide stewardship of cultural resources “consistent with the preservation of such properties and the mission of the agency (Section 470 h-2(a)).” Federal regulations governing cultural resource activities include the following: 36 CFR 800, Protection of Historic Properties (incorporating amendments effective August 5, 2004); 36 CFR 79, Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections; 43 CFR 7, Protection of Archaeological Resources; 36 CFR 60, National Register of Historic Places; and 36 CFR 63, Determinations of Eligibility for Inclusion in the National Register. Cultural resource-related EOs that may affect the locations include the following: EO 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment; EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites; EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments; and EO 13287, Preserve America. B.6.3 METHODOLOGY Impact analysis for cultural resources focuses on assessing whether the KC-46A mission would have the potential to affect cultural resources that are eligible for listing in the NRHP or have traditional significance for tribes. For this EIS, impact analysis for cultural resources focuses on, but is not limited to, guidelines and standards set forth in NHPA Section 106’s implementing regulations (36 CFR 800). Under Section 106 of the NHPA, the proponent of the action is responsible for determining whether any historic properties are located in the area, assessing whether the proposed undertaking would adversely affect the resources, and notifying the SHPO of any adverse effects. An adverse effect is any action that may directly or indirectly change the characteristics that make the historic property eligible for listing in the NRHP. If an adverse effect is identified, the Federal agency consults with the SHPO and federally recognized tribes to develop measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the adverse effects of the undertaking. Analysis of potential impacts on cultural resources considers both direct and indirect impacts. Impacts may occur through the following: . Physically altering, damaging, or destroying all or part of a resource . Altering characteristics of the surrounding environment that contribute to the resource’s significance . Introducing visual or audible elements that are out of character with the property or alter its setting . Neglecting the resource to the extent that it deteriorates or is destroyed Direct impacts are assessed by (1) identifying the nature and location of all elements of the proposed action and alternatives; (2) comparing those locations with identified historic properties, sensitive areas, and surveyed locations; (3) determining the known or potential significance of historic properties that could be affected; and (4) assessing the extent and intensity of the effects. Indirect impacts occur later in time or farther from the proposed action. Indirect impacts on cultural resources generally result from the effects of project-induced population increases, such as the need to develop new housing areas, utility services, and other support functions to accommodate population growth, or increased visitation of a remote area due to improved vehicle access. These activities and the subsequent use of the facilities can impact cultural resources. A key component of this analysis is defining the area of potential effect, defined as “the geographic area or areas within which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties, if any such properties exist” (36 CFR 800.16(d)). Archaeological and historic architectural resources at the bases were characterized using existing survey and analysis information from Installation Cultural Resources Management Plans, archaeological survey reports, historic buildings survey reports, local histories, and the records of the NRHP and National Historic Landmarks. These documents provided information on known locations of significant resources. In compliance with Section 106 of the NHPA, the USAF consulted with the relevant SHPOs regarding the area of potential effect and potential cultural resource concerns for the proposed action. NRHP-eligible or -listed properties at each base are identified in the base-specific sections. The potential for traditional resources at the bases was identified using Installation Cultural Resources Management Plans and information provided by base cultural resource management staff. Potentially interested tribes were contacted to request information on potential concerns about the proposed action. In this analysis, demolition, construction, and other base-specific actions needed to support the KC-46A basing are part of the alternatives. The assessment of adverse effects takes into account both the potential for physical damage or destruction of historic properties at the bases and the potential adverse effects of visual intrusions, noise, and vibration on historic properties at the bases. Properties eligible for inclusion in the NRHP for their scientific information potential generally are not adversely affected by the introduction of auditory or visual intrusions. Conversely, if integrity of setting or feeling is an important element of a property’s eligibility, that property may be adversely affected by the introduction of auditory or visual intrusions. Impacts on properties of traditional religious and cultural importance (hereafter referred to as “traditional cultural resources”) can result from noise and visual effects of aircraft overflights on rituals and ceremonies and on wildlife resources. The USAF’s ongoing consultation with tribes may identify places of traditional cultural importance or other types of cultural resources that might be adversely affected by auditory or visual intrusions or other elements of the proposed action. B.7 LAND USE B.7.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Land use describes the way the natural landscape has been modified or managed to provide for human needs. In developed and urbanized areas, land uses typically include residential, commercial, industrial, utilities and transportation, recreation, open space, and mixes of these basic types. Other uses such as mining, extractive activities, agriculture, forestry, and specially protected areas (such as larger monuments, parks, and preserves) are usually found on the fringes or outside of urbanized areas. Plans and policies guide how land resources are allocated and managed to best serve multiple needs and interests. Ordinances and regulations define specific limitations on uses. The attributes of land use addressed in this analysis include general land use patterns within and surrounding each military base and the land use regulatory setting. The regulatory setting is the framework for managing land use and approving new development. It pertains to Federal, state, and local statutes, regulations, plans, programs, and ordinances. Region of Influence. The ROI for the land use analyses in this EIS includes the land within and surrounding each base. The analysis considers an area that encompasses the full extent of airfield accident zones, and areas exposed to noise levels of concern, plus a reasonable buffer of a few miles. This ROI provides for a wider context of jurisdictional divisions that influence land use patterns around each base. B.7.2 REGULATORY SETTING The regulatory setting for land use includes the key Federal, state, and local statutes, regulations, plans, policies, and programs applicable to land use on and near each base. The land use discipline assumed the Federal noise compatibility requirements as identified below. Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design – DoD UFC 3-260-01. Several siting criteria have been established specific to land development and use at commercial and military airfields. To maintain safety, the USAF adheres to guidelines set forth in UFC 3-260-01, Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design (UFC 3-260-01). These criteria include CZs, APZs, and other obstruction zones relative to airfield environments. These and other criteria related to safety, security, and other land use issues are used to assist planners and decision makers with appropriate siting of facilities affecting design and physical layout of USAF bases. FICUN Land Use Guidelines (1980). In 1980, FICUN was formed to develop Federal policy and guidance on noise. The committee included the USEPA, FAA, Federal Highway Administration, DoD, Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. The designations contained in the FICUN compatibility table for land use do not constitute a Federal determination that any use of land covered by the program is acceptable or unacceptable under Federal, state, or local law. The responsibility for determining the acceptable and permissible land uses and the relationship between specific properties and specific noise contours rests with the local authorities. Air Installation Compatibility Use Zone (AICUZ) Program (DoDI 4165.57). Establishes the AICUZ program, which is similar to the FAA’s Federal Aviation Regulations Part 150 program for civil airports. The AICUZ program is a DoD discretionary program designed to promote compatible land use around military airfields. The military services maintain an AICUZ program to protect the operational integrity of their flying mission. Areas around airfields are exposed to the potential of aircraft accidents despite well-maintained aircraft with highly trained aircrews. DoD developed the AICUZ program to aid in the development of planning mechanisms that protect the safety and health of personnel on and near military airfields and to preserve operational capabilities. The AICUZ program consists of three distinct parts: APZs, hazards to air navigation (height and obstruction criteria established by the FAA), and noise zones. Bases use the AICUZ program to provide land use compatibility guidelines for areas exposed to increased safety risks and noise near the airfield. The noise compatibility guidelines recommended in the AICUZ program are similar to those used by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and FAA to provide information to surrounding jurisdictions to guide planning and regulation of land use. When noise levels exceed a DNL of 65 dB, residential land uses are normally considered incompatible. B.7.3 METHODOLOGY Potential impacts on land use can result from actions that (1) change the suitability of a location for its current or planned use (e.g., noise exposure in residential areas); (2) cause conditions that are unsafe for the public welfare; (3) conflict with the current and planned use of the area based on current zoning, amendments, agreements, regulatory restrictions, management, and land use plans; or (4) displace a current use with a use that does not meet the goals, objectives, and desired use for an area based on public plans or resolutions. The degree of land use effects (negligible, minor, moderate, or significant) is based on the level of land use sensitivity in areas affected by a proposed action, the magnitude of change, and the compatibility of a proposed action with existing or planned land uses. The assessment considers multiple contextual factors that are both quantified and qualitative. The evaluation primarily focuses on changes resulting from the action that may affect off-base areas. Also considered are potential effects on community amenities within the base such as schools, child care facilities, and housing areas. For each scenario, the following land use impact drivers are considered: . Construction and demolition on base (effects such as temporary dust, noise and traffic and longer-term noise or visual changes affecting community areas and nearby off-base locations). The assessment considers the extent of redevelopment, duration, and proximity to sensitive locations of on-base and off-base areas. . O&M activities for the new mission (generating noise, odors, or traffic). The assessment considers whether the action involves any unusual or new activities, and proximity to sensitive locations of on-base and off-base areas. . Aircraft operations at the base and in the surrounding area, including engine run ups, takeoffs and landings, and closed pattern work. The assessment evaluates changes in noise exposure levels and the location of noise relative to existing land use, planned uses, and zoning, focusing on land use compatibility with projected noise levels and accident potential following DoD guidelines. . Change in base population (causing indirect impacts such as congestion in nearby neighborhoods). The following steps are used to evaluate the impacts on land use from the proposed alternatives: 1. Characterize and describe existing land use and conditions (Chapter 3). . Describe general context for the base in the local area (whether urbanized, rural, or natural) and describe jurisdictional boundaries within the area around the airfield. . Describe the overall organization of functions on the base (using site plans, Base General Plans, other NEPA documents). . Describe the land use setting surrounding the base, using aerial photography (National Agriculture Imagery Program [NAIP] 1-meter aerial imagery), notes from site visits, land use plans by local jurisdictions, current zoning. . Describe current compatibility planning efforts for the base and status of compatibility around the airfield (based on AICUZ studies, Joint Land Use Studies, airfield zoning districts, airfield noise complaint logs). . Identify current noise exposure for land uses surrounding the airfield (using maps with baseline noise contours superimposed on aerial photography), describe noise levels affecting current uses and compatibility of the current exposure levels, and identify specific sensitive receptors affected by incompatible noise levels (such as schools and child development centers) based on the DoD noise compatibility guidelines. 2. Evaluate effects on land use of new construction and demolition. The analysis considers direct and indirect effects of redevelopment based on size of construction effort, location of projects relative to sensitive uses (for example, new industrial-type functions relative to family housing areas), and duration of construction. 3. Evaluate effects on land use of new O&M activities. Qualitatively consider if changes in O&M activities can have indirect effects on the suitability of areas outside the base for their current or planned uses. These effects may include dust, noise, traffic, visual modifications. 4. Assess whether any induced changes such as new housing demands in the local area pose any particular concerns for land use. 5. Quantify and locate changes in noise exposure from aircraft operations. . Estimate change in acreage of land on and off the base exposed to noise levels of 65 dB DNL and greater at 5 dB intervals. Consider the relative degree of change in exposure in the surrounding area. . Overlay projected and baseline noise contours on aerial photographs to locate where changes in noise exposure would occur. Identify projected noise exposure for land uses surrounding the airfield (using maps with baseline noise contours superimposed on aerial photography). Describe where the changes occur, what land use is affected, degree of change (decibel increase), and compatibility of the land use with the change. . Where changes in exposure interact with incompatible land use, a more careful evaluation of the zoning and potential future development of the affected area is included. This considers potential for future changes in land use or infill that could heighten an existing incompatible condition. Where residential land is impacted, review of aerial photography and zoning ordinances is used to determine the relative density of homes and potential for future infill. The analysis also identifies how and if current noise compatibility planning is adequate to protect airfield and community interests. 6. The impact assessment considers the degree or intensity of projected accident risk at the airfield in combination with current or possible future incompatible uses in the APZs (context). The analysis rates the degree of existing land use compatibility in the CZs and APZs based on DoD’s land use compatibility guidelines using levels of incompatible land uses and occupied structures within the APZs and CZs. Because accident risk is extremely low, the current condition of land use compatibility in the APZs and CZs is the dominant criteria in assessing impacts on land use. B.8 INFRASTRUCTURE B.8.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Infrastructure consists of the systems and physical structures that enable the population of a USAF base to function. Infrastructure is primarily human-made, with a high correlation between the type and extent of infrastructure and the degree to which an area is characterized as urban, or developed built environment. The availability of infrastructure and its capacity for expansion are essential to the ability of the base to carry out a specific mission, operations, and provide for the needs of the employees and residents. Utilities analyzed for each of the four bases in this EIS include water supply and distribution, sanitary sewer and wastewater systems, stormwater drainage, electrical system, natural gas, solid waste, and transportation. Solid waste management primarily relates to the availability of systems and landfills to support a population’s residential, commercial, and industrial needs. AFI 32-7042, “Waste Management,” incorporates the requirements of Subtitle D, 40 CFR 240 through 244, 257, and 258, applicable Federal regulations, AFIs, and DoD directives. It also establishes the requirement for bases to have a solid waste management plan; procedures for handling, storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste; record keeping and reporting; and pollution prevention (USAF 2009). The infrastructure information contained in this section provides a brief overview of each infrastructure component and describes its capacities, effectiveness, deficiencies, and existing general condition. Transportation infrastructure includes the public roadway network, public transportation systems, airports, railroads, pedestrian/bicycle facilities, and waterborne transportation required for the movement of people, materials, and goods. The proposed action has the potential to impact the public roadways that provide access to the bases, base access control points or gates, and the internal roadway systems of the bases. Roadways are typically assigned a functional classification by state departments of transportation. Functional classification is the process by which streets and highways are grouped into classes, or systems, according to the character of service they are intended to provide. The three main functional classifications for roadways include: . Arterial – These roadways provided mobility so traffic can move from one place to another quickly and safely. . Collector – These roadways link arterials and local roads and perform some of the duties of each. . Local – These roadways provide access to homes, businesses, and other property. B.8.2 REGULATORY SETTING There is no applicable regulatory setting for infrastructure and transportation resources. B.8.3 METHODOLOGY Effects on infrastructure were evaluated for the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios based on the potential for disruption or improvement of existing levels of service and additional needs for water, energy and natural gas consumption, wastewater and stormwater drainage systems, and solid waste system availability. Changes in population and proposed development were used to determine impact on infrastructure. For each scenario, the maximum demand or impact to capacity was calculated for the potable water, wastewater, electric and natural gas systems based on the change in population. For the transportation analysis, any change in population was assumed to reside off base. The impact analysis consisted of a quantitative assessment, based on available information for average and peak use and demand data for each on-base utility and the ability of a utility provider to absorb a given level of demand increase for its service area, and a qualitative assessment of the physical condition of each on-base system. Impacts might arise from physical changes to utility supply and distribution systems over their design life cycle and energy needs created by either direct or indirect workforce and population changes related to base activities. An effect would be considered adverse if the proposed FTU or MOB 1 scenario requirements caused any of the following: . A violation of a permit condition or contract with a utility provider . A capacity exceedance of a utility or solid waste facility . If a system could not sustain a mission increase due to poor condition, inefficient function, or operation . If a mission increase would require costly upgrades . A long-term interruption of a utility To assess the potential environmental consequences associated with transportation resources, increased utilization of the existing roadway system and base access gates due to the potential increase of personnel is analyzed, as well as potential effects of construction activities. Impacts could arise from physical changes to circulation, construction-related traffic delays, and changes in traffic volumes. Adverse impacts on roadway capacities would be significant if roads with no history of capacity exceedance had to operate at or above their full design capacity as a result of implementation of the KC-46A scenarios. B.9 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE B.9.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The terms “hazardous materials” and “hazardous waste” refer to substances that, because of their quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristic, may present substantial danger to public health or the environment when released into the environment. Products containing hazardous materials that may result in the generation of hazardous waste include aviation fuel, adhesives, sealants, conversion coatings, corrosion preventative compounds, hydraulic fluids, lubricants, oils, paints, polishes, thinners, and cleaners. B.9.2 REGULATORY SETTING The key Federal regulatory requirements related to hazardous materials and waste include: . Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.) . Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11001-11050) . Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 9601-9675) . Community Environmental Response Facilitation Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 9620) . Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act (15 U.S.C. 2651) . Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure Rule (40 CFR 112) . USEPA Regulation on Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste (40 CFR 261) . USEPA Regulation on Standards for the Management of Used Oil (40 CFR 279) . USEPA Regulation on Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification (40 CFR 302) . EO 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance . Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 (40 CFR 700–766) . Clean Air Act of 1970, including the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (40 CFR 61) Several USAF regulations address the management and safe handling of hazardous materials and wastes in accordance with applicable Federal and state regulations. These include: . AFI 32-7086, “Hazardous Material Management” . AFI 32-7042, “Solid and Hazardous Waste Compliance” . AFI 32-1052, “Facility Asbestos Management” B.9.3 METHODOLOGY The exact amounts of hazardous waste that would be generated under each scenario are unknown at this time. The qualitative and quantitative assessment of impacts from hazardous materials and waste management focuses on how (context) and to what degree (intensity) each location could affect hazardous materials usage and management, hazardous waste generation and management, and hazardous waste disposal. Potential impacts related to hazardous materials and wastes were analyzed for the following five effects: 1. Generation of hazardous material/waste types or quantities could not be accommodated by the current management system. 2. Increased likelihood of an uncontrolled release of hazardous materials that could contaminate the soil, surface water, groundwater, or air. 3. Non-compliance with applicable Federal and state regulations as a result of the proposed action. 4. Disturbance or creation of contaminated sites, resulting in adverse effects on human health and/or the environment. 5 . Established management policies, procedures, and handling capacities could not accommodate the proposed action. B.10 SOCIOECONOMICS B.10.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION Socioeconomics refers to features or characteristics of the social and economic environment. The main concern for socioeconomic resources is the change in personnel associated with the KC-46A FTU and MOB 1 scenarios that could potentially impact population, employment, earnings, housing, education, and public services. B.10.2 REGULATORY SETTING There is no applicable regulatory setting for socioeconomics. B.10.3 METHODOLOGY The socioeconomic analysis focuses on the effects resulting from the personnel changes, as well as construction and/or operation and maintenance under each scenario. To estimate the changes in population to the ROI, the total number of military personnel, military dependents and family members, and students (if any) as indicated in the personnel tables in Chapter 2 (Tables 2-4, 2-7, 2-10, 2-13, 2-16, 2-19) were added together and assumed to be migrating to the area. For this analysis, any DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, or contractors (other base personnel) identified in Chapter 2 associated with the KC-46A FTU scenario, MOB 1 scenario, or KC-135 mission were assumed to be from the local population and were not considered to be incoming personnel. Therefore, under these assumptions, the changes to the number of DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, and contractors would not impact population, housing, education, or public services. To determine the change in on-base jobs, the total change in full-time military personnel, students (if any), DoD civilians, and contractors was added to the existing on-base total work force. Part-time Reservists were not considered to be part of the work force since the Air Force Reserves typically only serve one weekend per month, in any areas they choose to live, and are on temporary duty assignment two weeks a year. For this reason, any change in the number of part-time Reservists associated with each scenario was also not considered as part of the incoming population that would impact housing, economic activity, education, public services, and base services. The economic impact analysis used to determine the effect of construction and operation and maintenance costs (if any) was conducted using the Impact Analysis for Planning (IMPLAN) economic forecasting model. The IMPLAN model uses data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct a mathematical representation of the local economics using the region-specific spending patterns, economic multipliers, and industries (MIG 2012). In this analysis, the IMPLAN model provided representations of the county-wide economy at each location. Economic impacts are analyzed by introducing a change to a specific industry in the form of increased or decreased employment or spending; the IMPLAN model mathematically calculates the resulting changes in the local economy. In this analysis, the IMPLAN model estimates the economic effects of the incoming personnel on spending and employment in the established ROI. The economic impacts analysis separates effects into three components: direct, indirect, and induced. Direct effects are the change in employment and income generated directly by the expenditures of the incoming or outgoing personnel. To produce the goods and services demanded by the incoming personnel, businesses, in turn, may need to purchase additional goods and services from other businesses. The employment and incomes generated by these secondary purchases would result in the indirect effects. Induced effects are the increased household spending generated by the direct and indirect effects. The overall effect from the economic impact analysis is the total number of jobs created throughout the ROI by the direct, indirect, and induced effects. The construction and O&M costs used in the economic activity section were provided by the USAF during the site survey reports. To determine whether the local housing market could support the personnel associated with the FTU or MOB 1 scenarios, several assumptions were made. The first assumption was that DoD civilians, part-time Reservists, and contractors were already residing in the local population and any change to the number of these personnel would not influence the local housing market. The second assumption was that the total number of homes required off base was equal to the total number of incoming full-time military personnel. This number was compared against the number of vacant housing units as defined by the 2010 census. If the number of incoming full-time military personnel did not exceed the number of vacant housing units as defined by the 2010 census, the housing market in the ROI was anticipated to be able to support the incoming population. Students assigned to the FTU would be assumed to be in transient status. Of the 200 students associated with the FTU scenario, 180 students would be lodged in either on base or off base facilities. The other 20 students would be assumed to be non-prior service Airmen, and would thus be required to live in an on base dormitory. Therefore, under each of the FTU scenarios, there would be a potential need for 180 lodging units on or off base and 20 dormitory units on base to support the average daily student load of 200. To determine the total dependents for each base associated with the KC-46A mission and KC-135 drawdown mission (where appropriate), 65 percent of all full-time military personnel, as identified in the personnel tables in Chapter 2 (See Tables 2-4, 2-7, 2-10, 2-13, 2-16, 2-19), were assumed to be accompanied. Each accompanied military member was assumed to be accompanied by 2.5 dependents, or 1 spouse and approximately 1.5 children. All children were assumed to be of school age. Therefore, to determine the total number of school-aged children, a multiplier of 1.5 was applied to 65 percent of the full-time military personnel. Public services were analyzed by considering the overall percentage change to the county population. Base services were analyzed by considering the capacity, staffing, and infrastructure available to support the incoming personnel. The magnitude of potential impacts can vary greatly, depending on the location of the proposed action. If potential socioeconomic changes were to result in substantial shifts in population trends or a decrease in regional spending or earning patterns, those effects would be considered adverse. A proposed action could have a significant effect with respect to socioeconomic conditions in the surrounding ROI if the following were to occur: . Change in the local business volume, employment, or population that exceeds the ROI’s historical annual change . Adverse change on social services or social conditions, including property values, school enrollment, county or municipal expenditures, or crime rates B.11 ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN B.11.1 RESOURCE DEFINITION The resource considered for environmental justice is potentially affected populations that meet certain characteristics based on race, income, and age. The resource is defined relatively, in order to understand if impacts from an action are occurring in areas that are disproportionately composed of minorities, low-income persons, and children. This concern arises because large impact projects have historically used sites where real estate values are lower and/or more industrialized. Locations with low property values have tended to attract development of affordable and marginal housing. This dynamic tends to perpetuate and often pre-dates the enactment of community land use ordinances. The intent of environmental justice is to reduce the burden of impacts on socially and economically vulnerable populations. B.11.2 REGULATORY SETTING Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations, EO 12898, directs Federal agencies to address environmental and human health conditions in minority and low-income communities. In addition to environmental justice issues are concerns pursuant to EO 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks, which directs Federal agencies to identify and assess environmental health and safety risks that may disproportionately affect children. USAF guidance for implementation of the EO is contained in the Guide for Environmental Justice Analysis with the Environmental Impact Analysis Process, dated November 1997 (CEQ 1997). Minority populations include all persons identified by the 2010 census to be of Hispanic origin, regardless of race, and all persons not of Hispanic origin other than White (i.e., non-Hispanic persons who are Black, American Indian, Eskimo or Aleut, Asian or Pacific Islander, or other race). The 2010 census did not collect information on income or poverty levels. The latest information on poverty was released in 2012 as a 5-year average from 2007 to 2011 as part of the American Community Survey. Low-income populations include persons living below the poverty level. The poverty level or threshold varies by size of family and number of children under 18 years (i.e., $23,021 for a family of four in 2011). If the total family income is less than the threshold, then the family and every individual in it (or unrelated individuals) is in poverty. The percentage of low-income persons is calculated as a percentage of all persons for whom the U.S. Census Bureau determines poverty status, which is generally a slightly lower number than the total population, as it excludes institutionalized persons, persons in military group quarters and in college dormitories, and unrelated individuals under 15 years old. B.11.3 METHODOLOGY Analysis of environmental justice focuses on potentially unavoidable significant adverse impacts on any of the resource areas evaluated in the EIS. If no potentially significant impacts are identified, an evaluation of environmental justice is not triggered. Where potentially significant impacts are identified in the EIS, the percentages of low-income persons, minority persons, and children under 18 are calculated for the population of the affected area. These percentages are compared to those of the region of comparison to determine if the affected population is disproportionately composed of low-income persons, minority persons, and children under age 18 (i.e., higher than the region of comparison). Since the proposed construction activities would occur within the base boundaries, the only action with the potential to cause adverse impacts is related to the new noise levels generated in the vicinity of each of the bases under consideration for the FTU or MOB 1 actions. Therefore, the ROI for the environmental justice analysis in this EIS uses the county as the region of comparison, and focuses on the demographics of specific affected populations for each of the bases evaluated. Should the analysis of impacts in the EIS conclude that a potentially unavoidable significant impact could occur, the composition of the affected population (i.e., percentages of low-income, minority, and children under age 18) is compared to the region (i.e., the county) to assess if the impact is borne disproportionately by minorities, low-income persons, or children. For the purposes of this analysis, children are defined as persons age 17 and younger, as enumerated by the 2010 census. For the purposes of this analysis, the proportion of affected low-income population in the 2000 census is evaluated to the census tract level. That percentage is then applied to the affected 2010 population as an estimate of the number of low-income persons affected under the 2010 census. The proportion of affected minority and children under 18 in the 2000 census is evaluated to the census block level, and then applied to the affected 2010 population. B.12 REFERENCES AFSC (Armed Forces Services Corporation), 2013. Aircraft Accident Statistics “C” Type Aircraft, Retrieved From http://www.afsec.af.mil/organizations/aviation/index.asp, 16 May 2013. Air Force Civil Engineer Center, 2013. Air Emissions Guide for Air Force Mobile Sources - Methods for Estimating Emissions of Air Pollutants for Mobile Sources at U.S. Air Force Installations. Compliance Technical Support Branch. AMC (Air Mobility Command), 2004. 55th ARS Inflight Guide All Original, 21 August 2004. AMC (Air Mobility Command), 2012. Mobility Air Forces Fuel Jettison Policy. Authority: HQ AMC/A37V FCIF, 3 May 2012. CEQ (Council on Environmental Equality), 1997. Guide for Environmental Justice Analysis with the Environmental Impact Analysis Process, November. CEQ (Council on Environmental Equality), 2010. Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. CRS (Congressional Research Service), 2002. Report for Congress Military Aviation Safety, Congressional Research Service Order Code RL 31571, 16 September 2002. Deepti, K.C., 2003. Environmental Assessment of Fuel Jettisoning and Development of a Geographical/Environmental Modeling with GIS Software. DoD (Department of Defense), 1999. Annotated Policy Document for the American Indian and Alaska Native Policy. DoD (U.S. Department of Defense), 2007. DoD Minimum Antiterrorism Standards for Buildings. DoD (Department of Defense), 2008. Department of Defense Instruction Number 4715.16 Cultural Resources Management. 18 September 2008. FICUN (Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise), 1980. Guidelines for Considering Noise in Land-Use Planning and Control. June. ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), 2013. ICAO Engine Exhaust Emissions Data Bank - Subsonic Engines. Engine Identification: PW4062. Test Organization: Pratt and Whitney. Test Dates: November 30, 2012 to March 12, 2013. MIG (MIG, Inc.), 2012. IMPLAN® (IMPact Analysis for PLANning) Version 3.1 (Computer program). Hudson, WI. Mitsch, W.J. & Gosselink, J.G., 2000. Wetlands, [3rd edition], John Wiley and Sons, NY. NPS (National Park Service), 1998. Guidelines for Evaluating and Documenting Traditional Cultural Properties. Patricia L. Parker and Thomas F. King. Originally published 1990; revised 1992, 1998. Teske, M.E. and Curbishley, T.B., 2000. Fuel Jettison Simulation Model User Manual, Version 2.0. Continuum Dynamics, Inc., Princeton, NJ. USAF (Unites States Air Force), 2002. US Air Force Accident Study Update, Department of the Air Force, US Air Force Headquarters, 19 December 2002. USAF (U.S. Air Force), 2009. Air Force Instruction 32-7042, Waste Management, 15 April 2009. USAF (U.S. Air Force), 2013. Data adjusted gross weight information for the KC46 environmental impact study for KC46 basing CY2008 - CY2012 for KC135s and KC10s, 618th Air and Space Operations Center (Tanker Airlift Control Center) Data Division 618 AOC (TACC)/XOND. USD (Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisitions, Technology, and Logistics), 2009. Memorandum Regarding Methodology for Assessing Hearing Loss Risk and Impacts in DoD Environmental Impact Analysis. 16 Jun 2009. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 1995. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, Volume I. Section 13.2.3, Heavy Construction Operations. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch13/final/c13s02-3.pdf. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2009. NONROAD2008a Model. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/otaq/nonrdmdl.htm. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2013. MOVES2010b Model. Retrieved from http://www.epa.gov/otaq/models/moves/index.htm. USGCRP (United States Global Change Research Program), 2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. Retrieved from http://www.globalchange.gov/ usimpacts, 26 March 2010. PUBLIC DOCUMENTS UFC 3-260-01, Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design Air Force Air Force Occupational Safety and Health Standard 48-20 Air Force Instructions AFI 32-1052 – Facility Asbestos Management AFI 32-7042 – Solid and Hazardous Waste Compliance AFI 32-7063 – Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Program AFI 32-7064 – Integrated Natural Resources Management AFI 32-7065 – Cultural Resources Management AFI 32-7086 – Hazardous Material Management Code of Federal Regulations 7 CFR 658 – Farmland Protection Policy Act 14 CFR 77 – Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace 29 CFR 1910.95 – Occupational Noise Exposure 30 CFR 320-330, Section 404 30 CFR 329, Section 10 – Rivers and Harbors Act 33 CFR 328.3 – Definition of Waters of the United States 36 CFR 60.4 – National Register of Historic Places 36 CFR 63 – Determinations of Eligibility for Inclusion in the National Register 36 CFR 79 – Curation of Federally Owned and Administered Archaeological Collections 36 CFR 800 – Protection of Historic Properties 36 CFR 800.16(d) – Definition of Area of potential effects 40 CFR 61 – National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 40 CFR 93, Subpart B – Determining Conformity of General Federal Actions to State or Federal Implementation Plans 40 CFR 112 – Oil Pollution Prevention 40 CFR 225.1 to 233.71 – Ocean Dumping 40 CFR 261 – EPA Regulation on Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste 40 CFR 279 – EPA Regulation on Standards for the Management of Used Oil 40 CFR 302 – EPA Regulation on Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification 40 CFR Parts 700-766 – Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 40 CFR 1508.27(b) – Council on Environmental Quality 43 CFR 7 – Protection of Archaeological Resources Department of Defense Instructions DoDI 4165.57 – AICUZ, Ground Obstructions DoDI 4710.02 – DoD Interactions with Federally-Recognized Tribes DoDI 4715.16 – Cultural Resources Management DoDI 6055.12 – Occupational Noise and Hearing Conservation Program Executive Orders EO 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment EO 11990, Protection of Wetlands EO 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations EO 13007, Indian Sacred Sites EO 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments EO 13287, Preserve America EO 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance United States Code 15 U.S.C. 2651, Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act of 1986 16 U.S.C. 668 – 668d, Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940 16 U.S.C. 703 – 712, Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 16 U.S.C. 1536, Endangered Species Act of 1973 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., Clean Water Act of 1977 42 U.S.C. 6901, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 42 U.S.C. 7506(c) Transportation Conformity of the Clean Air Act 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675, Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 42 U.S.C. 9620, Community Environmental Response Facilitation Act of 1992 42 U.S.C. 11001-11050, Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 APPENDIX C BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE NOISE ANALYSIS This appendix includes effects on some specific resources that may not be affected by regularly scheduled KC-46A training operations (e.g., noise impacts on manatees). KC-46A mission sorties could occur on an occasional basis at locations worldwide as part of real-world contingency operations. Furthermore, discussion of impacts on a wide variety of resource types provides additional perspective and context for those resources impacted by regular operations. This appendix provides a general noise primer to educate the reader on what constitutes noise, how it is measured, and the studies that were used in support of how and why noise is modeled. Noise is generally described as unwanted sound. Unwanted sound can be based on objective effects (such as hearing loss or damage to structures) or subjective judgments (community annoyance). Noise analysis thus requires a combination of physical measurement of sound, physical and physiological effects, plus psycho- and socio-acoustic effects. This appendix describes how sound is measured and summarizes noise impacts in terms of community acceptability and land use compatibility; gives detailed descriptions of the effects of noise that lead to the impact guidelines presented; and provides a description of the specific methods used to predict aircraft noise, including a detailed description of sonic booms. C.1 NOISE DESCRIPTORS AND IMPACT The following subsections describe the characteristics used to describe sound, the specific noise metrics used for noise impact analysis, and how environmental impact and land use compatibility are judged in terms of these quantities. C.1.1 QUANTIFYING SOUND Measurement and perception of sound involve two basic physical characteristics: amplitude and frequency. Amplitude is a measure of the strength of the sound and is directly measured in terms of the pressure of a sound wave. Because sound pressure varies in time, various types of pressure averages are usually used. Frequency, commonly perceived as pitch, is the number of times per second the sound causes air molecules to oscillate. Frequency is measured in units of cycles per second, or hertz (Hz). Amplitude. The loudest sounds the human ear can comfortably hear have acoustic energy one trillion times the acoustic energy of sounds the ear can barely detect. Because of this vast range, attempts to represent sound amplitude by pressure are generally unwieldy. Sound is, therefore, usually represented on a logarithmic scale with a unit called the decibel (dB). Sound measured on the decibel scale is referred to as a sound level. The threshold of human hearing is approximately 0 dB, and the threshold of discomfort or pain is around 120 dB. Figure C-1 is a chart of A-weighted sound levels from typical sounds. Some (air conditioner, vacuum cleaner) are continuous sounds whose levels are constant for some time. Some (automobile, heavy truck) are the maximum sound during a vehicle passby. Some (urban daytime, urban nighttime) are averages over some extended period. F35B-331 Aircraft Operations and Noise Source: Derived from the Handbook of Noise Control, Harris 1979, FICAN 1997. Figure C-1. Typical A-Weighted Sound Levels of Common Sounds Because of the logarithmic nature of the decibel scale, sounds levels do not add and subtract directly and are somewhat cumbersome to handle mathematically. However, some simple rules of thumb are useful in dealing with sound levels. First, if a sound’s intensity is doubled, the sound level increases by 3 dB, regardless of the initial sound level. For example: 60 dB + 60 dB = 63 dB, and 80 dB + 80 dB = 83 dB. The total sound level produced by two sounds of different levels is usually only slightly more than the higher of the two. For example: 60.0 dB + 70.0 dB = 70.4 dB. Because the addition of sound levels behaves differently than that of ordinary numbers, such addition is often referred to as “decibel addition” or “energy addition.” The latter term arises from the fact that the combination of decibel values consists of first converting each decibel value to its corresponding acoustic energy, then adding the energies using the normal rules of addition, and finally converting the total energy back to its decibel equivalent. The difference in decibels between two sounds represents the ratio of the amplitudes of those two sounds. Because human senses tend to be proportional (i.e., detect whether one sound is twice as big as another) rather than absolute (i.e., detect whether one sound is a given number of pressure units bigger than another), the decibel scale correlates well with human response. Under laboratory conditions, differences in sound level of 1 dB can be detected by the human ear. In the community, the smallest change in average noise level that can be detected is about 3 dB. A change in sound level of about 10 dB is usually perceived by the average person as a doubling (or halving) of the sound’s loudness, and this relation holds true for loud sounds and for quieter sounds. A decrease in sound level of 10 dB actually represents a 90 percent decrease in sound intensity but only a 50 percent decrease in perceived loudness because of the nonlinear response of the human ear (similar to most human senses). The one exception to the exclusive use of levels, rather than physical pressure units, to quantify sound is in the case of sonic booms. Sonic booms are coherent waves with specific characteristics. There is a long-standing tradition of describing individual sonic booms by the amplitude of the shock waves, in pounds per square foot. This is particularly relevant when assessing structural effects as opposed to loudness or cumulative community response. In this environmental analysis, sonic booms are quantified by either decibels or pounds per square foot, as appropriate for the particular impact being assessed. Frequency. The normal human ear can hear frequencies from about 20 Hz to about 20,000 Hz. It is most sensitive to sounds in the 1,000 to 4,000 Hz range. When measuring community response to noise, it is common to adjust the frequency content of the measured sound to correspond to the frequency sensitivity of the human ear. This adjustment is called A-weighting (ANSI 1988). Sound levels that have been so adjusted are referred to as A-weighted sound levels. The audible quality of high-thrust engines in modern military combat aircraft can be somewhat different than other aircraft, including (at high throttle settings) the characteristic nonlinear crackle of high-thrust engines. The spectral characteristics of various noises are accounted for by A-weighting, which approximates the response of the human ear but does not necessarily account for quality. There are other, more detailed, weighting factors that have been applied to sounds. In the 1950s and 1960s, when noise from civilian jet aircraft became an issue, substantial research was performed to determine what characteristics of jet noise were a problem. The metrics Perceived Noise Level and Effective Perceived Noise Level were developed. These accounted for nonlinear behavior of hearing and the importance of low frequencies at high levels, and for many years airport/airbase noise contours were presented in terms of Noise Exposure Forecast, which was based on Perceived Noise Level and Effective Perceived Noise Level. In the 1970s, however, it was realized that the primary intrusive aspect of aircraft noise was the high noise level, a factor that is well represented by A-weighted levels and day-night average sound level (DNL). The refinement of Perceived Noise Level, Effective Perceived Noise Level, and Noise Exposure Forecast was not significant in protecting the public from noise. There has been continuing research on noise metrics and the importance of sound quality, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) for military aircraft noise and by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for civil aircraft noise. The metric Ldnmr, which is described later and accounts for the increased annoyance of rapid onset rate of sound, is a product of this long-term research. The amplitude of A-weighted sound levels is measured in decibels. It is common for some noise analysts to denote the unit of A-weighted sounds by dBA. As long as the use of A-weighting is understood, there is no difference between dB or dBA: it is only important that the use of A-weighting be made clear. In this environmental analysis, A-weighted sound levels are reported as dB. Time Averaging. Sound pressure of a continuous sound varies greatly with time, so it is customary to deal with sound levels that represent averages over time. Levels presented as instantaneous (i.e., as might be read from the display of a sound level meter) are based on averages of sound energy over either 1/8 second (fast) or 1 second (slow). The formal definitions of fast and slow levels are somewhat complex, with details that are important to the makers and users of instrumentation. They may, however, be thought of as levels corresponding to the root mean square sound pressure measured over the 1/8-second or 1-second periods. C.1.2 NOISE METRICS C.1.2.1 Sound Exposure Level Individual time-varying noise events have two main characteristics: a sound level that changes throughout the event and a period of time during which the event is heard. Although the maximum sound level reached during the event provides some measure of the intrusiveness of the event, it alone does not completely describe the total event. The period of time during which the sound is heard is also significant. The Sound Exposure Level (abbreviated SEL or LAE for A-weighted sounds) combines both of these characteristics into a single metric. SEL is a composite metric that represents both the intensity of a sound and its duration. Mathematically, the mean square sound pressure is computed over the duration of the event, then multiplied by the duration in seconds, and the resultant product is turned into a sound level. It does not directly represent the sound level heard at any given time, but rather provides a measure of the net impact of the entire acoustic event. Table C-1 shows SEL values corresponding to representative aircraft in the specified power settings and aircraft configurations. Table C-1. Representative Sound Exposure Levels Aircraft (engine type) Power Setting Power Unit SEL Values (in dBA) At Varying Distances (in feet) 500 1,000 2,000 5,000 10,000 Takeoff/Departure Operations (at 300 knots airspeed) A-10A 6200 NF 102.6 96.2 88.5 76.9 68.3 B-1 97.5% RPM 129.5 123.1 116.5 107.3 99.3 F-15 (P220) 90% NC 117.3 112 106.1 97 88.4 F-16 (P229) 93% NC 116.5 110.8 104.6 95 86.3 F-22 100% ETR 124.2 118.7 112.7 103.5 95.2 Landing/Arrival Operations (at 160 knots airspeed) A-10A 5225 NF 97.9 91.5 83.3 67 55 B-1 90% RPM 103.4 98.3 92.7 83.4 74.4 F-15 (P220) 75% NC 94.2 89.2 83.6 74.9 66.9 F-16 (P229) 83.5% NC 97.4 92.1 86.3 76.9 68.2 F-22 43% ETR 114.9 109.3 103.1 93.5 84.5 Key: Engine Units of Power: ETR = engine thrust ratio; NC = engine core revolutions per minute; NF = engine fan revolutions per minute; RPM = revolutions per minute Source: SELCalc2 (Flyover Noise Calculator), Using NoiseMap 6/7 and Maximum Omega10 Result as the defaults.  C.1.2.2 Day-Night Average Sound Level Noise tends to be more intrusive at night than during the day. This effect is accounted for by applying a 10 dB penalty to events that occur after 10:00 P.M. and before 7:00 A.M. If the equivalent continuous sound pressure level (Leq) is computed over a 24-hour period with this nighttime penalty applied, the result is the DNL. DNL is the community noise metric recommended by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) (USEPA 1974) and has been adopted by most Federal agencies (FICON 1992). It has been well established that DNL correlates well with long-term community response to noise (Finegold et al. 1994; Schultz 1978). DNL accounts for the total, or cumulative, noise impact at a given location, and for this reason is often referred to as a “cumulative” metric. It was noted earlier that, for impulsive sounds, such as sonic booms, C-weighting is more appropriate than A-weighting. DNL computed with C-weighting is denoted CDNL or LCdn. This procedure has been standardized, and impact interpretive criteria similar to those for DNL have been developed (CHABA 1981). C.1.2.3 Onset-Adjusted Monthly Day-Night Average Sound Level Aircraft operations in military training airspace generate a noise environment somewhat different from other community noise environments. Overflights are sporadic, occurring at random times and varying from day to day and week to week. This situation differs from most community noise environments, in which noise tends to be continuous or patterned. Individual military overflight events also differ from typical community noise events in that noise from a low-altitude, high-airspeed flyover can have a rather sudden onset. To represent these differences, the conventional DNL metric is adjusted to account for the “surprise” effect of the sudden onset of aircraft noise events on humans (Plotkin et al. 1987; Stusnick et al. 1992, 1993). For aircraft exhibiting a rate of increase in sound level (called onset rate) of from 15 to 150 dB per second, an adjustment or penalty ranging from 0 to 11 dB is added to the normal SEL. Onset rates above 150 dB per second require an 11 dB penalty, while onset rates below 15 dB per second require no adjustment. The DNL is then determined in the same manner as for conventional aircraft noise events and is designated as onset-rate adjusted day-night average sound level (abbreviated Ldnmr). Because of the irregular occurrences of aircraft operations, the number of average daily operations is determined by using the calendar month with the highest number of operations. The monthly average is denoted Ldnmr. Noise levels are calculated the same way for both DNL and Ldnmr. Ldnmr is interpreted by the same criteria as used for DNL. C.1.3 NOISE IMPACT C.1.3.1 Community Reaction Studies of long-term community annoyance to numerous types of environmental noise show that DNL correlates well with the annoyance. Schultz (1978) showed a consistent relationship between DNL and annoyance. Shultz’s original curve fit (Figure C-2) shows that there is a remarkable consistency in results of attitudinal surveys which relate the percentages of groups of people who express various degrees of annoyance when exposed to different DNL. FigB-2 Source: Schultz 1978. Figure C-2. Community Surveys of Noise Annoyance Another study reaffirmed this relationship (Fidell et al. 1989). Figure C-3 shows an updated form of the curve fit (Finegold et al. 1994) in comparison with the original. The updated fit, which does not differ substantially from the original, is the current preferred form. In general, correlation coefficients of 0.85 to 0.95 are found between the percentages of groups of people highly annoyed and the level of average noise exposure. The correlation coefficients for the annoyance of individuals are relatively low, however, on the order of 0.5 or less. This is not surprising, considering the varying personal factors that influence the manner in which individuals react to noise. For example, individuals with autism are often very strongly affected by sudden noises (Tang et al. 2002). Persons with autism often report experiencing oversensitivity to noise and are often particularly sensitive to high-pitched or sudden onset noises (Grandin 1991). Nevertheless, findings substantiate that community annoyance to aircraft noise is represented quite reliably using DNL. As noted earlier for SEL, DNL does not represent the sound level heard at any particular time, but rather represents the total sound exposure. DNL accounts for the sound level of individual noise events, the duration of those events, and the number of events. Its use is endorsed by the scientific community (ANSI 1980, 1988, 2005; FICON 1992; FICUN 1980; USEPA 1974). While DNL is the best metric for quantitatively assessing cumulative noise impact, it does not lend itself to intuitive interpretation by non-experts. Accordingly, it is common for environmental noise analyses to include other metrics for illustrative purposes. A general indication of the noise environment can be presented by noting the maximum sound levels that can occur and the number of times per day noise events will be loud enough to be heard. Use of other metrics as supplements to DNL has been endorsed by Federal agencies (FICON 1992).  Figure C-3. Response of Communities to Noise; Comparison of Original (Schultz 1978) and Current (Finegold et al. 1994) Curve Fits The Schultz curve is generally applied to annual average DNL. Ldnmr was previously described and presented as being appropriate for quantifying noise in military airspace. The Schultz curve is used with Ldnmr as the noise metric. Ldnmr is always equal to or greater than DNL, so impact is generally higher than would have been predicted if the onset rate and busiest-month adjustments were not accounted for. There are several points of interest in the noise-annoyance relation. The first is DNL of 65 dB. This is a level most commonly used for noise planning purposes and represents a compromise between community impact and the need for activities like aviation, which do cause noise. Areas exposed to DNL above 65 dB are generally not considered suitable for residential use. The second is DNL of 55 dB, which was identified by USEPA as a level “...requisite to protect the public health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety” (USEPA 1974), which is essentially a level below which adverse impact is not expected. The third is DNL of 75 dB. This is the lowest level at which adverse health effects could be credible (USEPA 1974). The very high annoyance levels correlated with DNL of 75 dB make such areas unsuitable for residential land use. Table C-2 shows the relation between annoyance and DNL. Table C-2. Relation Between Annoyance and DNL dB DNL Percent (%) Highly Annoyed 45 0.83 50 1.66 55 3.31 60 6.48 65 12.29 70 22.10 C.1.3.2 Land Use Compatibility As noted above, the inherent variability between individuals makes it impossible to predict accurately how any individual will react to a given noise event. Nevertheless, when a community is considered as a whole, its overall reaction to noise can be represented with a high degree of confidence. As described above, the best noise exposure metric for this correlation is the DNL or Ldnmr for military overflights. In June 1980, an ad hoc Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise published guidelines (FICUN 1980) relating DNL to compatible land uses. This committee was composed of representatives from DoD, the U.S. Department of Transportation, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, USEPA, and the Veterans Administration. Since the issuance of these guidelines, Federal agencies have generally adopted these guidelines for their noise analyses. Following the lead of the committee, DoD and FAA adopted the concept of land use compatibility as the accepted measure of aircraft noise effect. The FAA included the committee’s guidelines in the Federal Aviation Regulations (DOT 1984). These guidelines are reprinted in Table C-3, along with the explanatory notes included in the regulation. Although these guidelines are not mandatory (note the footnote “*” in the table), they provide the best means for determining noise impact in airport communities. In general, residential land uses normally are not compatible with outdoor DNL values above 65 dB, and the extent of land areas and populations exposed to DNL of 65 dB and higher provides the best means for assessing the noise impacts of alternative aircraft actions. In some cases a change in noise level, rather than an absolute threshold, may be a more appropriate measure of impact. Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65– 69 dB 70– 74 dB 75– 79 dB 80+ dB 10 Residential 11 Household units        11.11 Single units; detached N N Ya Ak Bk N N 11.12 Single units; semidetached N N N Ak Bk N N 11.13 Singe units; attached row N N N Ak Bk N N 11.21 Two units; side-by-side N N N Ak Bk N N 11.22 Two units; one above the other N N N Ak Bk N N 11.31 Apartments; walk up N N N Ak Bk N N 11.32 Apartments; elevator N N N Ak Bk N N 12 Group quarters N N N Ak Bk N N 13 Residential hotels N N N Ak Bk N N 14 Mobile home parks or courts N N N N N N N 15 Transient lodgings N N N Ak Bk Ck N 16 Other residential N N Na Ak Bk N N 20 Manufacturing 21 Food and kindred products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 22 Textile mill products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 23 Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials; manufacturing N N Nb Y Yl Ym Yn Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential (Continued) Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65-69 dB 70-74 dB 75-79 dB 80+ dB 24 Lumber and wood products (except furniture); manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 25 Furniture and fixtures; manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 26 Paper and allied products; manufacturing N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 27 Printing, publishing, and allied industries N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 28 Chemicals and allied products; manufacturing N N Nb Y Yl Ym Yn 29 Petroleum refining and related industries N N N Y Yl Ym Yn 30 Manufacturing 31 Rubber and misc. plastic products; manufacturing N Nb Nb Y Yl Ym Yn 32 Stone, clay and glass products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 33 Primary metal industries N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 34 Fabricated metal products; manufacturing N Nb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 35 Professional, scientific, and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks; manufacturing N N Nb Y A B N 39 Miscellaneous manufacturing N Yb Yb Y Yl Ym Yn 40 Transportation, Communications, and Utilities 41 Railroad, rapid rail transit, and street railroad transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 42 Motor vehicle transportation Nc Y Y Y Yl Ym Yn 43 Aircraft transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 44 Marine craft transportation Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 45 Highway and street right-of-way Nc Y Y Y Yl Ym Yn 46 Automobile parking Nc Yd Y Y Yl Ym Yn 47 Communications Nc Yd Y Y Ao Bo N 48 Utilities Nc Yd Y Y Y Yl Ym 49 Other transportation communications and utilities Nc Yd Y Y Ao Bo N 50 Trade 51 Wholesale trade N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 52 Retail trade-building materials, hardware and farm equipment N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 53 Retail trade-general merchandise Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 54 Retail trade-food Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 55 Retail trade-automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 56 Retail trade-apparel and accessories Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 57 Retail trade-furniture, home furnishings and equipment Nb Nb Yb Y A B N 58 Retail trade-eating and drinking establishments N N Nb Y A B N 59 Other retail trade N Nb Yb Y A B N 60 Services 61 Finance, insurance, and real estate services N N Yf Y A B N 62 Personal services N N Yf Y A B N  Table C-3. Land Use Compatibility, Noise Exposure, and Accident Potential (Continued) Land Use Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones SLUCM No. Name Clear Zone APZ I APZ II 65-69 dB 70-74 dB 75-79 dB 80+ dB 62.4 Cemeteries N Yg Yg Y Yl Ym Yn,b,a 63 Business services N Yh Yh Y A B N 64 Repair services N Yb Y Y Yl Ym Yn 65 Professional services N N Yf Y A B N 65.1 Hospitals, nursing homes N N N A* B* N N 65.1 Other medical facilities N N N Y A B N 66 Contract construction services N Yf Y Y A B N 67 Governmental services Nf N Yf Y* A* B* N 68 Educational services N N N A* B* N N 69 Miscellaneous services N Nb Yb Y A B N 70 Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational 71 Cultural activities (including churches) N N Nb A* B* N N 71.2 Nature exhibits N Yb Y Y* N N N 72 Public assembly N N N Y N N N 72.1 Auditoriums, concert halls N N N A B N N 72.11 Outdoor music shell, amphitheatres N N N N N N N 72.2 Outdoor sports arenas, spectator sports N N N Yq Yq N N 73 Amusements N N Yh Y Y N N 74 Recreational activities (including golf courses, riding stables, water recreation) N Yh,i,j Y Y* A* B* N 75 Resorts and group camps N N N Y* Y* N N 76 Parks N Yh Yh Y* Y* N N 79 Other cultural, entertainment, and recreation Ni Yi Yi Y* Y* N N 80 Resources Production and Extraction 81 Agriculture (except livestock) Yp Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 81.5 to 81.7 Livestock farming and animal breeding N Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 82 Agricultural-related activities N Ye Y Yr Ys N N 83 Forestry activities and related services Ne Y Y Yr Ys Yt Yt,u 84 Fishing activities and related services Ne Ye Y Y Y Y Y 85 Mining activities and related services N Ye Y Y Y Y Y 89 Other resources production and extraction N Ye Y Y Y Y Y a Suggested maximum density of 1–2 dwelling units per acre possibly increased under a Planned Unit Development where maximum lot coverage is less than 20 percent. b Within each land use category, uses exist where further definition may be needed due to the variation of densities in people and structures. Shopping malls and shopping centers are considered incompatible in any accident potential zone (APZ). c The placing of structures, buildings, or aboveground utility lines in the clear zone is subject to severe restrictions. In a majority of the clear zones, these items are prohibited. See Air Force Instruction (AFI) 32-7063 and Air Force Manual (AFMAN) 32-1123 for specific guidance. d No passenger terminals and no major aboveground transmission lines in APZ I. e Factors to be considered: labor intensity, structural coverage, explosive characteristics, and air pollution. f Low-intensity office uses only. Meeting places, auditoriums, etc., are not recommended. g Excludes chapels. h Facilities must be low intensity. i Clubhouse not recommended. j Areas for gatherings of people are not recommended.  k Footnote k as applied to noise level reduction (NLR) designation A: Although local conditions may require residential use, it is discouraged in DNL 65–69 dB and strongly discouraged in DNL 70–74 dB. An evaluation should be conducted prior to approvals, indicating that a demonstrated community need for residential use would not be met if development were prohibited in these zones, and that there are no viable alternative locations.  Footnote k as applied to NLR designation B: Where the community determines the residential uses must be allowed, measures to achieve outdoor to indoor NLR for DNL 65–69 dB and DNL 70–74 dB should be incorporated into building codes and considered in individual approvals.  Footnote k as applied to NLR designation C: NLR criteria will not eliminate outdoor noise problems. However, building location and site planning and design and use of berms and barriers can help mitigate outdoor exposure, particularly from near ground-level sources. Measures that reduce outdoor noise should be used whenever practical in preference to measures that only protect interior spaces. l Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 65–69 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. m Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 70–74 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. n Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in the DNL 75–79 dB range must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas, or where the normal noise level is low. o If noise-sensitive, use indicated NLR; if not, the use is compatible. p No buildings. q Land use is compatible provided special sound reinforcement systems are installed. r Residential buildings require the same NLR required for facilities in the DNL 65–69 dB range. s Residential buildings require the same NLR required for facilities in the DNL 70–74 dB range. t Residential buildings are not permitted. u Land use is not recommended. If the community decides the use is necessary, hearing protection devices should be worn by personnel. Key: SLUCM = Standard Land Use Coding Manual, U.S. Department of Transportation; Y = Yes; land use and related structures are compatible without restriction; N = No; land use and related structures are not compatible and should be prohibited; A, B, or C = Land use and related structures generally compatible; measures to achieve noise level reduction of A (25 dB), B (30 dB), or C (35 dB) should be incorporated into the design and construction of structures; A*, B*, or C* = Land use generally compatible with noise level reduction. However, measures to achieve an overall noise level reduction do not necessarily solve noise difficulties and additional evaluation is warranted. See appropriate footnotes; * = The designation of these uses as “compatible” in this zone reflects individual Federal agency and program consideration of general cost and feasibility factors, as well as past community experiences and program objectives. Localities, when evaluating the application of these guidelines to specific situations, may have different concerns or goals to consider. C.2 NOISE EFFECTS The discussion in the previous section presented the global effect of noise on communities. The following sections describe particular noise effects. These effects include non-auditory health effects, annoyance, speech interference, sleep disturbance, noise-induced hearing impairment, noise effects on animals and wildlife, noise effects on property values, and noise effects on structures, terrain, and cultural resources. C.2.1 ANNOYANCE The primary effect of aircraft noise on exposed communities is one of annoyance. Noise annoyance is defined by the USEPA as any negative subjective reaction on the part of an individual or group (USEPA 1974). As noted in the discussion of DNL above, community annoyance is best measured by that metric. Because the USEPA Levels Document (USEPA 1974) identified DNL of 55 dB as “. . . requisite to protect public health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety,” it is commonly assumed that 55 dB should be adopted as a criterion for community noise analysis. From a noise exposure perspective, that would be an ideal selection. However, financial resources are generally not available to achieve that goal. Most agencies have identified DNL of 65 dB as a criterion that protects those most impacted by noise, and that can often be achieved on a practical basis (FICON 1992). This corresponds to about 12 percent of the exposed population being highly annoyed. Although DNL of 65 dB is widely used as a benchmark for significant noise impact, and is often an acceptable compromise, it is not a statutory limit, and it is appropriate to consider other thresholds in particular cases. Local ordinances and regulations have been adopted by many municipal governments to prevent civilian development near military installations that would be incompatible with noise generated by military operations. The decision to adopt such measures, and the specific content of the ordinances and regulations, is up to the municipal government. In many cases, the 65 dB DNL noise contour line is adopted as the threshold level above which land use restrictions are invoked. C.2.2 SPEECH INTERFERENCE Speech interference associated with aircraft noise is a primary cause of annoyance to individuals on the ground. The disruption of routine activities such as radio or television listening, telephone use, or family conversation gives rise to frustration and irritation. The quality of speech communication is also important in classrooms, offices, and industrial settings and can cause fatigue and vocal strain in those who attempt to communicate over the noise. Speech is an acoustic signal characterized by rapid fluctuations in sound level and frequency pattern. It is essential for optimum speech intelligibility to recognize these continually shifting sound patterns. Not only does noise diminish the ability to perceive the auditory signal, but it also reduces a listener’s ability to follow the pattern of signal fluctuation. In general, interference with speech communication occurs when intrusive noise exceeds about 60 dB (FICON 1992). Indoor speech interference can be expressed as a percentage of sentence intelligibility among two people speaking in relaxed conversation approximately 3 feet apart in a typical living room or bedroom (USEPA 1974). The percentage of sentence intelligibility is a non-linear function of the (steady) indoor background A-weighted sound level. Such a curve-fit yields 100 percent sentence intelligibility for background levels below 57 dB and yields less than 10 percent intelligibility for background levels above 73 dB. The function is especially sensitive to changes in sound level between 65 dB and 75 dB. As an example of the sensitivity, a 1 dB increase in background sound level from 70 dB to 71 dB yields a 14 percent decrease in sentence intelligibility. The sensitivity of speech interference to noise at 65 dB and above is consistent with the criterion of DNL 65 dB generally taken from the Schultz curve. This is consistent with the observation that speech interference is the primary cause of annoyance. Classroom Criteria. The effect of aircraft noise on children is a controversial area. Certain studies indicate that, in certain situations, children are potentially more sensitive to noise compared to adults. For example, adults average roughly 10 percent better than young children on speech intelligibility tests in high-noise environments (ASA 2000). Some studies indicate that noise negatively impacts classroom learning (e.g., Shield and Dockrell 2008). In response to noise-specific and other environmental studies, Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks (1997), requires Federal agencies to ensure that their policies, programs, and activities address environmental health and safety risks and to identify any disproportionate risks to children. While the issue of noise impacts on children’s learning is not fully settled, in May 2009, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) published a classroom acoustics standard entitled “Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools” (ANSI 2002). At present, complying with the standard is voluntary in most locations. Essentially, the criteria states that when the noisiest hour is dominated by noise from such sources as aircraft, the limits for most classrooms are an hourly average A-weighted sound level of 40 dB, and the A-weighted sound level must not exceed 40 dB for more than 10 percent of the hour. For schools located near airfields, indoor noise levels would have to be lowered by 35–45 dBA relative to outdoor levels (ANSI 2009). C.2.3 SLEEP DISTURBANCE Sleep disturbance is another source of annoyance associated with aircraft noise. This is especially true because of the intermittent nature and content of aircraft noise, which is more disturbing than continuous noise of equal energy and neutral meaning. Sleep disturbance may be measured in either of two ways. “Arousal” represents actual awakening from sleep, while a change in “sleep stage” represents a shift from one of four sleep stages to another stage of lighter sleep without actual awakening. In general, arousal requires a somewhat higher noise level than does a change in sleep stage. An analysis sponsored by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) summarized 21 published studies concerning the effects of noise on sleep (Pearsons et al. 1989). The analysis concluded that a lack of reliable in-home studies, combined with large differences among the results from the various laboratory studies, did not permit development of an acceptably accurate assessment procedure. The noise events used in the laboratory studies and in contrived in-home studies were presented at much higher rates of occurrence than would normally be experienced. None of the laboratory studies were of sufficiently long duration to determine any effects of habituation, such as that which would occur under normal community conditions. An extensive study of sleep interference in people’s own homes (Ollerhead et al. 1992) showed very little disturbance from aircraft noise. There is some controversy associated with these studies, so a conservative approach should be taken in judging sleep interference. Based on older data, the USEPA identified an indoor DNL of 45 dB as necessary to protect against sleep interference (USEPA 1974). Assuming an outdoor-toindoor noise level reduction of 20 dB for typical dwelling units, this corresponds to an outdoor DNL of 65 dB as minimizing sleep interference. A 1984 publication reviewed the probability of arousal or behavioral awakening in terms of SEL (Kryter 1984). Figure C-4, extracted from Figure 10.37 of Kryter (1984), indicates that an indoor SEL of 65 dB or lower should awaken less than 5 percent of those exposed. These results do not include any habituation over time by sleeping subjects. Nevertheless, this provides a reasonable guideline for assessing sleep interference and corresponds to similar guidance for speech interference, as noted above. It was noted in the early sleep disturbance research that the controlled laboratory studies did not account for many factors that are important to sleep behavior, such as habituation to the environment and previous exposure to noise and awakenings from sources other than aircraft noise. In the early 1990s, field studies were conducted to validate the earlier laboratory work. The most significant finding from these studies was that an estimated 80 to 90 percent of sleep disturbances were not related to individual outdoor noise events, but were instead the result of indoor noise sources and other non-noise-related factors. The results showed that there was less of an effect of noise on sleep in real-life conditions than had been previously reported from laboratory studies. The interim Federal Interagency Committee on Noise dose-response curve that was recommended for use in 1992 was based on the most pertinent sleep disturbance research that was conducted through the 1970s, primarily in laboratory settings. After that time, considerable field research was conducted to evaluate the sleep effects in people’s normal, home environment. Laboratory sleep studies tend to show higher values of sleep disturbance than field studies because people who sleep in their own homes are habituated to their environment and, therefore, do not wake up as easily (FICAN 1997). F35A-172 chart Figure C-4. Plot of Sleep Awakening Data Versus Indoor SEL Based on the new information, the Federal Interagency Committee on Aircraft Noise (FICAN) updated its recommended dose-response curve in 1997, depicted as the lower curve on Figure C-5. This figure is based on the results of three field studies (Ollerhead et al. 1992; Fidell et al. 1994, 1995a, 1995b), along with the datasets from six previous field studies. The new relationship represents the higher end, or upper envelope, of the latest field data. It should be interpreted as predicting the “maximum percent of the exposed population expected to be behaviorally awakened” or the “maximum percent awakened” for a given residential population. According to this relationship, a maximum of 3 percent of people would be awakened at an indoor SEL of 58 dB, compared to 10 percent using the 1992 curve. An indoor SEL of 58 dB is equivalent to outdoor SELs of 73 and 83 dB, respectively, assuming 15 and 25 dB noise level reduction from outdoor to indoor with windows open and closed, respectively. The FICAN 1997 curve is represented by the following equation: Percent Awakenings = 0.0087 . [SEL – 30]1.79  http://www.fican.org/images/sleprela.gif Figure C-5. FICAN’s 1997 Recommended Sleep Disturbance Dose-Response Relationship Note the relatively low percentage of awakenings to fairly high noise levels. People think they are awakened by a noise event, but usually the reason for awakening is otherwise. For example, a 1992 United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority study found the average person was awakened about 18 times per night for reasons other than exposure to an aircraft noise – some of these awakenings are due to the biological rhythms of sleep and some to other reasons that were not correlated with specific aircraft events. In July 2008, ANSI and the Acoustical Society of America (ASA) published a method to estimate the percent of the exposed population that might be awakened by multiple aircraft noise events based on statistical assumptions about the probability of awakening (or not awakening) (ANSI 2008). This method relies on probability theory rather than direct field research/experimental data to account for multiple events. Figure C-6 depicts the awakenings data that form the basis and equations of ANSI (2008). The curve labeled ‘Eq. (B1)’ is the relationship between noise and awakening endorsed by FICAN in 1997. The ANSI-recommended curve labeled ‘Eq. (1)’ quantifies the probability of awakening for a population of sleepers who are exposed to an outdoor noise event as a function of the associated indoor SEL in the bedroom. This curve was derived from studies of behavioral awakenings associated with noise events in “steady state” situations where the population has been exposed to the noise long enough to be habituated. The data points on Figure C-6 come from these studies. Unlike the FICAN curve, the ANSI 2008 curve represents the average of the field research data points. In December 2008, FICAN recommended the use of this new estimation procedure for future analyses of behavioral awakenings from aircraft noise. In that statement, FICAN also recognized that additional sleep disturbance research is underway by various research organizations, and results of that work may result in additional changes to FICAN’s position. Until that time, FICAN recommends the use of ANSI (2008).  Figure C-6. Relation Between Indoor SEL and Percentage of Persons Awakened as Stated in ANSI/ASA S12.9-2008/Part 6 (ANSI 2008) C.2.4 NOISE-INDUCED HEARING IMPAIRMENT Residents in surrounding communities express concerns regarding the effects of aircraft noise on hearing. This section provides a brief overview of hearing loss caused by noise exposure. The goal is to provide a sense of perspective as to how aircraft noise (as experienced on the ground) compares to other activities that are often linked with hearing loss. Hearing loss is generally interpreted as a decrease in the ear’s sensitivity or acuity to perceive sound, i.e., a shift in the hearing threshold to a higher level. This change can either be a Temporary Threshold Shift (TTS) or a Permanent Threshold Shift (PTS) (Berger et al. 1995). TTS can result from exposure to loud noise over a given amount of time, yet the hearing loss is not necessarily permanent. An example of TTS might be a person attending a loud music concert. After the concert is over, the person may experience a threshold shift that may last several hours, depending upon the level and duration of exposure. While experiencing TTS, the person becomes less sensitive to low-level sounds, particularly at certain frequencies in the speech range (typically near 4,000 Hz). Normal hearing ability eventually returns, as long as the person has enough time to recover within a relatively quiet environment. PTS usually results from repeated exposure to high noise levels, where the ears are not given adequate time to recover from the strain and fatigue of exposure. A common example of PTS is the result of working in a loud environment such as a factory. It is important to note that a temporary shift (TTS) can eventually become permanent (PTS) over time with continuous exposure to high noise levels. Thus, even if the ear is given time to recover from TTS, repeated occurrence of TTS may eventually lead to permanent hearing loss. The point at which a TTS results in a PTS is difficult to identify and varies with a person’s sensitivity. Considerable data on hearing loss have been collected and analyzed by the scientific/medical community. It has been well established that continuous exposure to high noise levels will damage human hearing (USEPA 1978). The Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulation of 1971 standardizes the limits on workplace noise exposure for protection from hearing loss as an average level of 90 dB over an 8-hour work period or 85 dB over a 16-hour period (the average level is based on a 5 dB decrease per doubling of exposure time) (DoL 1971). Even the most protective criterion (no measurable hearing loss for the most sensitive portion of the population at the ear’s most sensitive frequency, 4,000 Hz, after a 40-year exposure) is an average sound level of 70 dB over a 24-hour period. The USEPA established 75 dB for an 8-hour exposure and 70 dB for a 24-hour exposure as the average noise level standard requisite to protect 96 percent of the population from greater than a 5 dB PTS (USEPA 1978). The National Academy of Sciences Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics, and Biomechanics identified 75 dB as the minimum level at which hearing loss may occur (CHABA 1977). Finally, the World Health Organization has concluded that environmental and leisure-time noise below an Leq24 value of 70 dB “will not cause hearing loss in the large majority of the population, even after a lifetime of exposure” (WHO 2000). C.2.4.1 Hearing Loss and Aircraft Noise The 1982 USEPA guidelines report specifically addresses the criteria and procedures for assessing the noise-induced hearing loss in terms of the Noise-Induced Permanent Threshold Shift (NIPTS), a quantity that defines the permanent change in hearing level, or threshold, caused by exposure to noise (USEPA 1982). This effect is also described as Potential Hearing Loss. Numerically, the NIPTS is the change in threshold averaged over the frequencies 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 kHz that can be expected from daily exposure to noise over a normal working lifetime of 40 years, with the exposure beginning at an age of 20 years. A grand average of the NIPTS over time (40 years) and hearing sensitivity (10 to 90 percentiles of the exposed population) is termed the Average NIPTS. The Average NIPTS that can be expected for noise exposure as measured by the DNL metric is given in Table C-4. Table C-4. Average NIPTS and 10th Percentile NIPTS as a Function of DNL dB DNL Average NIPTS dBa 10th Percentile NIPTS dBa 75–76 1.0 4.0 76–77 1.0 4.5 77–78 1.6 5.0 78–79 2.0 5.5 79–80 2.5 6.0 80–81 3.0 7.0 81–82 3.5 8.0 82–83 4.0 9.0 83–84 4.5 10.0 84–85 5.5 11.0 85–86 6.0 12.0 86–87 7.0 13.5 87–88 7.5 15.0 88–89 8.5 16.5 89–90 9.5 18.0 a Rounded to the nearest 0.5 dB. For example, for a noise exposure of 80 dB DNL, the expected lifetime average value of NIPTS is 2.5 dB, or 6.0 dB for the 10th percentile. Characterizing the noise exposure in terms of DNL will usually overestimate the assessment of hearing loss risk as DNL includes a 10 dB weighting factor for aircraft operations occurring between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. If, however, flight operations between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. account for 5 percent or less of the total 24-hour operations, the overestimation is on the order of 1.5 dB. From a civilian airport perspective, the scientific community has concluded that there is little likelihood that the resulting noise exposure from aircraft noise could result in either a temporary or permanent hearing loss. Studies on community hearing loss from exposure to aircraft flyovers near airports showed that there is no danger, under normal circumstances, of hearing loss due to aircraft noise (Newman and Beattie 1985). The USEPA criterion (Leq24 = 70 dBA) can be exceeded in some areas located near airports, but that is only the case outdoors. Inside a building, where people are more likely to spend most of their time, the average noise level will be much less than 70 dBA (Eldred and von Gierke 1993). Eldred and von Gierke also report that “several studies in the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom have confirmed the predictions that the possibility for permanent hearing loss in communities, even under the most intense commercial take-off and landing patterns, is remote.” With regard to military airbases, as individual aircraft noise levels are increasing with the introduction of new aircraft, a 2009 DoD policy directive requires that hearing loss risk be estimated for the at risk population, defined as the population exposed to DNL greater than or equal to 80 dB (DoD 2009). Specifically, DoD components are directed to “use the 80 Day-Night A-Weighted (DNL) noise contour to identify populations at the most risk of potential hearing loss.” This does not preclude populations outside the 80 dB DNL contour (i.e., at lower exposure levels) from being at some degree of risk of hearing loss. However, the analysis should be restricted to populations within this contour area, including residents of on-base housing. The exposure of workers inside the base boundary area should be considered occupational and evaluated using the appropriate DoD component regulations for occupational noise exposure. With regard to military airspace activity, studies have shown conflicting results. A 1995 laboratory study measured changes in human hearing from noise representative of low-flying aircraft on Military Training Routes (Nixon et al. 1993). The potential effects of aircraft flying along Military Training Routes is of particular concern because maximum overflight noise levels can exceed 115 dB, with rapid increases in noise levels exceeding 30 dB per second. In this study, participants were first subjected to four overflight noise exposures at A-weighted levels of 115 dB to 130 dB. Fifty percent of the subjects showed no change in hearing levels, 25 percent had a temporary 5 dB increase in sensitivity (the people could hear a 5 dB wider range of sound than before exposure), and 25 percent had a temporary 5 dB decrease in sensitivity (the people could hear a 5 dB narrower range of sound than before exposure). In the next phase, participants were subjected to a single overflight at a maximum level of 130 dB for eight successive exposures, separated by 90 seconds or until a temporary shift in hearing was observed. The TTSs showed an increase in sensitivity of up to 10 dB. In another study of 115 test subjects between 18 and 50 years old in 1999, TTSs were measured after laboratory exposure to military low-altitude flight noise (Ising et al. 1999). According to the authors, the results indicate that repeated exposure to military low-altitude flight noise with a maximum sound level (Lmax) greater than 114 dB, especially if the noise level increases rapidly, may have the potential to cause noise-induced hearing loss in humans. Aviation and typical community noise levels near airports are not comparable to the occupational or recreational noise exposures associated with hearing loss. Studies of aircraft noise levels associated with civilian airport activity have not definitively correlated permanent hearing impairment with aircraft activity. It is unlikely that airport neighbors will remain outside their homes 24 hours per day, so there is little likelihood of hearing loss below an average sound level of 75 dB DNL. Near military airbases, average noise levels above 75 dB may occur, and while new DoD policy dictates that NIPTS be evaluated, no research results to date have definitively related permanent hearing impairment to aviation noise. C.2.4.2 Non-Auditory Health Effects Studies have been conducted to determine whether correlations exist between noise exposure and cardiovascular problems, birth weight, and mortality rates. The non-auditory effect of noise on humans is not as easily substantiated as the effect on hearing. Prolonged stress is known to be a contributor to a number of health disorders. Kryter and Poza (1980) state, “It is more likely that noise-related general ill-health effects are due to the psychological annoyance from the noise interfering with normal everyday behavior, than it is from the noise eliciting, because of its intensity, reflexive response in the autonomic or other physiological systems of the body.” Psychological stresses may cause a physiological stress reaction that could result in impaired health. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and USEPA commissioned the Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics (CHABA) in 1981 to study whether established noise standards are adequate to protect against health disorders other than hearing defects. CHABA’s conclusion was that: Evidence from available research reports is suggestive, but it does not provide definitive answers to the question of health effects, other than to the auditory system, of long-term exposure to noise. It seems prudent, therefore, in the absence of adequate knowledge as to whether or not noise can produce effects upon health other than damage to auditory system, either directly or mediated through stress, that insofar as feasible, an attempt should be made to obtain more critical evidence. Since the CHABA report, there have been further studies that suggest that noise exposure may cause hypertension and other stress-related effects in adults. Near an airport in Stockholm, Sweden, the prevalence of hypertension was reportedly greater among nearby residents who were exposed to energy averaged noise levels exceeding 55 dB and maximum noise levels exceeding 72 dB, particularly older subjects and those not reporting impaired hearing ability (Rosenlund et al. 2001). A study of elderly volunteers who were exposed to simulated military low-altitude flight noise reported that blood pressure was raised by Lmax of 112 dB and high speed level increase (Michalak et al. 1990). Yet another study of subjects exposed to varying levels of military aircraft or road noise found no significant relationship between noise level and blood pressure (Pulles et al. 1990). Most studies of non-auditory health effects of long-term noise exposure have found that noise exposure levels established for hearing protection will also protect against any potential non-auditory health effects, at least in workplace conditions. One of the best scientific summaries of these findings is contained in the lead paper at the National Institutes of Health Conference on Noise and Hearing Loss, held on 22 to 24 January 1990 in Washington, D.C.: The nonauditory effects of chronic noise exposure, when noise is suspected to act as one of the risk factors in the development of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and other nervous disorders, have never been proven to occur as chronic manifestations at levels below these criteria (an average of 75 dBA for complete protection against hearing loss for an 8-hour day). At the 1988 International Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem, most studies attempting to clarify such health effects did not find them at levels below the criteria protective of noise-induced hearing loss, and even above these criteria, results regarding such health effects were ambiguous. Consequently, one comes to the conclusion that establishing and enforcing exposure levels protecting against noise-induced hearing loss would not only solve the noise-induced hearing loss problem, but also any potential non-auditory health effects in the work place (von Gierke 1990). Although these findings were specifically directed at noise effects in the workplace, they are equally applicable to aircraft noise effects in the community environment. Research studies regarding the non-auditory health effects of aircraft noise are ambiguous, at best, and often contradictory. Yet, even those studies that purport to find such health effects use time-average noise levels of 75 dB and higher for their research. For example, two University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) researchers apparently found a relationship between aircraft noise levels under the approach path to Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) and increased mortality rates among the exposed residents by using an average noise exposure level greater than 75 dB for the “noise-exposed” population (Meacham and Shaw 1979). Nevertheless, three other UCLA professors analyzed those same data and found no relationship between noise exposure and mortality rates (Frerichs et al. 1980). As a second example, two other UCLA researchers used this same population near LAX to show a higher rate of birth defects for 1970 to 1972 when compared with a control group residing away from the airport (Jones and Tauscher 1978). Based on this report, a separate group at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention performed a more thorough study of populations near Atlanta’s Hartsfield International Airport for 1970 to 1972 and found no relationship in their study of 17 identified categories of birth defects to aircraft noise levels above 65 dB (Edmonds et al. 1979). In summary, there is no scientific basis for a claim that potential health effects exist for aircraft time-averaged sound levels below 75 dB. The potential for noise to affect physiological health, such as the cardiovascular system, has been speculated; however, no unequivocal evidence exists to support such claims (Harris 1997). Conclusions drawn from a review of health effect studies involving military low-altitude flight noise with its unusually high maximum levels and rapid rise in sound level have shown no increase in cardiovascular disease (Schwarze and Thompson 1993). Additional claims that are unsupported include flyover noise producing increased mortality rates and increases in cardiovascular death, aggravation of post-traumatic stress syndrome, increased stress, increases in admissions to mental hospitals, and adverse effects on pregnant women and fetuses (Harris 1997). C.2.4.3 Performance Effects The effect of noise on the performance of activities or tasks has been the subject of many studies. Some of these studies have established links between continuous high noise levels and performance loss. Noise-induced performance losses are most frequently reported in studies employing noise levels in excess of 85 dB. Little change has been found in low-noise cases. It has been cited that moderate noise levels appear to act as a stressor for more sensitive individuals performing a difficult psychomotor task. While the results of research on the general effect of periodic aircraft noise on performance have yet to yield definitive criteria, several general trends have been noted including: . A periodic intermittent noise is more likely to disrupt performance than a steady state continuous noise of the same level. Flyover noise, due to its intermittent nature, might be more likely to disrupt performance than a steady state noise of equal level. . Noise is more inclined to affect the quality than the quantity of work. . Noise is more likely to impair the performance of tasks that place extreme demands on the worker. C.2.4.4 Noise Effects on Children In response to noise-specific and other environmental studies, Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks (1997), requires Federal agencies to ensure that policies, programs, and activities address environmental health and safety risks to identify any disproportionate risks to children. A review of the scientific literature indicates that there has not been a tremendous amount of research in the area of aircraft noise effects on children. The research reviewed does suggest that environments with sustained high background noise can have variable effects, including noise effects on learning and cognitive abilities, and reports of various noise-related physiological changes. C.2.4.4.1 Effects on Learning and Cognitive Abilities In “Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools,” (ANSI 2002), ANSI refers to studies that suggest that loud and frequent background noise can affect the learning patterns of young children (ANSI 2002). ANSI provides discussion on the relationships between noise and learning, and stipulates design requirements and acoustical performance criteria for outdoor-to-indoor noise isolation. School design is directed to be cognizant of, and responsive to, surrounding land uses and the shielding of outdoor noise from the indoor environment. The ANSI acoustical performance criteria for schools include the requirement that the 1-hour average background noise level shall not exceed 35 dBA in core learning spaces smaller than 20,000 cubic feet and 40 dBA in core learning spaces with enclosed volumes exceeding 20,000 cubic feet. This would require schools be constructed such that, in quiet neighborhoods, indoor noise levels are lowered by 15 to 20 dBA relative to outdoor levels. In schools near airports, indoor noise levels would have to be lowered by 35 to 45 dBA relative to outdoor levels (ANSI 2002). The studies referenced by ANSI to support the new standard are not specific to jet aircraft noise and the potential effects on children. However, there are references to studies that have shown that children in noisier classrooms scored lower on a variety of tests. Excessive background noise or reverberation within schools causes interferences of communication and can therefore create an acoustical barrier to learning (ANSI 2002). Studies have been performed that contribute to the body of evidence emphasizing the importance of communication by way of the spoken language to the development of cognitive skills. The ability to read, write, comprehend, and maintain attentiveness, are, in part, based upon whether teacher communication is consistently intelligible (ANSI 2002). Numerous studies have shown varying degrees of effects of noise on the reading comprehension, attentiveness, puzzle-solving, and memory/recall ability of children. It is generally accepted that young children are more susceptible than adults to the effects of background noise. Because of the developmental status of young children (linguistic, cognitive, and proficiency), barriers to hearing can cause interferences or disruptions in developmental evolution. Research on the impacts of aircraft noise, and noise in general, on the cognitive abilities of school-aged children has received more attention in the last 20 years. Several studies suggest that aircraft noise can affect the academic performance of school children. Although many factors could contribute to learning deficits in school-aged children (e.g., socioeconomic level, home environment, diet, sleep patterns), evidence exists that suggests that chronic exposure to high aircraft noise levels can impair learning. Specifically, elementary school children attending schools near New York City’s two airports demonstrated lower reading scores than children living farther away from the flight paths (Green et al. 1982). Researchers have found that tasks involving central processing and language comprehension (such as reading, attention, problem solving, and memory) appear to be the most affected by noise (Evans and Lepore 1993; Evans et al. 1998). It has been demonstrated that chronic exposure of first- and second-grade children to aircraft noise can result in reading deficits and impaired speech perception (i.e., the ability to hear common, low-frequency [vowel] sounds but not high frequencies [consonants] in speech) (Evans and Maxwell 1997). The Evans and Maxwell (1997) study found that chronic exposure to aircraft noise resulted in reading deficits and impaired speech perception for first- and second-grade children. Other studies found that children residing near LAX had more difficulty solving cognitive problems and did not perform as well as children from quieter schools in puzzle-solving and attentiveness (Bronzaft 1997; Cohen et al. 1980). Children attending elementary schools in high aircraft noise areas near London’s Heathrow Airport demonstrated poorer reading comprehension and selective cognitive impairments (Haines et al. 2001a, 2001b). Similar studies involving the testing of attention, memory, and reading comprehension of school children located near airports showed that their tests exhibited reduced performance results compared to those of similar groups of children who were located in quieter environments (Evans et al. 1998; Haines et al. 1998). The Haines and Stansfeld study indicated that there may be some long-term effects associated with exposure, as 1-year follow-up testing still demonstrated lowered scores for children in higher noise schools (Haines et al. 2001a, 2001b). In contrast, a 2002 study found that although children living near the old Munich airport scored lower in standardized reading and long-term memory tests than a control group, their performance on the same tests were equal to that of the control group once the airport was closed (Hygge et al. 2002). Finally, although it is recognized that there are many factors that could contribute to learning deficits in school-aged children, there is increasing awareness that chronic exposure to high aircraft noise levels may impair learning. This awareness has led the World Health Organization (WHO 2000) and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization working group (NATO 2000) to conclude that daycare centers and schools should not be located near major sources of noise, such as highways, airports, and industrial sites. C.2.4.4.2 Health Effects Physiological effects in children exposed to aircraft noise and the potential for health effects have also been the focus of limited investigation. Studies in the literature include examination of blood pressure levels, hormonal secretions, and hearing loss. As a measure of stress response to aircraft noise, blood pressure readings have been used to monitor children’s health. Children who were chronically exposed to aircraft noise from a new airport near Munich, Germany, had modest (although significant) increases in blood pressure, significant increases in stress hormones, and a decline in quality of life (Evans et al. 1998). Children attending noisy schools had statistically significant average systolic and diastolic blood pressure (p<0.03). Systolic blood pressure means were 89.68 millimeters for children attending schools located in noisier environments compared to 86.77 millimeters for a control group. Similarly, diastolic blood pressure means for the noisier environment group were 47.84 millimeters and 45.16 millimeters for the control group (Cohen et al. 1980). Although the literature appears limited, studies focused on the wide range of potential effects of aircraft noise on school children have also investigated hormonal levels between groups of children exposed to aircraft noise compared to those in a control group. Specifically, two studies analyzed cortisol and urinary catecholamine levels in school children as measurements of stress response to aircraft noise (Haines et al. 2001b, 2001c). In both instances, there were no differences between the aircraft-noise-exposed children and the control groups. Other studies have reported hearing losses from exposure to aircraft noise. Noise-induced hearing loss was reportedly higher in children who attended a school located under a flight path near a Taiwan airport, as compared to children at another school far away (Chen et al. 1997). Another study reported that hearing ability was reduced significantly in individuals who lived near an airport and were frequently exposed to aircraft noise (Chen and Chen 1993). In that study, noise exposure near the airport was reportedly uniform, with DNL greater than 75 dB and maximum noise levels of about 87 dB during overflights. Conversely, several other studies that were reviewed reported no difference in hearing ability between children exposed to high levels of airport noise and children located in quieter areas (Andrus et al. 1975; Fisch 1977; Wu et al. 1995). C.2.5 NOISE EFFECTS ON DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND WILDLIFE Hearing is critical to an animal’s ability to react, compete, reproduce, hunt, forage, and survive in its environment. While the existing literature does include studies on possible effects of jet aircraft noise and sonic booms on wildlife, there appears to have been little concerted effort in developing quantitative comparisons of aircraft noise effects on normal auditory characteristics. Behavioral effects have been relatively well described, but the larger ecological context issues, and the potential for drawing conclusions regarding effects on populations, has not been well developed. The relationships between potential auditory/physiological effects and species interactions with their environments are not well understood. Manci et al. (1988) assert that the consequences that physiological effects may have on behavioral patterns are vital to understanding the long-term effects of noise on wildlife. Questions regarding the effects (if any) on predator-prey interactions, reproductive success, and intra-inter specific behavior patterns remain. The following discussion provides an overview of the existing literature on noise effects (particularly jet aircraft noise) on animal species. The literature reviewed outlines those studies that have focused on the observations of the behavioral effects that jet aircraft and sonic booms have on animals. A great deal of research was conducted in the 1960s and 1970s on the effects of aircraft noise on the public and the potential for adverse ecological impacts. These studies were largely completed in response to the increase in air travel and the introduction of supersonic jet aircraft. According to Manci et al. (1988), the foundation of information created from that focus does not necessarily correlate or provide information specific to the impacts on wildlife in areas overflown by aircraft at supersonic speed or at low altitudes. The abilities to hear sounds and noise and to communicate assist wildlife in maintaining group cohesiveness and survivorship. Social species communicate by transmitting calls of warning, introduction, and others that are subsequently related to an individual’s or group’s responsiveness. Animal species differ greatly in their responses to noise. Noise effects on domestic animals and wildlife are classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary effects are direct, physiological changes to the auditory system, and most likely include the masking of auditory signals. Masking is defined as the inability of an individual to hear important environmental signals that may arise from mates, predators, or prey. There is some potential that noise could disrupt a species’ ability to communicate or interfere with behavioral patterns (Manci et al. 1988). Although the effects are likely temporal, aircraft noise may cause masking of auditory signals within exposed faunal communities. Animals rely on hearing to avoid predators, obtain food, and communicate and attract other members of their species. Aircraft noise may mask or interfere with these functions. Other primary effects, such as ear drum rupture or temporary (TTS) and permanent (PTS) hearing threshold shifts, are not as likely given the subsonic noise levels produced by aircraft overflights. Secondary effects may include non-auditory effects such as stress and hypertension; behavioral modifications; interference with mating or reproduction; and impaired ability to obtain adequate food, cover, or water. Tertiary effects are the direct result of primary and secondary effects. These include population decline and habitat loss. Most of the effects of noise are mild enough to be undetectable as variables of change in population size or population growth against the background of normal variation (Bowles 1995). Other environmental variables (e.g., predators, weather, changing prey base, ground-based disturbance) also influence secondary and tertiary effects and confound the ability to identify the ultimate factor in limiting productivity of a certain nest, area, or region. Overall, the literature suggests that species differ in their response to various types, durations, and sources of noise (Manci et al. 1988). Many scientific studies have investigated the effects of aircraft noise on wildlife, and some have focused on wildlife “flight” due to noise. Apparently, animal responses to aircraft are influenced by many variables, including size, speed, proximity (both height above the ground and lateral distance), engine noise, color, flight profile, and radiated noise. The type of aircraft (e.g., fixed-wing versus rotor-wing [helicopter]) and type of flight mission may also produce different levels of disturbance, with varying animal responses (Manci et al. 1988). Consequently, it is difficult to generalize animal responses to noise disturbances across species. One result of the 1988 Manci et al. literature review was the conclusion that, while behavioral observation studies were relatively limited, a general behavioral reaction in animals from exposure to aircraft noise is the startle response. The intensity and duration of the startle response appear to be dependent on which species is exposed, whether there is a group or an individual, and whether there have been previous exposures. Responses range from flight, trampling, stampeding, jumping, or running to movement of the head in the apparent direction of the noise source. Manci et al. (1988) reported that the literature indicated that avian species may be more sensitive to aircraft noise than mammals. C.2.5.1 Domestic Animals Although some studies report that the effects of aircraft noise on domestic animals is inconclusive, a majority of the literature reviewed indicates that domestic animals exhibit some behavioral responses to military overflights, but generally seem to habituate to the disturbances over a period of time. Mammals in particular appear to react to noise at sound levels higher than 90 dB, with responses including the startle response, freezing (i.e., becoming temporarily stationary), and fleeing from the sound source. Many studies on domestic animals suggest that some species appear to acclimate to some forms of sound disturbance (Manci et al. 1988). Some studies have reported primary and secondary effects, including reduced milk production and rate of milk release, increased glucose concentrations, decreased levels of hemoglobin, increased heart rate, and a reduction in thyroid activity. These latter effects appear to represent a small percentage of the findings occurring in the existing literature. Some reviewers have indicated that earlier studies and claims by farmers linking adverse effects of aircraft noise on livestock did not necessarily provide clear-cut evidence of cause and effect (Cottereau 1978). In contrast, many studies conclude that there is no evidence that aircraft overflights affect feed intake, growth, or production rates in domestic animals. Cattle. In response to concerns about overflight effects on pregnant cattle, milk production, and cattle safety, the USAF prepared a handbook for environmental protection that summarizes the literature on the impacts of low-altitude flights on livestock (and poultry) and includes specific case studies conducted in numerous airspaces across the country. Adverse effects have been found in a few studies, but have not been reproduced in other similar studies. One such study, conducted in 1983, suggested that 2 of 10 cows in late pregnancy aborted after showing rising estrogen and falling progesterone levels. These increased hormonal levels were reported as being linked to 59 aircraft overflights. The remaining eight cows showed no changes in their blood concentrations and calved normally (USAF 1994). A similar study reported that abortions occurred in three out of five pregnant cattle after exposing them to flyovers by six different aircraft (USAF 1994). Another study suggested that feedlot cattle could stampede and injure themselves when exposed to low-level overflights (USAF 1994). A majority of the studies reviewed suggest that there is little or no effect of aircraft noise on cattle. Studies presenting adverse effects on domestic animals have been limited. A number of studies (Kovalcik and Sottnik 1971; Parker and Bayley 1960) investigated the effects of jet aircraft noise and sonic booms on the milk production of dairy cows. Through the compilation and examination of milk production data from areas exposed to jet aircraft noise and sonic boom events, it was determined that milk yields were not affected. This was particularly evident in those cows that had been previously exposed to jet aircraft noise. One study examined the causes of 1,763 abortions in Wisconsin dairy cattle over a 1-year time period, and none were associated with aircraft disturbances (USAF 1993). In 1987, Anderson contacted seven livestock operators for production data, and no effects of low-altitude and supersonic flights were noted. Three out of 43 cattle previously exposed to low-altitude flights showed a startle response to an F/A-18 aircraft flying overhead at 500 feet above ground level (AGL) at 400 knots by running less than 10 meters. They resumed normal activity within 1 minute (USAF 1994). In 1983, Beyer found that helicopters caused more reaction than other low-altitude overflights. A 1964 study also found that helicopters flying 30 to 60 feet overhead did not affect milk production and pregnancies of 44 cows and heifers (USAF 1994). Additionally, Beyer reported that five pregnant dairy cows in a pasture did not exhibit fright-flight tendencies or have their pregnancies disrupted after being overflown by 79 low-altitude helicopter flights and 4 low-altitude, subsonic jet aircraft flights (USAF 1994). A 1956 study found that the reactions of dairy and beef cattle to noise from low-altitude, subsonic aircraft were similar to those caused by paper blowing about, strange persons, or other moving objects (USAF 1994). In a report to Congress, the U.S. Forest Service concluded that “evidence both from field studies of wild ungulates and laboratory studies of domestic stock indicate that the risks of damage are small (from aircraft approaches of 50 to 100 meters), as animals take care not to damage themselves (USFS 1992). If animals are overflown by aircraft at altitudes of 50 to 100 meters, there is no evidence that mothers and young are separated, that animals collide with obstructions (unless confined) or that they traverse dangerous ground at too high a rate.” These varied study results suggest that, although the confining of cattle could magnify animal response to aircraft overflight, there is no proven cause-and-effect link between startling cattle from aircraft overflights and abortion rates or lower milk production. Horses. Horses have also been observed to react to overflights of jet aircraft. Several of the studies reviewed reported a varied response of horses to low-altitude aircraft overflights. Observations made in 1966 and 1968 noted that horses galloped in response to jet flyovers (USAF 1993). In 1995, Bowles cites Kruger and Erath as observing horses exhibiting intensive flight reactions, random movements, and biting/kicking behavior. However, no injuries or abortions occurred, and there was evidence that the mares adapted somewhat to the flyovers over the course of a month (USAF 1994). Although horses were observed noticing the overflights, it did not appear to affect either survivability or reproductive success. There was also some indication that habituation to these types of disturbances was occurring. LeBlanc et al. studied the effects of F-14 jet aircraft noise on pregnant mares (1991). They specifically focused on any changes in pregnancy success, behavior, cardiac function, hormonal production, and rate of habituation. Their findings reported observations of “flight-fright” reactions, which caused increases in heart rates and serum cortisol concentrations. The mares, however, did habituate to the noise. Levels of anxiety and mass body movements were the highest after initial exposure, with intensities of responses decreasing thereafter. There were no differences in pregnancy success when compared to a control group. Swine. Generally, the literature findings for swine appear to be similar to those reported for cows and horses. While there are some effects from aircraft noise reported in the literature, these effects are minor. Studies of continuous noise exposure (i.e., 6 hours or 72 hours of constant exposure) reported influences on short-term hormonal production and release. Additional constant exposure studies indicated the observation of stress reactions, hypertension, and electrolyte imbalances (Dufour 1980). A study by Bond et al. demonstrated no adverse effects on the feeding efficiency, weight gain, ear physiology, or thyroid and adrenal gland condition of pigs subjected to aircraft noise (1963). Observations of heart rate increase were recorded and it was noted that cessation of the noise resulted in the return to normal heart rates. Conception rates and offspring survivorship did not appear to be influenced by exposure to aircraft noise. Similarly, simulated aircraft noise at levels of 100 dB to 135 dB had only minor effects on the rate of feed utilization, weight gain, food intake, and reproduction rates of boars and sows exposed, and there were no injuries or inner ear changes observed (Gladwin et al. 1988; Manci et al. 1988). Domestic Fowl. According to a 1994 position paper by the USAF on effects of low-altitude overflights (below 1,000 feet) on domestic fowl, overflight activity has negligible effects (USAF 1994). The paper did recognize that given certain circumstances, adverse effects can be serious. Some of the effects can be panic reactions, reduced productivity, and effects on marketability (e.g., bruising of the meat caused during “pile-up” situations). The typical reaction of domestic fowl after exposure to sudden, intense noise is a short-term startle response. The reaction ceases as soon as the stimulus is ended, and within a few minutes all activity returns to normal. More severe responses are possible depending on the number of birds, the frequency of exposure, and environmental conditions. Large crowds of birds and birds not previously exposed are more likely to pile up in response to a noise stimulus (USAF 1994). According to studies and interviews with growers, it is typically the previously unexposed birds that incite panic crowding, and the tendency to do so is markedly reduced within five exposures to the stimulus (USAF 1994). This suggests that the birds habituate relatively quickly. Egg productivity was not adversely affected by infrequent noise bursts, even at exposure levels as high as 120 to 130 dB. Between 1956 and 1988, there were 100 recorded claims against the Navy for alleged damage to domestic fowl. The number of claims averaged three per year, with peak numbers of claims following publications of studies on the topic in the early 1960s (USAF 1994). Many of the claims were disproved or did not have sufficient supporting evidence. The claims were filed for the following alleged damages: 55 percent for panic reactions, 31 percent for decreased production, 6 percent for reduced hatchability, 6 percent for weight loss, and less than 1 percent for reduced fertility (USAF 1994). Turkeys. The review of the existing literature suggests that there has not been a concerted or widespread effort to study the effects of aircraft noise on commercial turkeys. One study involving turkeys examined the differences between simulated versus actual overflight aircraft noise, turkey responses to the noise, weight gain, and evidence of habituation (Bowles et al. 1990). Findings from the study suggested that turkeys habituated to jet aircraft noise quickly, that there were no growth rate differences between the experimental and control groups, and that there were some behavioral differences that increased the difficulty in handling individuals within the experimental group. Low-altitude overflights were shown to cause turkey flocks that were kept inside turkey houses to occasionally pile up and experience high mortality rates due to the aircraft noise and a variety of disturbances unrelated to aircraft (USAF 1994). C.2.5.2 Wildlife Studies on the effects of overflights and sonic booms on wildlife have been focused mostly on avian species and ungulates such as caribou and bighorn sheep. Few studies have been conducted on marine mammals, small terrestrial mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and carnivorous mammals. Generally, species that live entirely below the surface of the water have also been ignored due to the fact they do not experience the same level of sound as terrestrial species (NPS 1994). Wild ungulates appear to be much more sensitive to noise disturbance than domestic livestock (Manci et al. 1988). This may be due to previous exposure to disturbances. One common factor appears to be that low-altitude flyovers seem to be more disruptive in terrain where there is little cover (Manci et al. 1988). C.2.5.3 Mammals Terrestrial Mammals. Studies of terrestrial mammals have shown that noise levels of 120 dBA can damage mammals’ ears, and levels of 95 dBA can cause temporary loss of hearing acuity. Noise from aircraft has affected other large carnivores by causing changes in home ranges, foraging patterns, and breeding behavior. One study recommended that aircraft not be allowed to fly at altitudes below 2,000 feet AGL over important grizzly and polar bear habitat (Dufour 1980). Wolves have been frightened by low-altitude flights that were 25 to 1,000 feet off the ground. However, wolves have been found to adapt to aircraft overflights and noise as long as they were not being hunted from aircraft (Dufour 1980). Wild ungulates (American bison, caribou, bighorn sheep) appear to be much more sensitive to noise disturbance than domestic livestock (Weisenberger et al. 1996). Behavioral reactions may be related to the past history of disturbances by such things as humans and aircraft. Common reactions of reindeer kept in an enclosure and exposed to aircraft noise disturbance were a slight startle response, raising of the head, pricking ears, and scenting of the air. Panic reactions and extensive changes in behavior of individual animals were not observed. Observations of caribou in Alaska exposed to fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters showed running and panic reactions occurred when overflights were at an altitude of 200 feet or less. The reactions decreased with increased altitude of overflights, and for overflights higher than 500 feet in altitude, the panic reactions stopped. Also, smaller groups reacted less strongly than larger groups. One negative effect of the running and avoidance behavior is increased expenditure of energy. For a 90-kilogram animal, the calculated expenditure due to aircraft harassment is 64 kilocalories per minute when running and 20 kilocalories per minute when walking. When conditions are favorable, this expenditure can be counteracted with increased feeding; however, during harsh winter conditions, this may not be possible. Incidental observations of wolves and bears exposed to fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters suggested that wolves were less disturbed than wild ungulates, while grizzly bears showed the greatest response of any animal species observed. It has been proven that low-altitude overflights do induce stress in animals. Increased heart rates, an indicator of excitement or stress, have been found in pronghorn antelope, elk, and bighorn sheep. These reactions occur naturally as a response to predation, so infrequent overflights may not, in and of themselves, be detrimental. However, flights at high frequencies over a long period of time may cause harmful effects. The consequences of this disturbance, while cumulative, are not additive. Aircraft disturbance may not cause obvious and serious health effects, but coupled with a harsh winter, it may have an adverse impact. Research has shown that stress induced by other types of disturbances produces long-term decreases in metabolism and hormone balances in wild ungulates. Behavioral responses can range from mild to severe. Mild responses include head raising, body shifting, or turning to orient toward the aircraft. Moderate disturbance may be nervous behaviors, such as trotting a short distance. Escape is the typical severe response. Marine Mammals. The physiological composition of the ear in aquatic and marine mammals exhibits adaptation to the aqueous environment. These differences (relative to terrestrial species) manifest themselves in the auricle and middle ear (Manci et al. 1988). Some mammals use echolocation to perceive objects in their surroundings and to determine the directions and locations of sound sources (Simmons 1983 in Manci et al. 1988). Research conducted on northern fur seals, sea lions, and ringed seals indicated that there are some differences in how various animal groups receive frequencies of sound. It was observed that these species exhibited varying intensities of a startle response to airborne noise, which was habituated over time. The rates of habituation appeared to vary with species, populations, and demographics (age, sex). Time of day of exposure was also a factor (Muyberg 1978 in Manci et al. 1988). Studies accomplished near the Channel Islands were conducted near the area where the space shuttle launches occur. It was found that there were some response differences between species relative to the loudness of sonic booms. Those booms that were between 80 and 89 dBA caused a greater intensity of startle reactions than lower-intensity booms of 72 to 79 dBA. However, the duration of the startle responses to louder sonic booms was shorter (Jehl and Cooper 1980 in Manci et al. 1988). Jehl and Cooper indicated that low-flying helicopters, loud boat noises, and humans were the most disturbing to pinnipeds (1980). According to the research, although the space launch and associated operational activity noises have not had a measurable effect on the pinniped population, it also suggests that there was a greater “disturbance level” exhibited during launch activities. There was a recommendation to continue observations for behavioral effects and to perform long-term population monitoring (Jehl and Cooper 1980). The continued presence of single or multiple noise sources could cause marine mammals to leave a preferred habitat. However, it does not appear likely that overflights could cause migration from suitable habitats because aircraft noise over water is mobile and would not persist over any particular area. Aircraft noise, including supersonic noise, currently occurs in the overwater airspace of Eglin, Tyndall, and Langley Air Force Bases from sorties predominantly involving jet aircraft. Survey results reported in Davis et al. indicate that cetaceans (i.e., dolphins) occur under all of the Eglin and Tyndall marine airspace (2000). The continuing presence of dolphins indicates that aircraft noise does not discourage use of the area and apparently does not harm the locally occurring population. In a summary by the National Park Service on the effects of noise on marine mammals, it was determined that gray whales and harbor porpoises showed no outward behavioral response to aircraft noise or overflights (1994). Bottlenose dolphins showed no obvious reaction in a study involving helicopter overflights at 1,200 to 1,800 feet above the water. They also did not show any reaction to survey aircraft unless the shadow of the aircraft passed over them, at which point there was some observed tendency to dive (Richardson et al. 1995). Other anthropogenic noises in the marine environment from ships and pleasure craft may have more of an effect on marine mammals than aircraft noise (USAF 2000). The noise effects on cetaceans appear to be somewhat attenuated by the air/water interface. Manatees appear relatively unresponsive to human-generated noise to the point that they are often suspected of being deaf to oncoming boats (although their hearing is actually similar to that of pinnipeds) (Bullock et al. 1980). Little is known about the importance of acoustic communication to manatees, although they are known to produce at least 10 different types of sounds and are thought to have sensitive hearing (Richardson et al. 1995). C.2.5.4 Birds Auditory research conducted on birds indicates that they fall between reptiles and mammals relative to hearing sensitivity. According to Dooling, within the range of 1,000 to 5,000 Hz, birds show a level of hearing sensitivity similar to that of the more sensitive mammals (1978). In contrast to mammals, bird sensitivity falls off at a greater rate with increasing and decreasing frequencies. Passive observations and studies examining aircraft bird strikes indicate that birds nest and forage near airports. Aircraft noise in the vicinity of commercial airports apparently does not inhibit bird presence and use. High-noise events (like a low-altitude aircraft overflight) may cause birds to engage in escape or avoidance behaviors, such as flushing from perches or nests (Ellis et al. 1991). These activities impose an energy cost on the birds that, over the long term, may affect survival or growth. In addition, the birds may spend less time engaged in necessary activities like feeding, preening, or caring for their young because they spend time in noise-avoidance activity. However, the long-term significance of noise-related impacts is less clear. Several studies on nesting raptors have indicated that birds become habituated to aircraft overflights and that long-term reproductive success is not affected (Grubb and King 1991; Ellis et al. 1991). Threshold noise levels for significant responses range from 62 dB for Pacific black brant to 85 dB for crested tern (Brown 1990; Ward and Stehn 1990). Songbirds were observed to become silent prior to the onset of a sonic boom event (F-111 jets), followed by “raucous discordant cries.” There was a return to normal singing within 10 seconds after the boom (Higgins 1974 in Manci et al. 1988). Ravens responded by emitting protestation calls, flapping their wings, and soaring. Manci et al. reported a reduction in reproductive success in some small territorial passerines (i.e., perching birds or songbirds) after exposure to low-altitude overflights (1988). However, it has been observed that passerines are not driven any great distance from a favored food source by a nonspecific disturbance, such as aircraft overflights (USFS 1992). Further study may be warranted. A recent study, conducted cooperatively between DoD and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, assessed the response of the red-cockaded woodpecker to a range of military training noise events, including artillery, small arms, helicopter, and maneuver noise (Pater et al. 1999). The project findings show that the red-cockaded woodpecker successfully acclimates to military noise events. Depending on the noise level, which ranged from innocuous to very loud, the birds responded by flushing from their nest cavities. When the noise source was closer and the noise level was higher, the number of flushes increased proportionately. In all cases, however, the birds returned to their nests within a relatively short period of time (usually within 12 minutes). Additionally, the noise exposure did not result in any mortality or statistically detectable changes in reproductive success (Pater et al. 1999). Red-cockaded woodpeckers did not flush when artillery simulators were more than 122 meters away and SEL noise levels were 70 dBA. Lynch and Speake studied the effects of both real and simulated sonic booms on the nesting and brooding eastern wild turkey in Alabama (1978). Hens at four nest sites were subjected to between 8 and 11 combined real and simulated sonic booms. All tests elicited similar responses, including quick lifting of the head and apparent alertness for between 10 and 20 seconds. No apparent nest failure occurred as a result of the sonic booms. Twenty-one brood groups were also subjected to simulated sonic booms. Reactions varied slightly between groups, but the largest percentage of groups reacted by standing motionless after the initial blast. Upon the sound of the boom, the hens and poults fled until reaching the edge of the woods (approximately 4 to 8 meters). Afterward, the poults resumed feeding activities while the hens remained alert for a short period of time (approximately 15 to 20 seconds). In no instances were poults abandoned, nor did they scatter and become lost. Every observation group returned to normal activities within a maximum of 30 seconds after a blast. C.2.5.4.1 Raptors In a literature review of raptor responses to aircraft noise, Manci et al. found that most raptors did not show a negative response to overflights (1988). When negative responses were observed, they were predominantly associated with rotor-winged aircraft or jet aircraft that were repeatedly passing within 0.5 miles of a nest. Ellis et al. performed a study to estimate the effects of low-level military jet aircraft and mid-to high-altitude sonic booms (both actual and simulated) on nesting peregrine falcons and seven other raptors (common black-hawk, Harris’ hawk, zone-tailed hawk, red-tailed hawk, golden eagle, prairie falcon, bald eagle) (1991). They observed responses to test stimuli, determined nest success for the year of the testing, and evaluated site occupancy the following year. Both long- and short-term effects were noted in the study. The results reported the successful fledging of young in 34 of 38 nest sites (all eight species) subjected to low-level flight and/or simulated sonic booms. Twenty-two of the test sites were revisited in the following year, and observations of pairs or lone birds were made at all but one nest. Nesting attempts were underway at 19 of 20 sites that were observed long enough to be certain of breeding activity. Re-occupancy and productivity rates were within or above expected values for self-sustaining populations. Short-term behavior responses were also noted. Overflights at a distance of 150 meters or less produced few significant responses and no severe responses. Typical responses included crouching or, very rarely, flushing from the perch site. Significant responses were most evident before egg laying and after young were “well grown.” Incubating or brooding adults never burst from the nest, thus preventing egg breaking or knocking chicks out of the nest. Jet passes and sonic booms often caused noticeable alarm; however, significant negative responses were rare and did not appear to limit productivity or re-occupancy. The locations of some of the nests may have caused some birds to be habituated to aircraft noise. There were some test sites located at distances far from zones of frequent military aircraft usage, and the test stimuli were often closer, louder, and more frequent than would be likely for a normal training situation. Manci et al. noted that a female northern harrier was observed hunting on a bombing range in Mississippi during bombing exercises (1988). The harrier was apparently unfazed by the exercises, even when a bomb exploded within 200 feet. In a similar case of habituation/non-disturbance, a study on the Florida snail-kite stated that the greatest reaction to overflights (approximately 98 dBA) was “watching the aircraft fly by.” No detrimental impacts to distribution, breeding success, or behavior were noted. Bald Eagle. A study by Grubb and King on the reactions of the bald eagle to human disturbances showed that terrestrial disturbances elicited the greatest response, followed by aquatic (i.e., boats) and aerial disturbances (1991). The disturbance regime of the area where the study occurred was predominantly characterized by aircraft noise. The study found that pedestrians consistently caused responses that were greater in both frequency and duration. Helicopters elicited the highest level of aircraft-related responses. Aircraft disturbances, although the most common form of disturbance, resulted in the lowest levels of response. This low response level may have been due to habituation; however, flights less than 170 meters away caused reactions similar to other disturbance types. Ellis et al. showed that eagles typically respond to the proximity of a disturbance, such as a pedestrian or aircraft within 100 meters, rather than the noise level (1991). They also noted that helicopters were four times more likely to cause a reaction than a commercial jet and 20 times more likely to cause a reaction than a propeller plane. Fraser et al. have suggested that raptors habituate to overflights rapidly, sometimes tolerating aircraft approaches of 65 feet or less (1985). Osprey. A 1998 study by Trimper et al. in Goose Bay, Labrador, Canada, focused on the reactions of nesting osprey to military overflights by CF-18 Hornets. Reactions varied from increased alertness and focused observation of planes to adjustments in incubation posture. No overt reactions (e.g., startle response, rapid nest departure) were observed as a result of an overflight. Young nestlings crouched as a result of any disturbance until they grew to 1 to 2 weeks prior to fledging. Helicopters, human presence, float planes, and other ospreys elicited the strongest reactions from nesting ospreys. These responses included flushing, agitation, and aggressive displays. Adult osprey showed high nest occupancy rates during incubation regardless of external influences. The osprey observed occasionally stared in the direction of the flight before it was audible to the observers. The birds may have been habituated to the noise of the flights; however, overflights were strictly controlled during the experimental period. Strong reactions to float planes and helicopter may have been due to the slower flight and therefore longer duration of visual stimuli rather than noise-related stimuli. Red-Tailed Hawk. Andersen et al. conducted a study that investigated the effects of low-level helicopter overflights on 35 red-tailed hawk nests (1989). Some of the nests had not been flown over prior to the study. The hawks that were naïve (i.e., not previously exposed) to helicopter flights exhibited stronger avoidance behavior (9 of 17 birds flushed from their nests) than those that had experienced prior overflights. The overflights did not appear to affect nesting success in either study group. These findings were consistent with the belief that red-tailed hawks habituate to low-level air traffic, even during the nesting period. C.2.5.4.2 Migratory Waterfowl A study by Conomy et al. exposed previously unexposed ducks to 71 noise events per day that equaled or exceeded 80 dBA (1998). It was determined that the proportion of time black ducks reacted to aircraft activity and noise decreased from 38 percent to 6 percent in 17 days and remained stable at 5.8 percent thereafter. In the same study, the wood duck did not appear to habituate to aircraft disturbance. This supports the notion that animal response to aircraft noise is species-specific. Because a startle response to aircraft noise can result in flushing from nests, migrants and animals living in areas with high concentrations of predators would be the most vulnerable to experiencing effects of lowered birth rates and recruitment over time. Species that are subjected to infrequent overflights do not appear to habituate to overflight disturbance as readily. Black brant studied in the Alaskan Peninsula were exposed to jets and propeller aircraft, helicopters, gunshots, people, boats, and various raptors. Jets accounted for 65 percent of all the disturbances. Humans, eagles, and boats caused a greater percentage of brant to take flight. There was markedly greater reaction to Bell-206-B helicopter flights than fixed-wing, single-engine aircraft (Ward et al. 1986). The presence of humans and low-flying helicopters in the Mackenzie Valley North Slope area did not appear to affect the population density of Lapland longspurs, but the experimental group was shown to have reduced hatching and fledging success and higher nest abandonment. Human presence appeared to have a greater impact on the incubating behavior of the black brant, common eider, and Arctic tern than fixed-wing aircraft (Gunn and Livingston 1974). Gunn and Livingston found that waterfowl and seabirds in the Mackenzie Valley and North Slope of Alaska and Canada became acclimated to float plane disturbance over the course of 3 days (1974). Additionally, it was observed that potential predators (bald eagle) caused a number of birds to leave their nests. Non-breeding birds were observed to be more reactive than breeding birds. Waterfowl were affected by helicopter flights, while snow geese were disturbed by Cessna 185 flights. The geese flushed when the planes were under 1,000 feet, compared to higher flight elevations. An overall reduction in flock sizes was observed. It was recommended that aircraft flights be reduced in the vicinity of pre-migratory staging areas. Manci et al. reported that waterfowl were particularly disturbed by aircraft noise (1988). The most sensitive appeared to be snow geese. Canada geese and snow geese were thought to be more sensitive than other animals such as turkey vultures, coyotes, and raptors (Edwards et al. 1979). C.2.5.4.3 Wading and Shore Birds Black et al. studied the effects of low-altitude (less than 500 feet AGL) military training flights with sound levels from 55 to 100 dBA on wading bird colonies (i.e., great egret, snowy egret, tricolored heron, and little blue heron) (1984). The training flights involved three or four aircraft, which occurred once or twice per day. This study concluded that the reproductive activity— including nest success, nestling survival, and nestling chronology—was independent of F-16 overflights. Dependent variables were more strongly related to ecological factors, including location and physical characteristics of the colony and climatology. Another study on the effects of circling fixed-wing aircraft and helicopter overflights on wading bird colonies found that at altitudes of 195 to 390 feet, there was no reaction in nearly 75 percent of the 220 observations. Ninety percent displayed no reaction or merely looked toward the direction of the noise source. Another 6 percent stood up, 3 percent walked from the nest, and 2 percent flushed (but were without active nests) and returned within 5 minutes (Kushlan 1979). Apparently non-nesting wading birds had a slightly higher incidence of reacting to overflights than nesting birds. Seagulls observed roosting near a colony of wading birds in another study remained at their roosts when subsonic aircraft flew overhead (Burger 1981). Colony distribution appeared to be most directly correlated to available wetland community types and was found to be distributed randomly with respect to Military Training Routes. These results suggest that wading bird species presence was most closely linked to habitat availability and that they were not affected by low-level military overflights (USAF 2000). Burger studied the response of migrating shorebirds to human disturbance and found that shorebirds did not fly in response to aircraft overflights, but did flush in response to more localized intrusions (i.e., humans and dogs on the beach) (1986). Burger studied the effects of noise from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York on herring gulls that nested less than 1 kilometer from the airport (1981). Noise levels over the nesting colony were 85 to 100 dBA on approach and 94 to 105 dBA on takeoff. Generally, there did not appear to be any prominent adverse effects of subsonic aircraft on nesting, although some birds flushed when a Concorde flew overhead and, when they returned, engaged in aggressive behavior. Groups of gulls tended to loaf in the area of the nesting colony, and these birds remained at the roost when the Concorde flew overhead. Up to 208 of the loafing gulls flew when supersonic aircraft flew overhead. These birds would circle around and immediately land in the loafing flock (USAF 2000). In 1970, sonic booms were potentially linked to a mass hatch failure of sooty terns on the Dry Tortugas (Austin et al. 1970). The cause of the failure was not certain, but it was conjectured that sonic booms from military aircraft or an overgrowth of vegetation were factors. In the previous season, sooties were observed to react to sonic booms by rising in a “panic flight,” circling over the island, and then usually settling down on their eggs again. Hatching that year was normal. Following the 1969 hatch failure, excess vegetation was cleared and measures were taken to reduce supersonic activity. The 1970 hatch appeared to proceed normally. A colony of noddies on the same island hatched successfully in 1969, the year of the sooty hatch failure. Subsequent laboratory tests of exposure of eggs to sonic booms and other impulsive noises (Bowles et al. 1991; Bowles et al. 1994; Cogger and Zegarra 1980) failed to show adverse effects on the hatching of eggs. A structural analysis (Ting et al. 2002) showed that, even under extraordinary circumstances, sonic booms would not damage an avian egg. Burger observed no effects of subsonic aircraft on herring gulls in the vicinity of John F. Kennedy International Airport (1981). The Concorde aircraft did cause more nesting gulls to leave their nests (especially in areas of higher density of nests), causing the breakage of eggs and the scavenging of eggs by intruder prey. Clutch sizes were observed to be smaller in areas of higher-density nesting (presumably due to the greater tendency for panic flight) than in areas where there were fewer nests. C.2.5.5 Fish, Reptiles, and Amphibians The effects of overflight noise on fish, reptiles, and amphibians have been poorly studied, but conclusions regarding their expected responses have involved speculation based upon known physiologies and behavioral traits of these taxa (Gladwin et al. 1988). Although fish do startle in response to low-flying aircraft noise, and probably to the shadows of aircraft, they have been found to habituate to the sound and overflights. Reptiles and amphibians that respond to low frequencies and those that respond to ground vibration, such as spadefoots (genus Scaphiopus), may be affected by noise. Limited information is available on the effects of short-duration noise events on reptiles. Dufour in 1980 and Manci et al. in 1988, summarized a few studies of reptile responses to noise. Some reptile species tested under laboratory conditions experienced at least TTSs or hearing loss after exposure to 95 dB for several minutes. Crocodilians in general have the most highly developed hearing of all reptiles. Crocodile ears have lids that can be closed when the animal goes under water. These lids can reduce the noise intensity by 10 to 12 dB (Wever and Vernon 1957). On Homestead Air Reserve Station, Florida, two crocodilians (the American alligator and the spectacled caiman) reside in wetlands and canals along the base runway, suggesting that they can coexist with existing noise levels of an active runway, including DNLs of 85 dB. C.2.5.6 Summary Some physiological/behavioral responses such as increased hormonal production, increased heart rate, and reduction in milk production have been described in a small percentage of studies. A majority of the studies focusing on these types of effects have reported short-term or no effects. The relationships between physiological effects and how species interact with their environments have not been thoroughly studied. Therefore, the larger ecological context issues regarding physiological effects of jet aircraft noise (if any) and resulting behavioral pattern changes are not well understood. Animal species exhibit a wide variety of responses to noise. It is therefore difficult to generalize animal responses to noise disturbances or to draw inferences across species, as reactions to jet aircraft noise appear to be species-specific. Consequently, some animal species may be more sensitive than other species and/or may exhibit different forms or intensities of behavioral responses. For instance, one study suggests that wood ducks appear to be more sensitive and more resistant to acclimation to jet aircraft noise than Canada geese. Similarly, wild ungulates seem to be more easily disturbed than domestic animals. The literature does suggest that common responses include the “startle” or “fright” response and, ultimately, habituation. It has been reported that the intensities and durations of the startle response decrease with the numbers and frequencies of exposures, suggesting no long-term adverse effects. The majority of the literature suggests that domestic animal species (cows, horses, chickens) and wildlife species exhibit adaptation, acclimation, and habituation after repeated exposure to jet aircraft noise and sonic booms. Animal responses to aircraft noise appear to be somewhat dependent on, or influenced by, the size, shape, speed, proximity (vertical and horizontal), engine noise, color, and flight profile of planes. Helicopters also appear to induce greater intensities and durations of disturbance behavior as compared to fixed-wing aircraft. Some studies showed that animals that had been previously exposed to jet aircraft noise exhibited greater degrees of alarm and disturbance to other objects creating noise, such as boats, people, and objects blowing across the landscape. Other factors influencing response to jet aircraft noise may include wind direction, speed, and local air turbulence; landscape structures (i.e., amount and type of vegetative cover); and, in the case of bird species, whether the animals are in the incubation/nesting phase. C.2.6 PROPERTY VALUES There are a number of factors that affect property values, which makes predicting impacts difficult. Factors directly related to the property, such as size, improvements, and location of the property, as well as current conditions in the real estate market, interest rates, and housing sales in the area, are more likely to have a direct adverse impact on property values. Several studies have analyzed property values as they relate to military and civilian aircraft noise. In one study, a regression analysis of property values as they relate to aircraft noise at two military installations was conducted (Fidell et al. 1996). This study found that, while aircraft noise at these installations may have had minor impacts on property values, it was difficult to quantify that impact. Other factors, such as the quality of the housing near the installations and the local real estate market, had a larger impact on property values. Therefore, the regression analysis was not able to predict the impact of aircraft noise on the property values of two comparable properties. Another study analyzed 33 other studies attempting to quantify the impact of noise on property values (Nelson 2003). The result of the study supports the idea that the potential for an adverse impact on property values as a result of aircraft noise exists and estimates that the value of a specific property could be discounted between 0.5 and 0.6 percent per decibel when compared to a similar property that is not impacted by aircraft noise. Additional data indicate that the discount for property values as a result of noise would be higher for noise levels above 75 dB DNL. C.2.7 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE EFFECTS ON STRUCTURES Normally, the most sensitive components of a structure to airborne noise are the windows and, infrequently, the plastered walls and ceilings. An evaluation of the peak sound pressures impinging on the structure is normally sufficient to determine the possibility of damage. In general, at sound levels above 130 dB, there is the possibility of the excitation of structural component resonance. While certain frequencies (such as 30 Hz for window breakage) may be of more concern than other frequencies, conservatively, only sounds lasting more than 1 second above a sound level of 130 dB are potentially damaging to structural components (CHABA 1977). A study directed specifically at low-altitude, high-speed aircraft showed that there is little probability of structural damage from such operations (Sutherland 1989). One finding in that study is that sound levels at damaging frequencies (e.g., 30 Hz for window breakage or 15 to 25 Hz for whole-house response) are rarely above 130 dB. Noise-induced structural vibration may also cause annoyance to dwelling occupants because of induced secondary vibrations, or “rattle,” of objects within the dwelling, such as hanging pictures, dishes, plaques, and bric-a-brac. Window panes may also vibrate noticeably when exposed to high levels of airborne noise, causing homeowners to fear breakage. In general, such noise-induced vibrations occur at sound levels above those considered normally incompatible with residential land use. Thus, assessments of noise exposure levels for compatible land use should also be protective of noise-induced secondary vibrations. C.2.8 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE EFFECTS ON STRUCTURE AND TERRAIN Members of the public often believe that noise from low-flying aircraft can cause avalanches or landslides by disturbing fragile soil or snow structures in mountainous areas. There are no known instances of such effects, and it is considered improbable that such effects would result from routine, subsonic aircraft operations. C.2.9 NOISE EFFECTS ON HISTORICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES Because of the potential for increased fragility of structural components of historical buildings and other historical sites, aircraft noise may affect such sites more severely than newer, modern structures. Most scientific studies of the effects of noise and vibration on historic properties have considered potential impacts on standing architecture. For example, the FAA published a study of potential impacts resulting from vibrations caused by the noise of subsonic Concorde overflights on five historic properties, including a restored plantation house, a stone bridge and tollhouse, and other structures (Hershey, Kevala, and Burns 1975). This study analyzed the breakage probabilities of structural elements that might be considered susceptible to vibration, such as window glass, mortar, and plaster. The results indicated that, with the exception of some already cracked window glass, there was no practical risk of noise-induced vibration damage to any of these structures. Some studies of the effects of overflights—both subsonic and supersonic—on archaeological structures and other types of sites also have been published. Battis examined the effects of low-altitude overflights of B-52, RF-4C, and A-7 aircraft on standing walls at Long House Ruin in northeastern Arizona (Battis 1988). The motion levels observed during all passes were well below a conservative threshold for vibration in ancient structures, a level of 1.3 millimeters per second, established by two previous studies. Battis concluded that vibration associated with aircraft overflights at speeds and altitudes similar to those measured in his study would have no significant damaging effect on Long House and similar sites. USAF National Environment Policy Act documents have examined the potential impacts on historic properties that might result from subsonic and supersonic overflights. In 1995, USAF published the Environmental Assessment for Continued Supersonic Operations in the Black Mountain Supersonic Corridor and the Alpha/Precision Impact Range Area. Eligible and potentially eligible cultural resources in the area of potential effect include petroglyph and pictograph panels located on a variety of rock types, historic adobe and non-adobe structures with standing walls, and historic mines (which contain tunnels) and wells. The report concludes that supersonic low-altitude flights have occurred over these corridors for 25 years or more and have resulted in no significant impacts on cultural resources. The California State Historic Preservation Office agreed, and during National Historic Preservation Act Section 106 review of this undertaking, concurred with USAF’s finding that continued supersonic overflights would have no effect on historic properties. As noted above for the noise effects of noise-induced vibrations on normal structures, assessments of noise exposure levels for normally compatible land uses should also be protective of historic and archaeological sites. C.3 SUBSONIC AIRCRAFT NOISE MODELING An aircraft in subsonic flight generally emits noise from two sources: the engines and flow noise around the airframe. Noise generation mechanisms are complex and, in practical models, the noise sources must be based on measured data. The USAF has developed a series of computer models and aircraft noise databases for this purpose. The models include NOISEMAP (Moulton 1992), which is used to model noise around airbases. This model uses the NOISEFILE database developed by USAF. NOISEFILE data include SEL and Lmax as a function of speed and power setting for aircraft in straight flight. Noise from an individual aircraft is a time-varying continuous sound. It is first audible as the aircraft approaches, increases to a maximum when the aircraft is near its closest point, then diminishes as it departs. The noise depends on the speed and power setting of the aircraft and its trajectory. The models noted above divide the trajectory into segments whose noise can be computed from the data in NOISEFILE. The contributions from these segments are summed. Supporting routines from NOISEMAP were used to calculate SEL and Lmax for various flight altitudes and lateral off-sets from a ground receiver position. Sound intensity at a point on the ground is also affected by several environmental factors, such as atmospheric conditions and properties of the terrain being overflown. C.4 REFERENCES Andersen, D.E., O.J. Rongstad, and W.R. Mytton. 1989. Response of Red-Tailed Hawks to Helicopter Overflights. The Condor, Volume 91: 296-299. Andrus, W.S., M.E. Kerrigan, and K.T. Bird. 1975. Hearing and Para-Airport Children. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, Volume 46, Number 5: 740-742. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1980. Sound Level Descriptors for Determination of Compatible Land Use. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S3.23-1980. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1988. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound, Part 1. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-1988. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2002. Acoustical Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools. Vol. S12.60-2002. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2005. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound, Part 4. Noise Assessment and Prediction of Long-term Community Response. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-2005. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2008. Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound – Part 6: Methods for Estimation of Awakenings Associated with Outdoor Noise Events Heard in Homes. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.9-2008. ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 2009. Performance Criteria, Design Requirements, and Guidelines for Schools. American National Standards Institute Standard ANSI S12.60-2002. ASA (Acoustical Society of America). 2000. Acoustics of Classrooms. Technical Committee on Architectural Acoustics. August. Austin, O.L., Jr., W.B. Robertson, Jr. and G.E. Woolfenden. 1970. Mass hatching failure in Dry Tortugas Sooty Terns. Proceedings of the International Ornithological Congress, Volume 15: 627. Battis, J.C. 1988. Effects of Low-Flying Aircraft on Archeological Structures. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, Air Force Systems Command AFGL-TR-0263. Environmental Research Paper 1013. Berger, E. H., W.D. Ward, J.C. Morrill, and L.H. Royster. 1995. Noise and Hearing Conservation Manual, Fourth Edition. American Industrial Hygiene Association, Fairfax, Virginia. Black, B., M. Collopy, H. Percivial, A. Tiller, and P. Bohall. 1984. Effects of Low-Altitude Military Training Flights on Wading Bird Colonies in Florida. Florida Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Technical Report No. 7. Bond, J., C.F. Winchester, L.E. Campbell, and J.C. Webb. 1963. The Effects of Loud Sounds on the Physiology and Behavior of Swine. U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Technical Bulletin 1280. Bowles, A.E., C. Book, and F. Bradley. 1990. Effects of Low-Altitude Aircraft Overflights on Domestic Turkey Poults. U.S. Air Force, Wright-Patterson AFB, AL/OEBN Noise Effects Branch. Bowles, A.E., F.T. Awbrey, and J.R. Jehl. 1991. The Effects of High-Amplitude Impulsive Noise On Hatching Success: A Reanalysis of the Sooty Tern Incident, HSD-TP-91-0006. Hubbs Marine Research Center, Sea World Research Center. February. Bowles, A.E., M. Knobler, M.D. Sneddon, and B.A. Kugler. 1994. Effects of Simulated Sonic Booms on the Hatchability of White Leghorn Chicken Eggs. Occupational and Environmental Health Directorate Bioenvironmental Engineering Division, Wright Patterson AFB, AL/OE-TR-1994-0179. Bowles, A.E. 1995. Responses of Wildlife to Noise. In: Wildlife and Recreationists: Coexistence Through Management and Research, R.L. Knight and K.J. Gutzwiller eds. Island Press, Washington, DC. Bronzaft, A.L. 1997. Beware: Noise is Hazardous to Our Children’s Development. Hearing Rehabilitation Quarterly, Volume 22, Number 1. Brown, A.L. 1990. Measuring the Effect of Aircraft Noise on Sea Birds. Environment International, Volume 16: 587-592. Bullock, T.H., D.P. Donning, and C.R. Best. 1980. Evoked Brain Potentials Demonstrate Hearing in a Manatee (Trichechus inunguis). Journal of Mammals, Volume 61, Number 1: 130-133. Burger, J. 1981. Behavioral Responses of Herring Gulls (Larus argentatus) to Aircraft Noise. Environmental Pollution (Series A), Volume 24: 177-184. Burger, J. 1986. The Effect of Human Activity on Shorebirds in Two Coastal Bays in Northeastern United States. Environmental Conservation, Volume 13, Number 2: 123-130. CHABA (Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics). 1977. Guidelines for Preparing Environmental Impact Statements on Noise. Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics, and Biomechanics. National Research Council/National Academy of Sciences (NRC/NAS). CHABA (Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics). 1981. Assessment of Community Noise Response to High-Energy Impulsive Sounds. Report of Working Group 84, Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics, Assembly of Behavioral and Social Sciences. National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences. Washington, DC. Chen, T., S. Chen, P. Hsieh, and H. Chiang. 1997. Auditory Effects of Aircraft Noise on People Living Near an Airport. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 52, Number 1: 45-50. Chen, T., and S. Chen. 1993. Effects of Aircraft Noise on Hearing and Auditory Pathway Function of School-Age Children. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, Volume 65, Number 2: 107-111. Cogger, E.A., and E.G. Zegarra. 1980. Sonic Booms and Reproductive Performance of Marine Birds: Studies on Domestic Fowl as Analogues. In Jehl, J.R., and C.F. Cogger, eds., Potential Effects of Space Shuttle Sonic Booms on the Biota and Geology of the California Channel Islands: Research Reports, San Diego State University Center for Marine Studies Technical Report No. 80-1. Cohen, S., G.W. Evans, D.S. Krantz, and D. Stokols. 1980. Physiological, Motivational, and Cognitive Effects of Aircraft Noise on Children: Moving from Laboratory to Field. American Psychologist, Volume 35: 231-243. Conomy, J.T., J.A. Dubovsky, J.A. Collazo, and W.J. Fleming. 1998. Do Black Ducks and Wood Ducks Habituate to Aircraft Disturbance? Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 62, Number 3: 1135-1142. Cottereau, P. 1978. Effect of sonic boom from aircraft on wildlife and animal husbandry. In: Effects of Noise on Wildlife. Academic Press, New York, New York. Davis, R.W., W.E. Evans, and B. Wursig. 2000. Cetaceans, Sea Turtles, and Seabirds in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: Distribution, Abundance, and Habitat Associations. Volume II of Technical Report, prepared by Texas A&M University at Galveston and the National Marine Fisheries Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, and Minerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region, New Orleans, Louisiana, OCS Study MMS 2000-003. DoD (U.S. Department of Defense). 2009. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense, Ashton B. Carter, re: “Methodology for assessing Hearing Loss Risk and Impacts in DoD Environmental Impact Analysis,” 16 June. DoL (U.S. Department of Labor). 1971. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Occupational Noise Exposure, Standard No. 1910.95. Dooling, R.J. 1978. Behavior and psychophysics of hearing in birds. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Supplement 1, Volume 65: S4. DOT (United States Department of Transportation). 1984. Airport Noise Compatibility Planning; Development of Submission of Airport Operator’s Noise Exposure Map and Noise Compatibility Program; Final Rule and Request for Comments. 14 CFR Parts 11 and 150, Federal Register, Volume 49, Number 244. 18 December. Dufour, P.A. 1980. Effects of Noise on Wildlife and Other Animals: Review of Research Since 1971. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Noise Abatement and Control. July. Edmonds, L.D., P.M. Layde, and J.D. Erickson. 1979. Airport Noise and Teratogenesis. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 34, Number 4: 243-247. Edwards, R.G., A.B. Broderson, R.W. Harbour, D.F. McCoy, and C.W. Johnson. 1979. Assessment of the Environmental Compatibility of Differing Helicopter Noise Certification Standards. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC. Eldred, K, and H. von Gierke. 1993. Effects of Noise on People. Noise/News International, Volume 1, Number 2: 67-89. June. Ellis, D.H., C.H. Ellis, and D.P. Mindell. 1991. Raptor Responses to Low-Level Jet Aircraft and Sonic Booms. Environmental Pollution, Volume 74: 53-83. Evans, G.W., and L. Maxwell. 1997. Chronic Noise Exposure and Reading Deficits: The Mediating Effects of Language Acquisition. Environment and Behavior, Volume 29, Number 5: 638-656. Evans, G.W., and S.J. Lepore. 1993. Nonauditory Effects of Noise on Children: A Critical Review. Children’s Environment, Volume 10: 31-51. Evans, G.W., M. Bullinger, and S. Hygge. 1998. Chronic Noise Exposure and Physiological Response: A Prospective Study of Children Living under Environmental Stress. Psychological Science, Volume 9: 75-77. FICAN (Federal Interagency Committee on Aircraft Noise). 1997. Annual Report. U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory Report AFRL-HE-WP-TR-1998-0144. February. FICON (Federal Interagency Committee on Noise). 1992. Federal Agency Review of Selected Airport Noise Analysis Issues. August. FICUN (Federal Interagency Committee on Urban Noise). 1980. Guidelines for Considering Noise in Land-Use Planning and Control. June. Fidell, S., D.S. Barger, and T.J Schultz. 1989. Updating a Dosage-Effect Relationship for the Prevalence of Annoyance Due to General Transportation Noise. Noise and Sonic Boom Impact Technology, Human Systems Division, Air Force Systems Command, Brooks AFB, Texas. December. Fidell, S., K. Pearson, R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, L. Silvati, and D. Barber. 1994. Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance in Residential Settings. Technical Report. Armstrong Laboratory, Air Force Materiel Command. Final Report for July 1992 to February 1994. Fidell, S., K. Pearsons, R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, L. Silvati, and D.S. Barber. 1995a. Field Study of Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 96. Number 2, Part 1. August. Fidell, S., R. Howe, B. Tabachnick, K. Pearsons, and M. Sneddon. 1995b. Noise-Induced Sleep Disturbance in Residences Near Two Civil Airports. NASA Langley Research Center. NASA Contractor Report 198252. Hampton, Virginia. December. Fidell, S., B. Tabachnick, and L. Silvati. 1996. Effects of Military Aircraft Noise on Residential Property Values. 16 October. Finegold, L.S., C.S. Harris, and H.E. von Gierke. 1994. Community Annoyance and Sleep Disturbance: Updated Criteria for Assessing the Impacts of General Transportation Noise on People. Noise Control Engineering Journal, Volume 42, Number 1: 25-30. January-February. Fisch, L. 1977. Research Into Effects of Aircraft Noise on Hearing of Children in Exposed Residential Areas Around an Airport. Acoustics Letters, Volume 1: 42-43. Fraser, J.D., L.D. Franzel, and J.G. Mathiesen. 1985. The Impact of Human Activities on Breeding Bald Eagles in North-Central Minnesota. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 49: 585-592. Frerichs, R.R., B.L. Beeman, and A.H. Coulson. 1980. Los Angeles Airport Noise and Mortality: Faulty Analysis and Public Policy. American Journal of Public Health, Volume 70, Number 4: 357-362. April. Gladwin, D.N., K.M. Manci, and R. Villella. 1988. Effects of Aircraft Noise and Sonic Booms on Domestic Animals and Wildlife. Bibliographic Abstracts. NERC-88/32. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Ecology Research Center, Fort Collins, Colorado. Grandin, T., 1991. An Inside View of Autism. Available online at http://www.autism.com/fam_ inside_view.asp. Green, K.B., B.S. Pasternack, and R.E. Shore. 1982. Effects of Aircraft Noise on Reading Ability of School-Age Children. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 37, Number 1: 24-31. Grubb, T.G., and R.M. King. 1991. Assessing Human Disturbance of Breeding Bald Eagles with Classification Tree Models. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 55, Number 3: 500- 511. Gunn, W.W.H., and J.A. Livingston. 1974. Disturbance to Birds by Gas Compressor Noise Simulators, Aircraft, and Human Activity in the MacKenzie Valley and the North Slope. Chapters VI-VIII, Arctic Gas Biological Report, Series Volume 14. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, and B. Berglund. 1998. Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure and Child Cognitive Performance and Stress. In Carter, N.L., and R.F. Job, eds., Proceedings of Noise as a Public Health Problem, Volume 1, Sydney, Australia University of Sydney, pp. 329-335. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, B. Berglund, and J. Head. 2001a. A Follow-up Study of Effects of Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure on Child Stress Responses and Cognition. International Journal of Epidemiology, Volume 30: 839-845. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, R.F. Job, B. Berglund, and J. Head. 2001b. Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure, Stress Responses, Mental Health and Cognitive Performance in School Children. Psychological Medicine, Volume 31: 265-277. February. Haines, M.M., S.A. Stansfeld, S. Brentnall, J. Head, B. Berry, M. Jiggins, and S. Hygge. 2001c. The West London Schools Study: the Effects of Chronic Aircraft Noise Exposure on Child Health. Psychological Medicine, Volume 31: 1385-1396. November. Harris, C.M. (editor). 1979. Handbook of Noise Control. McGraw-Hill: New York, New York. Harris, C.S. 1997. The Effects of Noise on Health. Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, AL/OE-TR-1997-0077. Hershey, R.L., R.J. Kevala, and S.L. Burns. 1975. Analysis of the Effects of Concorde Aircraft Noise on Historic Structures. FAA RD-75-118. July. Hygge, S., G.W. Evans, and M. Bullinger. 2002. A Prospective Study of Some Effects of Aircraft Noise on Cognitive Performance in School Children. Psychological Science, Volume 13: 469-474. Ising, H., Z. Joachims, W. Babisch, and E. Rebentisch. 1999. Effects of Military Low-Altitude Flight Noise I Temporary Threshold Shift in Humans. Zeitschrift fur Audiologie (Germany), Volume 38, Number 4: 118-127. Jehl, J.R., and C.F. Cooper, eds. 1980. Potential Effects of Space Shuttle Sonic Booms on the Biota and Geology of the California Channel Islands. Research Reports, Center for Marine Studies, San Diego State University, San Diego, California, Technical Report No. 80-1. Jones, F.N., and J. Tauscher. 1978. Residence Under an Airport Landing Pattern as a Factor in Teratism. Archives of Environmental Health, 10-12. January/February. Kovalcik, K., and J. Sottnik. 1971. Vplyv Hluku Na Mliekovú Úzitkovost Kráv [The Effect of Noise on the Milk Efficiency of Cows]. Zivocisná Vyroba, Volume 16, Number 10-11: 795-804. Kryter, K.D. 1984. Physiological, Psychological, and Social Effects of Noise. NASA Reference Publication 1115, 446. July. Kryter, K.D., and F. Poza. 1980. Effects of Noise on Some Autonomic System Activities. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 67, Number 6: 2036-2044. Kushlan, J.A. 1979. Effects of Helicopter Censuses on Wading Bird Colonies. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 43, Number 3: 756-760. LeBlanc, M.M., C. Lombard, S. Lieb, E. Klapstein, and R. Massey. 1991. Behavioral and Physiological Responses of Horses to Simulated Aircraft Noise. U.S. Air Force, NSBIT Program for University of Florida. Lynch, T.E., and D.W. Speake. 1978. Eastern Wild Turkey Behavioral Responses Induced by Sonic Boom. In: Effects of Noise on Wildlife. Academic Press: New York, New York, pp. 47-61. Manci, K.M., D.N. Gladwin, R. Villella, and M.G. Cavendish. 1988. Effects of Aircraft Noise and Sonic Booms on Domestic Animals and Wildlife: A Literature Synthesis. U.S. Air Force Engineering and Services Center and U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. June. Meacham, W.C., and N. Shaw. 1979. Effects of Jet Noise on Mortality Rates. British Journal of Audiology, Volume 13: 77-80. August. Michalak, R., H. Ising, and E. Rebentisch. 1990. Acute Circulatory Effects of Military Low- Altitude Flight Noise. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, Volume 62, Number 5: 365-372. Moulton, C.L. 1992. Air Force Procedure for Predicting Noise Around Airbases: Noise Exposure Model (NOISEMAP). Technical Report AL-TR-1992-59. NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization). 2000. The Effects of Noise from Weapons and Sonic Booms, and the Impact on Humans, Wildlife, Domestic Animals and Structures. Final Report of the Working Group Study Follow-up Program to the Pilot Study on Aircraft Noise, Report No. 241. June. Nelson, J. 2003. Meta-Analysis of Airport Noise and Hedonic Property Values: Problems and Prospects. July Newman, J.S., and K.R. Beattie. 1985. Aviation Noise Effects. U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration Report No. FAA-EE-85-2. Nixon, C.W., D.W. West, and N.K. Allen. 1993. Human Auditory Responses to Aircraft Flyover Noise. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Congress on Noise as a Public Problem, Volume 2, Vallets, M., ed. Arcueil, France: INRETS. NPS (National Park Service). 1994. Report to Congress: Report on Effects of Aircraft Overflights on the National Park System. Prepared Pursuant to Public Law 100-91, The National Parks Overflights Act of 1987. 12 September. Ollerhead, J.B., C.J. Jones, R.E. Cadoux, A. Woodley, B.J. Atkinson, J.A. Horne, F. Pankhurst, L. Reyner, K.I. Hume, F. Van, A. Watson, I.D. Diamond, P. Egger, D. Holmes, and J. McKean. 1992. Report of a Field Study of Aircraft Noise and Sleep Disturbance. Commissioned by the United Kingdom (UK) Department of Transport for the 36th UK Department of Safety, Environment and Engineering, London, England: Civil Aviation Authority. December. Parker, J.B., and N.D. Bayley. 1960. Investigations on Effects of Aircraft Sound on Milk Production of Dairy Cattle, 1957-58. U.S. Agricultural Research Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Technical Report Number ARS 44-60. Pater, L.D., D.K. Delaney, T.J. Hayden, B. Lohr, and R. Dooling. 1999. Assessment of Training Noise Impacts on the Red-cockaded Woodpecker: Preliminary Results – Final Report. Report Number 99/51, ADA Number 367234. U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Construction Engineering Research Laboratory, Champaign, Illinois. February. Pearsons, K.S., Barber, D.S., and Tabachick, B.G. 1989. Analyses of the Predictability of Noise- Induced Sleep Disturbance. USAF Report HSD-TR-89-029. October. Plotkin, K.J., L.C. Sutherland, and J.A. Molino. 1987. Environmental Noise Assessment for Military Aircraft Training Routes, Volume II: Recommended Noise Metric. Wyle Research Report WR 86-21. January. Pulles, M.P.J., W. Biesiot, and R. Stewart. 1990. Adverse Effects of Environmental Noise on Health: An Interdisciplinary Approach. Environment International, Volume 16: 437-445. Richardson, W.J., C.R. Greene, Jr., C.I. Malme, and D.H. Thomson. 1995. Marine Mammals and Noise. Academic Press: San Diego, California. Rosenlund, M., N. Berglind, G. Bluhm, L. Jarup, and G. Pershagen. 2001. Increased Prevalence of Hypertension in a Population Exposed to Aircraft Noise. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Volume 58, Number 12: 769-773. December. Schultz, T.J. 1978. Synthesis of Social Surveys on Noise Annoyance. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 64: 377¬405. August. Schwarze, S., and S.J. Thompson. 1993. Research on Non-Auditory Physiological Effects of Noise Since 1988: Review and Perspectives. In Vallets, M., ed., Proceedings of the 6th International Congress on Noise as a Public Problem, Volume 3, Arcueil, France: INRETS. Shield, B.M., and J.E. Dockrell. 2008. The Effects of Environmental and Classroom Noise on the Academic Attainments of Primary School Children. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 123(1). January. Stusnick, E., D.A. Bradley, J.A. Molino, and G. DeMiranda. 1992. The Effect of Onset Rate on Aircraft Noise Annoyance. Volume 2: Rented Own-Home Experiment. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR 92-3. March. Stusnick, E., D.A. Bradley, M.A. Bossi, and D.G. Rickert. 1993. The Effect of Onset Rate on Aircraft Noise Annoyance. Volume 3: Hybrid Own-Home Experiment. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR 93-22. December. Sutherland, L.C. 1989. Assessment of Potential Structural Damage from Low Altitude Subsonic Aircraft. Wyle Laboratories Research Report WR89-16. June. Tang, J.C., C.H. Kennedy, A. Koppekin, and M. Caruso. 2002. Functional Analysis of Stereotypical Ear Covering in a Child with Autism. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, Volume 35, Number 1: 95-98. Ting, C., J. Garrelick, and A. Bowles. 2002. An analysis of the response of Sooty Tern eggs to sonic boom overpressures. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Volume 111, Number 1, Part 2: 562-568. Trimper, P.G., N.M. Standen, L.M. Lye, D. Lemon, T.E. Chubbs, and G.W. Humphries. 1998. Effects of low-level jet aircraft noise on the behavior of nesting osprey. Journal of Applied Ecology, Volume 35, 122-130. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 1993. The Impact of Low Altitude Flights on Livestock and Poultry. Air Force Handbook. Volume 8, Environmental Protection. 28 January. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 1994. Air Force Position Paper on the Effects of Aircraft Overflights on Large Domestic Stock. Approved by HQ USAF/CEVP. 3 October. USAF (U.S. Air Force). 2000. Preliminary Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for Homestead Air Force Base Closure and Reuse. Prepared by SAIC. 20 July. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1974. Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect the Public Health and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Report 550/9-74-004. March. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1978. Protective Noise Levels. Office of Noise Abatement and Control, Washington, DC. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Report 550/9-79-100. November. USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 1982. Guidelines for Noise Impact Analysis. USEPA Report 550/9-82-105. April. USFS (United States Forest Service). 1992. Report to Congress: Potential Impacts of Aircraft Overflights of National Forest System Wilderness. Prepared pursuant to Public Law 100-91, The National Parks Overflights Act of 1987. von Gierke, H.R. 1990. The Noise-Induced Hearing Loss Problem. NIH Consensus Development Conference on Noise and Hearing Loss, January 22-24. Washington, DC. Ward, D.H., E.J. Taylor, M.A. Wotawa, R.A. Stehn, D.V. Derksen, and C.J. Lensink. 1986. Behavior of Pacific Black Brant and Other Geese in Response to Aircraft Overflights and Other Disturbances at Izembek Lagoon, Alaska. 1986 Annual Report, p. 68. Ward, D.H., and R.A. Stehn. 1990. Response of Brant and Other Geese to Aircraft Disturbances at Izembek Lagoon, Alaska. Final Technical Report, Number MMS900046. Alaska Fish and Wildlife Research Center, Anchorage, Alaska. Minerals Management Service, Anchorage, Alaska, Alaska Outer Continental Shelf Office. Weisenberger, M.E., P.R. Krausman, M.C. Wallace, and D.W. De Young, and O.E. Maughan. 1996. Effects of Simulated Jet Aircraft Noise on Heart Rate and Behavior of Desert Ungulates. Journal of Wildlife Management, Volume 60, Number 1: 52-61. Wever, E.G., and J.A. Vernon. 1957. Auditory Responses in the Spectacled Caiman. Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology, Volume 50: 333-339. WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. Guidelines for Community Noise. B. Berglund, T. Lindvall, and D. Schwela, eds. Wu, T.N., J.S. Lai, C.Y. Shen, T.S Yu, and P.Y. Chang. 1995. Aircraft Noise, Hearing Ability, and Annoyance. Archives of Environmental Health, Volume 50, Number 6: 452-456. November-December. PUBLIC DOCUMENTS Air Force Instructions AFI 32-7063 – Air Installation Compatible Use Zone Program Air Force Manuals AFMAN 32-1123 – Airfield and Heliport Planning and Design Executive Orders Executive Order 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK ATTACHMENT C-1 REPRESENTATIVE LOCATIONS POINT ANALYSIS THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 