Responsible Federal Agency: U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Cooperating Agencies: None Title: Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the FutureGen 2.0 Project (DOE/EIS-0460D) Location: Morgan County, Illinois Contact: For further information about this For general information on the DOE process for Environmental Impact Statement, implementing the National Environmental Policy Act, contact: contact: Cliff Whyte, NEPA Compliance Officer Carol Borgstrom,Director U.S. Departmentof Energy Office ofNEPAPolicyand Compliance (GC-54) NationalEnergy TechnologyLaboratory U.S. Departmentof Energy 3610Collins Ferry Road 1000Independence Avenue, SW Morgantown, WV26507-0880 Washington, DC 20585-0103 (304)285-2098 (202)586-4600orleave message Fax: (304)285-4403 at (800)472-2756 Email: Cliff.Whyte@netl.doe.gov Email: AskNEPA@hq.doe.gov Abstract: This Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) evaluates the potential impacts associated with DOE’s proposed action to provide financial assistance to the FutureGen Alliance (the Alliance) for the FutureGen 2.0 Project, including the direct and indirect environmental impacts from construction and operation of the proposed project. DOE’s proposed action would provide approximately $1 billion of funding (primarily under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) to support construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The funding would be used for project design and development, procurement of capital equipment, construction, and to support a 56-month demonstration period for a coal-fueled electric generation plant integrated with carbon capture and storage. For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance would construct and operate a 168-megawatt electrical (MWe) gross output coal-fueled electric generation plant using advanced oxy-combustion technology. The plant would use existing infrastructure, including the existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4), at Ameren Energy Resources’ Meredosia Energy Center on the Illinois River just south of Meredosia, Illinois. The proposed project would include facilities designed to capture at least 90 percent of the carbon dioxide (CO2) that would otherwise be emitted to the atmosphere, equivalent to approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 captured per year. The captured CO2 would be compressed and transported via a new underground pipeline, approximately 30 miles long and 12 inches in diameter, to a geologic storage area in eastern Morgan County, where it would be injected and stored in the Mt. Simon Formation (a saline aquifer) approximately 4,000 to 4,500 feet below the ground surface. The project would also employ systems for the monitoring, verification, and accounting of the CO2 being geologically stored. A visitor and research center and a training facility would be sited in the vicinity of Jacksonville, Illinois. The proposed project would provide performance and emissions data, as well as establish operating and maintenance experience, that would facilitate future large-scale commercial deployment of oxy-combustion technology and geologic CO2 storage. DOE is the lead federal agency responsible for preparation of this EIS. DOE prepared the EIS pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and in compliance with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) implementing regulations for NEPA (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1500 through 1508) and DOE NEPA implementing procedures (10 CFR 1021). The EIS evaluates the potential environmental impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project as part of DOE’s decision-making process to determine whether to provide financial assistance. The EIS also analyzes the no action alternative, under which DOE would not provide financial assistance for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Comment Period: DOE encourages public participation in the NEPA process. Comments received or postmarked by June 17, 2013, will be addressed in the Final EIS. DOE will consider late comments to the extent practicable. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction ................................................................................................................................................ S-1 DOE’s Purpose and Need .......................................................................................................................... S-3 DOE Proposed Action ................................................................................................................................ S-3 Alternatives Considered By DOE .............................................................................................................. S-3 No Action Alternative ........................................................................................................................ S-4 Alternatives Dismissed from Further Evaluation ............................................................................... S-4 Alternative Fuel Sources ............................................................................................................... S-4 Alternative Advanced Coal-Based Electric Generating Technologies ......................................... S-4 Alternative Retrofitting Technologies .......................................................................................... S-4 Alternative Sites for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test ........................................................ S-5 Alternative CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir Locations ......................................................... S-5 EIS Scoping Process .................................................................................................................................. S-6 Description of the FutureGen 2.0 Project .................................................................................................. S-7 The Meredosia Energy Center ............................................................................................................ S-7 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test .................................................................................................... S-8 CO2 Pipeline ..................................................................................................................................... S-14 CO2 Storage Study Area ................................................................................................................... S-16 Educational Facilities ....................................................................................................................... S-24 Characteristics of the Affected Environment ........................................................................................... S-24 Environmental Impacts ............................................................................................................................ S-29 Mitigation ................................................................................................................................................. S-30 Potential Cumulative Impacts .................................................................................................................. S-44 Glossary ................................................................................................................................................... S-47 LIST OF TABLES Table S-1. Overview of Oxy-Combustion Facility Components and Features ........................................ S-13 Table S-2. Affected Environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project .............................................................. S-25 Table S-3. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project .............. S-31 Table S-4. Summary of Cumulative Impacts ........................................................................................... S-44 LIST OF FIGURES Figure S-1. The FutureGen 2.0 Project .................................................................................................. S-1 Figure S-2. Project Location Map .......................................................................................................... S-2 Figure S-3. Meredosia Energy Center.................................................................................................... S-7 Figure S-4. Meredosia Energy Center Features – Aerial Overview....................................................... S-9 Figure S-5. Meredosia Energy Center Features – Coal and Fuel Handling Systems ........................... S-10 Figure S-6. Simplified Diagram of Oxy-Combustion Facility ............................................................. S-11 Figure S-7. Conceptual Oxy-Combustion Facility Site Layout ........................................................... S-12 Figure S-8. Southern and Northern CO2 Pipeline Route Options to CO2 Storage Study Area  ........... S-15 Figure S-9. Recommended Construction Right-of-Way Cross Section ............................................... S-16 Figure S-10. Primary Injection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout.................................... S-18 Figure S-11. Secondary Injection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout................................ S-19 Figure S-12. Geological Stratigraphic Column for the CO2 Storage Study Area and  Proposed Vertical Injection Well Construction Details .................................................................... S-21 Figure S-13. Proposed Horizontal Injection Well Construction Details ................................................ S-22 Figure S-14. Predicted Areal Extent of CO2 Plume ............................................................................... S-23 Figure S-15. Monitoring Well Network Conceptual Layout ................................................................. S-24 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK ACRONYMS Acronym Definition bgs below ground surface CCPI Clean Coal Power Initiative CEQ Council on Environmental Quality CFR Code of Federal Regulations CO2 carbon dioxide dBA A-weighted sound level in decibels  DOE U.S. Department of Energy EIS Environmental Impact Statement  FR Federal Register GHG greenhouse gas IDNR Illinois Department of Natural Resources IDOA Illinois Department of Agriculture IGCC integrated gasification combined cycle ILCS Illinois Compiled Statutes MVA monitoring,  verification, and accounting MWe megawatt electrical NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NOI Notice of Intent NRHP National Register of Historic Places ppmv parts per million by volume ROD Record of Decision ROI region of influence ROW right-of-way SHPO State Historic Preservation Office U.S. United States UIC UndergroundInjection Control USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USDW underground source of drinking water USEPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK SUMMARY INTRODUCTION The United States (U.S.) Department of Energy (DOE) prepared this Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) to evaluate the potential impacts associated with the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. DOE’s proposed action would provide financial assistance to the FutureGen Alliance (the Alliance) for the Project. DOE is the federal agency responsible for preparation of this EIS, which was prepared pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and in compliance with the Council on Environmental Quality implementing regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1500-1508) and DOE NEPA implementing procedures (10 CFR 1021). To date, DOE has authorized the expenditure of funds for the purpose of project definition, cost estimating, and preliminary and front-end engineering design activities, and to facilitate environmental review. Such activities do not have an adverse impact on the environment or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives. This EIS will inform DOE’s decision of whether to authorize the expenditure of additional funds for final design, construction, and initial operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. FutureGen 2.0 is a public-private partnership with the purpose of developing the world’s first large-scale oxy-combustion electric generation project integrated with carbon capture and storage. The FutureGen 2.0 Project replaces the original FutureGen Project (DOE/EIS-0394) as explained in Section 1.2. The FutureGen 2.0 Project consists of two major components: the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Pipeline and Storage Reservoir (see Figure S-1). To date, DOE has authorized the expenditure of cost-shared funding to support project definition and planning efforts under Phase I and Phase II. DOE proposes to provide approximately $1 billion of financial assistance to the Alliance that would support preliminary and final design (completion of Phase II), construction and commissioning (Phase III), and operations (Phase IV).   FutureGen 2.0 Project Features Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test – Construction and operation of an integrated oxy-combustion coal boiler with CO2 capture, purification, and compression. Oxy-combustion is the combustion of coal with a mixture of manufactured oxygen and recycled flue gas (instead of air), resulting in a gas by-product that is primarily CO2. CO2 Pipeline – Construction and operation of approximately 30 miles of pipeline to transport CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center to a storage reservoir in Morgan County. Storage Reservoir – Construction and operation of surface facilities and injection and permanent storage of captured CO2 into a deep geologic formation. DOE entered into a cooperative agreement with the Alliance under which the Alliance, cooperating with Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren), would upgrade one unit in a power plant currently owned by Ameren near Meredosia, Illinois (see Figure S-2). The repowered unit would include oxy-combustion and carbon capture technologies provided by the Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group, Inc. and Air Liquide Process and Construction, Inc. The unit would capture at least 90 percent of its CO2 emissions and reduce other emissions to near zero. The captured CO2 would be transported through a 30-mile pipeline to injection wells where it would be injected deep into a geologic saline formation for permanent storage. The project would be designed to capture, transport, and inject approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 annually, up to a total of 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) over approximately 20 years. The Alliance would also construct and operate a visitor and research center in addition to training facilities related to carbon capture and storage in the vicinity of Jacksonville, Illinois. The DOE-funded demonstration period would last for 56 months from the start of operations (approximately 2017) through 2022. Figure S-2. Project Location Map The Alliance is a non-profit membership organization created to benefit the public interest and the interests of science through research, development, and demonstration of near-zero emissions coal technology. It was formed to partner with DOE on the FutureGen Initiative, announced by President George W. Bush on February 27, 2003. Members of the Alliance include some of the largest coal producers, coal users, and coal equipment suppliers in the world. The Alliance’s current members are: Alpha Natural Resources, Inc.; Anglo American, SA; Joy Global, Inc.; Peabody Energy Corporation; and Xstrata PLC. The active role of industry in this FutureGen Initiative ensures that the public and private sector share the cost and risk of developing the advanced technologies necessary to commercialize the FutureGen concept.  DOE’S PURPOSE AND NEED DOE considers the advancement of carbon capture and storage technology critically important to addressing CO2 emissions and global climate change concerns associated with coal-fueled energy. The purpose of DOE’s proposed action is to demonstrate the commercial feasibility of an advanced coal-based energy technology (oxycombustion) that can serve as a cost-effective approach to implementing carbon capture at new and existing coal-fueled energy facilities. The proposed project would also demonstrate utility-scale integration of transport and permanent storage of captured CO2 in a deep geologic formation. Implementation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project supports the objectives of the FutureGen Initiative to establish the feasibility and viability of producing electricity from coal with at least 90 percent CO2 capture and near-zero emissions of air pollutants. One of DOE's primary strategic goals is to protect our national and economic security by promoting a diverse supply and delivery of reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound energy. DOE’s action is needed to further this strategic goal with the recognition that coal serves an important role in the nation’s energy supply, and that there is growing need to upgrade or replace the nation’s aging energy infrastructure. The development of carbon capture and storage technologies through the FutureGen 2.0 Project would demonstrate a viable path forward for the ongoing and future use of the nation’s abundant coal reserves in a manner that addresses both aging infrastructure and environmental challenges. Federal financial support is needed to help reduce the risks inherent in these first-of-a-kind projects, which without financial assistance would be unlikely to occur. DOEPROPOSED ACTION DOE proposes to provide approximately $1 billion of financial assistance to the Alliance for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The financial assistance would support final design (Phase II), construction and commissioning (Phase III), and operations (Phase IV). The FutureGen 2.0 Project consists of two major components: the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir (see Figure S-1). The proposed action would support the FutureGen 2.0 Project components as summarized in the Description of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, below, and described in detail in Chapter 2, Proposed Action and Alternatives (see Sections 2.1, 2.4, and 2.5). ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BY DOE Section 102(2)(C) (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)) of NEPA requires that agencies discuss alternatives to the proposed action in an EIS. The purpose and need for a federal action determines the reasonable alternatives to be analyzed in the NEPA process. Thus, any reasonable alternative to the continued funding of the FutureGen 2.0 Project must be capable of satisfying the underlying purpose and need of the FutureGen Initiative. DOE developed the range of reasonable alternatives for the FutureGen 2.0 Project based on:  Evaluation of various clean coal technologies through the Clean Coal Power Initiative (CCPI) Program;  Analysis of the original FutureGen Project in terms of technology, costs, and suitability for geologic storage;  Data obtained and reviewed through variousfunding opportunity announcements; and  Interest of industry to participate in projects to support FutureGen 2.0. No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not continue to fund the FutureGen 2.0 Project into the final design, construction, and operation phases. Without DOE funding, it is unlikely that the Alliance, or industry in general, would undertake the utility-scale integration of CO2 capture and geologic storage with a coal-fueled power plant using oxy-combustion. Therefore, the no action alternative also represents a “no-build” alternative. Without DOE's investment in a utility-scale facility, the development of oxycombustion repowered plants integrated with CO2 capture and geologic storage would also occur more slowly or notat all. Alternatives Dismissed from Further Evaluation Alternative Fuel Sources Because the FutureGen Initiative was conceived for the purpose of encouraging commercial development of advanced coal-based carbon capture and storage technologies, other technologies that cannot serve to carry out that goal are not reasonable alternatives. Nuclear power, renewable energy sources (e.g., wind and solar power), and energy conservation improvements do not address the specific goal of reducing CO2 emissions from coal-fueled energy production and, therefore, are not considered to be reasonable alternatives to FutureGen 2.0. These fuel sources and many others are addressed by other programs and projects in DOE’s diverse portfolio of energy research, development, and demonstration efforts. Alternative Advanced Coal-Based Electric Generating Technologies Technologies for carbon capture at advanced coal-based electric generating facilities fall into two general categories, pre-combustion and post-combustion. Pre-combustion capture technologies remove carbon from the process stream (fuel gas) after the solid coal feed has been converted (i.e., gasified). Post-combustion capture technologies remove carbon from the process stream (flue gas) after it has been combusted in the boiler. As explained in Section 1.2, the original FutureGen Project considered the demonstration of integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) technology for the generation of electricity with pre-combustion capture and storage of CO2 that would otherwise be emitted. Rising costs for the original project delayed DOE’s decision and during the intervening time a number of commercial IGCC projects were proposed, many of which would employ pre-combustion carbon capture technology similar to that which was to be proven by the original FutureGen Project. At the time of award of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, DOE had already awarded funding for four other large-scale projects intended to demonstrate the underlying IGCC concept of the original FutureGen Project. Due to the now-commercial status of IGCC, along with multiple pre-combustion carbon capture projects within DOE’s demonstration portfolio, DOE identified the need for a utility-scale demonstration of post-combustion carbon capture technologies. Accordingly, the agency does not consider pre-combustion technologies to be reasonable alternatives for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Alternative Retrofitting Technologies Through review and consideration of the data and analysis associated with the original FutureGen Project, DOE identified the repowering of an existing power plant with oxy-combustion technology as the approach that would best meet cost and technology advancement objectives of the FutureGen Initiative. Instead of funding the construction and operation of a new IGCC plant, DOE considered two options for retrofitting an existing power plant to facilitate carbon capture and storage: repowering with oxycombustion technology or post-combustion scrubbing (removal from flue gas). DOE determined that the selection of the oxy-combustion technology for testing and evaluation would complement its CCPI portfolio by providing the opportunity to address a technology option that otherwise would be absent from DOE’s slate of projects. Therefore, DOE chose to consider retrofitting an existing power plant with oxy-combustion technology as a lower-cost replacement for the IGCC process originally proposed in the FutureGen Project. Because DOE is already assessing the merits of post-combustion scrubbing in other projects, the agency does not consider that technology to be a reasonable alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Alternative Sites for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test After determining that construction and operation of a new power plant was not reasonable and building upon the findings in the original FutureGen Final EIS, DOE considered potential power plants in the vicinity of the originally proposed Mattoon CO2 power plant and storage site as practicable candidates for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. DOE determined that the Meredosia Energy Center had the only available and appropriately sized unit that would be suitable for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Ameren was willing to make its Meredosia Energy Center Unit No. 4 available for the FutureGen Initiative in part because the aging unit was not a baseload power generator and operated only sporadically to provide peaking power. Therefore, repowering efforts at the Meredosia Energy Center would not pose unacceptable disruptions of power generation or affect existing power purchase agreements. It is difficult for owners of existing power plants to accept the financial and operational risks associated with repowering existing equipment and adding untested CO2 capture and storage to their plants. With no other power plant owners willing to undertake the inherent financial and operational risks, DOE considers the Meredosia Energy Center to be the only viable location for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component of FutureGen 2.0. DOE does not consider other power plants that are unavailable to the FutureGen 2.0 Project to be reasonable alternatives. Alternative CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir Locations After DOE identified the Meredosia Energy Center for the evolving FutureGen Initiative, the Mattoon site proponents withdrew their site from further consideration based on a determination that use of the site strictly for CO2 storage was not in the community’s best interest. In response to the Mattoon site being withdrawn as a storage site, DOE asked the Alliance to identify alternate storage sites to which it would be economically viable to transport the CO2 captured at the Meredosia Energy Center for injection and permanent storage in the same geologic formation as proposed for the Mattoon site (the Mt. Simon Formation). The Alliance then undertook a siting process, similar to the original process used to select the Mattoon site, to identify possible locations. The Alliance’s siting process included screening sites using specific qualifying criteria related to geologic conditions as well as a variety of other factors, including land use and environmental considerations (see Section 2.5.2.1). This process culminated in the selection of a site in Morgan County as the Alliance’s preferred site, with two sites (in Christian County and Douglas County) identified as potential alternate sites. The Alliance conducted a detailed geological stratigraphic analysis at the preferred Morgan County site to characterize and verify the viability of the proposed CO2 storage reservoir. The Alliance also conducted pipeline routing studies for the three sites under consideration, as well as desktop and targeted field studies to evaluate sensitive environmental resources that could be adversely affected by the project. Based on the findings of the geological analysis and environmental studies, combined with a cost analysis of the pipelines to the alternate sites, the Alliance confirmed that the proposed Morgan County site remained its preferred site. Through these analyses, the Alliance also determined that the costs of siting, constructing, and operating a CO2 pipeline to either the Christian County or Douglas County sites would be cost-prohibitive. The Alliance estimated that an additional $50 million to $100 million would be required to construct a pipeline that would be approximately 50 miles (Christian County) or 100 miles (Douglas County) longer than a pipeline required for the Morgan County site. On July 17, 2012, the Alliance Board of Directors affirmed that the proposed Morgan County site remained its preferred location and voted to direct the Alliance to no longer pursue the sites in Christian County and Douglas County as alternate sites due to cost considerations. The Alliance notified DOE and the proponents of Christian County and Douglas County that their locations were no longer being considered as alternate sites and that the Alliance would not construct or operate a CO2 storage reservoir at either site. As a result, the site proponents were released to find other uses for their proposed sites. Because of the Alliance’s decision to no longer consider the Christian County and Douglas County sites, DOE has determined that these sites are not reasonable alternatives as CO2 storage reservoirs for FutureGen 2.0. Therefore, these sites have been eliminated fromfurther consideration in this EIS. EISSCOPING PROCESS On May 23, 2011, DOE published a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare EIS Scoping an EIS in the Federal Register (FR) under Docket ID No. FR Doc. 2010–12632 (76 FR 29728). The NOI initially identified potential EIS scoping is the process by which issues and areas of impact that would be addressed in the EIS. After the scope of issues and alternatives to issuing the NOI, DOE conducted three public scoping meetings and be examined in the EIS is determined. The process includes soliciting input consulted with various interested governmental agencies and from the public and consulting with stakeholders. During the public scoping period, DOE solicited public interested governmental agencies and input to ensure that: (1) significant issues were identified early; stakeholders, to identify public and (2) issues of minimal significance would not consume excessive time agency concerns and significant issues. and effort; and (3) the EIS would be thorough and balanced, in accordance with applicable regulations and guidance. DOE held public scoping meetings on the dates indicated at the following locations:  June 7, 2011, at Taylorville High School, Taylorville, Illinois  June 8, 2011, at Ironhorse Golf Club, Tuscola, Illinois  June 9, 2011, at the Elks Lodge, Jacksonville, Illinois The public scoping period ended on June 22, 2011, after a 30-day comment period. During the comment period, DOE accepted comments by telephone, facsimile, U.S. mail, and electronic mail. In general, respondents expressed concerns regarding potential impacts to farmers and farmland (e.g., loss of farmland or impacts to soil). Other concerns included: issues with the experimental nature of the project; a lack of confidence that economic benefits would occur; concerns about the use of public funds for a private endeavor; belief that DOE funding should go toward renewable and alternative energy technologies from sources other than coal; and concerns about potential increased electricity costs for consumers. The majority of issues strictly related to natural resources tended to be general in nature (e.g., potential impacts to surface waters should be addressed). Additionally, two petitions in opposition to the project, signed by a total of approximately 340 residents and landowners in Morgan County, and one petition signed by 55 residents and landowners in Douglas County, were submitted to DOE. Of the commenters that responded favorably for the project, many commented positively primarily due to economic and job creation benefits for the community, as well as benefits in terms of self-sufficient national energy production. Following the intent of NEPA, DOE uses the scoping process to focus the analysis of issues and impacts in the EIS. Rather than providing responses to specific comments received during scoping, DOE endeavors to ensure that the EIS addresses and analyzes issues and potential environmental impacts appropriately based on commenter concerns. Chapter 1 (see Table 1-1) provides a summary of the scoping comments received, organized by comment category or applicable resource area, and it identifies the appropriate sections in the EIS where the respective issues are addressed. The subjects and issues raised in specific comments are summarized in more detail in Table 3 of Appendix A, Public Scoping. DOE also contacted federal and state agencies and Native American tribes during the scoping process to initiate interagency and intergovernmental coordination requirements under various laws. Consultation with the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) resulted in the development of a Programmatic Agreement to be signed by DOE, the Alliance, the SHPO, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation that would outline steps to address potential discoveries protected by the National Historic Preservation Act. Consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) resulted in the identification of species protected by the Endangered Species Act and by state law to be addressed in the EIS. DOE contacted the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to discuss the potential need for wetland permitting under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and contacted the U.S. and Illinois Departments of Agriculture (IDOA) to ensure conformance with the Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act. In compliance with the National Historic Preservation Act, DOE contacted the 18 federally recognized Native American tribal organizations that could have a cultural or historic affiliation with the area to be affected by the proposed project, based on the National Park Service’s listing of tribes to be contacted in conformance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.  DESCRIPTION OF THE FUTUREGEN 2.0PROJECT For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance would purchase from Ameren the assets of the Meredosia Energy Center that would be needed for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component of the proposed project. Ameren suspended plant operations at the end of 2011 but has retained the permits associated with the facility and will maintain the facilities to be available for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. All equipment remains in operable condition, which would enable Ameren to operate the generating facilities if the resumption of operations were to fit Ameren’s requirements. If the FutureGen 2.0 Project is implemented, Ameren would permanently terminate operations of the existing boilers and related power generation infrastructure. With support from Babcock & Wilcox and Air Liquide, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate an advanced oxy-combustion power generation plant. The oxy-combustion project has a proposed design capacity of 168 megawatt electrical (MWe) (gross) and would be integrated into the Meredosia Energy Center in order to make use of existing facilities and infrastructure. The facility would operate continuously to generate baseload electric power with a net output estimated at approximately 99 MWe. The project would repower the existing Unit 4 steam turbine generator and capture and compress approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year for subsequent transport and geologic storage. The project would be designed to meet DOE’s CO2 capture target of at least 90 percent (the project is actually designed to capture up to 98 percent) while reducing emissions levels of sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, mercury, acid gases, and particulate matter during normal operations. The Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center, shown in Figure S-3, is located adjacent to the east side of the Illinois River, south of the village of Meredosia, Illinois. The 5,300-foot western boundary of the 263-acre energy center fronts the Illinois River, where the station's oil and coal barge unloading facilities are located (see Figure S-4). The energy center includes the infrastructure necessary to support the operation of a power generation plant including material and fuel handling and delivery facilities, process water sources, intake structures and treatment systems, stormwater and wastewater systems, cooling systems, and interconnects to high voltage transmission lines. The Meredosia Energy Center includes four electric generating units (see Figure S-5). An electric generating unit refers to the combination, or unit, of equipment used to generate electricity including the boilers that create heat energy through combustion, Figure S-3. Meredosia Energy steam cycle equipment that uses the heat to generate steam, steam Center turbines that convert the steam to mechanical energy, and electric generators that convert the mechanical energy to electricity. These units also include supporting equipment and facilities. Units 1 and 2 consist of four coal-fired boilers (Boilers 1, 2, 3, and 4), with each unit having a nominal rated generating capacity (i.e., capacity) of 60 MWe. Unit 3 consists of one coal-fired boiler (Boiler 5) and has a capacity of 229 MWe.  Unit 4 consists of one oil-fired boiler (Boiler 6) with a capacity of 200 MWe. Unit 4 was placed in service as an interim measure in 1975 to meet anticipated load growth until new generating facilities came online in 1977. During the 1980s and early 1990s, Unit 4 was operated as a peaking unit, accumulating approximately 20,000 hours of operation, with 900 starts. Peaking units are electric generating units that are only used during periods of high electricity demand. The downtown area of the village of Meredosia is approximately one quarter mile north of the energy center. Meredosia has a population of approximately 1,000 (USCB 2010a) and is approximately 18 miles west of Jacksonville, Illinois. Land use immediately east of the energy center consists of roadways, roadway rights-of-way (ROWs), rail access, and an unused railroad ROW. Beyond these immediate areas, land use is primarily residential to the north and northeast, scattered residential and agricultural to the east, and industrial to the south. Across the river, approximately 700 feet west, are forested lands, a small portion of a levee, and transmission line ROW.  Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test The Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would include the design, construction, and operation of an oxy-combustion power generation facility. The project would repower the existing Unit 4 using a new oxy-combustion coal boiler (in place of the existing oil-fired boiler) with equipment to capture, purify, and compress CO2 for use in the CO2 pipeline and storage reservoir component of the project. The oxy-combustion facility would be integrated into the existing infrastructure of the Meredosia Energy Center and would utilize the existing coal handling systems (delivery, storage, and conveyance), water supply systems (intake structures and wells), wastewater discharge outfalls, the main cooling tower (to be rebuilt from the existing Unit 4 cooling tower), substation equipment, the Unit 4 steam turbine, the Unit 4 electric generator, and other common plant infrastructure such as roadways (see Figures S-4 and S-5). The proposed oxy-combustion facility is based on using the Babcock & Wilcox–Air Liquide cool recycle oxy-combustion process. A simplified diagram of this oxy-combustion system is provided in Figure S-6, with a conceptual layout of how the oxy-combustion system would be configured at the energy center presented in Figure S-7. Major components of the system (new and existing), and an overview of their key features, are provided in Table S-1. The repowered unit would be designed to generate approximately 168 MWe gross, with a net output estimated at approximately 99 MWe. The oxy-combustion system would use a mix of high-sulfur bituminous coal from Illinois and low-sulfur Powder River Basin (Wyoming) coal.  To accommodate the proposed plant at the Meredosia Energy Center, several existing warehouses, a deaerator, and one of the condensate storage tanks would be relocated. Three existing groundwater supply wells (Wells 3, 4, and 5) would beremoved and one new well would be installed. The main cooling tower would be reconstructed and two additional cooling towers would be constructed, one for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber and one for both the air separation unit and compression and purification unit. cy = cubic yard; kV = kilovolt; NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Source: Babcock & Wilcox 2010 ASU = airseparation unit; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CPU = compression and purification unit; H2O = water; N2 = nitrogen; NCGs = non-condensable gases; O2 = oxygen; SO2= sulfur dioxide During construction at the Meredosia Energy Center, the Alliance plans to use the area between the existing boat ramps to the north of the energy center (in Figure S-4 labeled ‘Public Boat Ramp Area’) to unload a number of large equipment modules for the oxy-combustion facility. The modules would be constructed offsite and sent by barge on the Illinois River. The boat ramp area is owned by the village of Meredosia. Only one of the two existing boat ramps would be needed to offload the modules. There are two exits from the boat ramp area to the village, only one of which would be obstructed during barge unloading. Additional phases of project engineering and coordination with the village of Meredosia would be required to determine further accessibility arrangements, but the Alliance expects to ensure that at least one of the boat ramps remains open for public access during project construction. It is anticipated that impacts to the boat ramp area would be short term, lasting between 1 to 3 months during each of several construction unloading timeframes. It is expected that barge unloading activities related to construction of the oxy-combustion facility would begin in early 2014 and conclude in early 2016. The construction phase for the oxy-combustion facility, including initial demolition, is estimated to occur over a period of approximately 42 months beginning in 2014 and extending through 2017. However, construction would be substantially completed within 30 months, and the last 12 months of construction would overlap with a 1-year commissioning and startup effort. The number of construction and craft workers onsite would range from 100 to 200 for the first 7 months, 300 to 400 for the next 8 months, and 450 to 500 at peak for the next 8 months. Beginning with the 24th month, the onsite construction staff would reduce to approximately 300 for 8 months, then decline to between 50 and 200 for the final 11 months. ASU = air separation unit; CPU = compression and purification unit; DCCPS = direct contact cooler polishing scrubber; DW = deep well; kV = kilovolt Figure S-7. Conceptual Oxy-Combustion Facility Site Layout Power Block Generates thermal energy through combustion, converts the thermal energy to steam, and uses steam to create mechanical energy to drive the electric generator that produces electricity. Gas Quality Control System Treats flue gas generated during the combustion process to remove (new) pollutants and impurities. Directs treated gas to the compression and purification unit and also back to the boiler. Includes the following: - Circulating dry scrubber to remove sulfur compounds (e.g., sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide); - Pulse jet fabric filter to remove particulates; and - Direct contact cooling polishing scrubber for reduction of moisture and removal of remaining pollutants. Electric Generators (existing) Uses mechanical energy (spinning) from turbines to drive electric generators that produce electricity. Transfers electricity from generators to the transmission grid. Includes delivery, storage, and conveyance systems. CO2 Pipeline The CO2 captured by the oxy-combustion facility would be dehydrated, processed for removal of contaminants, and compressed to 2,100 pounds per square inch pressure. The compressed gas would then be delivered to a new 12-inch diameter pipeline for transport to the injection wells located in Morgan County, Illinois. The CO2 wouldbe at least 97 percent pure and transported in a liquid-like dense phase, which is the method of choice adopted by all major CO2 pipeline companies. In this dense phase, the CO2 is non-corrosive and is safe to transport in a pipeline. The Alliance proposes to site, design, construct, and operate a CO2 pipeline approximately 30 miles in length from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area. The Alliance designated a 4-mile wide corridor to the CO2 storage study area through which the pipeline route would pass. Because the exact pipeline route has not yet been finalized, DOE uses the corridor to set the boundaries and general existing conditions of where the pipeline would be located. Two possible pipeline routes within this corridor, the southern route and northern route, were identified by the Alliance (see Figure S-8). The Alliance’s preferred option is the southern route, which was developed based on field investigation and discussions with SHPO, IDNR, and the USACE. The southern pipeline route would utilize existing highway ROWs and further avoid sensitive environmental resources such as wetlands, cultural resources, forest land, and threatened or endangered species and their habitats to the fullest extent possible.  The CO2 pipeline would be designed to meet American Petroleum Institute standards. The design would comply with all applicable pipeline requirements under the U.S. Department of Transportation’s regulation entitled “Transportation of Hazardous Liquids in Pipelines” (49 CFR 195) and provide safeguards to mitigate risks associated with CO2 safety hazards. These safeguards include mainline block valves to isolate pipeline sections, a leak detection system to alert the operator, and a supervisory control and data acquisition telecommunication system to communicate information and data about pipeline performance. In addition, pipeline monitoring and surveillance procedures would be implemented in the field on a daily basis.  The CO2 pipeline would have an operational ROW of 50 feet wide with a construction ROW of 80 feet wide (100 feet in limited circumstances as dictated by terrain). The CO2 pipeline would be constructed over a 3 to 4 month period and in a manner to minimize potential impacts. The number of construction workers for the pipeline would range from 150 to 300. The pipeline would be buried at least 4 feet underground, which is more stringent than required by 49 CFR 195, with additional depth of cover for crossings, drainage ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least 5 feet deep in accordance with IDOA pipeline construction standards and policies. Topsoil would be removed first and stored separately along the pipeline trench segregated from other subsoil (see Figure S-9). The Alliance has signed an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the IDOA (IDOA 2012) that identifies additional mitigation measures during construction related to activities in the ROW (e.g., tree clearing and management of debris). Access to the construction ROW would be provided (as much as possible) from existing roads near the pipeline route. Horizontal directional drilling would be used for major waterbody crossings (i.e., waterbodies more than 100 feet wide) to avoid disturbing streambeds. Jack-and-bore tunneling would be used for smaller surface water features and wetland areas for the same purpose. It is also possible that trenching would be used for crossings of dry stream channels. Existing pipelines would be under-crossed unless over-crossing is specifically permitted by the pipeline owner. All road and railroad crossings would be bored under the road or railroad (i.e., without casings) using heavy wall pipe with abrasion resistant coating. Figure S-9. Recommended Construction Right-of-Way Cross Section Pipeline operations would be managed and monitored on a continuous basis from a central control room located in the site control building at the CO2 injection well site(s). The central control room would send command and control signals remotely using the supervisory control and data acquisition network to all pump and metering stations and the launcher and receivers in the system. Operation of the pipeline would be performed in full compliance with applicable U.S. Department of Transportation rules and regulations and would require regular visual and in-line inspections to ensure safety and integrity. Pipeline patrolling would be by road, by foot, and by helicopter, contracted to specialist companies. These visual surveys would be conducted every two weeks and would look for signs of leaks (e.g., discolored vegetation, disturbed soil) and potential infrastructure concerns (e.g., exposed pipe at stream crossings). Post-construction monitoring would be conducted (potentially for several years) to ensure that restoration of wetlands and agricultural lands would be undertaken in accordance with all permit and Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement requirements.  CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 injection well site(s) would be located within the CO2 storage study area identified in Figure S-2. The Alliance is in the process of determining the specific locations of these facilities within the study area based on the optimal locations for the injection wells. Potential injection well locations are being evaluated based on the results of data gathered from a stratigraphic well that was drilled in the CO2 storage study area, other characterization activities, and the results of ongoing modeling of the proposed CO2 injection. The Alliance has evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical and horizontal injection wells at one or two sites. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is currently proposing to construct and operate up to four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site. Although the Alliance plans to move forward with this configuration, the impact analysis in the EIS considers both a single injection well site scenario and a scenario with two injection well sites. The injection well scenario involving two separate injection well locations would require the most land area for surface facilities and would occupy up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Approximately 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining 15 acres would be used for access roads to the well sites. As depicted in Figure S-10, the primary injection well location would include the injection well, booster pump building (if required), well maintenance and monitoring building, site control building (including the central control room), and other supporting infrastructure (e.g., parking lots, access roads, etc.). The secondary injection well site (see Figure S-11) would be approximately 200 feet by 200 feet and would be limited to the injection well, well maintenance and monitoring building, and an access road. Both locations would have security fences with controlled access. Additional acreage would be needed during well drilling and construction. A scenario with a single injection well site containing four horizontal wells would have a footprint comparable to that depicted in Figure S-10 and would result in a smaller overall land area requirement for surface facilities. Well drilling would require approximately 14 construction workers over 100 to 120 days per well. Construction of the surface facilities would require approximately 41 construction workers over a 38-week period. The combined footprint of land area disturbance for construction of the surface facilities would be approximately 30,620 square feet (0.7 acre) for the buildings, sidewalks, and parking lot, as well as associated ground disturbance for construction activity and staging areas. Aside from these structures, the area affected during construction of the surface facilities would include the construction of a stormwater retention and infiltration basin, a packaged wastewater treatment system, screening berms, and fencing; which would result in an estimated 182,600-square foot (4.2-acre) area of land disturbance during construction. Pursuant to an Illinois Commerce Commission ruling on the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance is proposing a 20-year injection period. The injection wells would be designed to collectively inject 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year over 20 years for a total of up to 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) into the target formation. The target formation is the Mt. Simon Formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin's major deep saline formations with estimated total dissolved solids of approximately 48,000 parts per million. This high level of total dissolved solids exceeds safe drinking water standards; thus, this formation is not suitable to serve as a future drinking water source in Morgan County. The formation's positive characteristics for CO2 storage include its depth, lateral continuity, relative permeability, and its upper contact with an impermeable caprock (Eau Claire Formation). The injection wells would be designed, permitted, and constructed as Class VI wells in compliance with the Safe Drinking Water Act, Safe Drinking Water Act Underground Injection Control Program  Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program regulations (40 CFR 146). These regulations include strict standards related to the siting, On December 10, 2010, the USEPA construction, and monitoring of Class VI wells. The Alliance has published a final rule, “Federal considered injection well configurations with both vertical and Requirements Under the Underground Inject Control (UIC) Program for CO2 horizontal wells at one or two injection well sites. Figures S-12 and ion Geologic Sequestration (GS) Wells” S-13 show the conceptual designs for a vertical and horizontal (Federal Register Vol. 75, No. 237) (the injection well, respectively. The figures also present the geological “Class VI rule”). Under this rule, the USEPA stratigraphic column for the CO2 storage study area, showing the created a new category of injection wells depth and thickness of the Mt. Simon Formation. The injection (Class VI wells) with new federal requirements to allow for injection of CO2 wells would extend into the Mt. Simon Formation. The Alliance for geologic sequestration to ensure the currently plans to propose an injection well configuration with four protection of underground sources of horizontal injection wells that originate from one injection well site drinking water (USDW). The Class VI rule and operate independently of each other in the UIC permit would apply to the FutureGen 2.0 injection wells. applications (one permit application for each injection well) it intends to file with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency USEPA. Figure S-11. Secondary Injection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout Ongoing efforts to characterize the geology at the CO2 storage study area, including drilling of a stratigraphic well, have been used to provide an improved geologic understanding of the site. The Alliance has conducted computer modeling using data from these efforts to simulate the currently proposed configuration of four horizontal injection wells, which indicates that the underground CO2 plume would expand to encompass an area of approximately 4,000 acres over the 20-year injection period, as shown in Figure S-14. The impact analysis in this EIS conservatively assumes that the plume would be 4,000 to 5,000 acres in size. Because the specific location of the injection wells has not yet been established, the exact location of the CO2 plume has not been determined, but any well configuration proposed by the Alliance in its UIC permit applications would result in an underground CO2 plume that would be located within the CO2 storage study area outlined in Figure S-2. The Alliance would implement a monitoring, verification, and accounting (MVA) program to monitor the injection and storage of CO2 within the geologic formations to verify that it stays within the target formation. The MVA program would meet injection control permitting and requirements that DOE may impose. The MVA program would consist of the following components: (1) injection system monitoring; (2) containment monitoring (via monitoring wells, mechanical integrity testing, and other means); (3) CO2 plume tracking via multiple techniques; (4) CO2 injection simulation modeling; and (5) perhaps new experimental techniques not yet in practice. The Alliance anticipates constructing approximately 10 monitoring wells as part of the MVA program. The conceptual monitoring network design is shown in Figure S-15 based on the scenario of two injection well sites (a comparable network design would be developed for the single injection well site scenario). The Alliance has characterized the injection and confining zones and designed the injection wells to minimize the potential for a CO2 release. If, however, an adverse event were to occur during construction or operation, the Alliance would deploy a variety of emergency or remedial responses, depending on the characteristics of the event (e.g., the location, type, and volume of a release). The individual procedures, based on the event, would be described in detail in the MVA plan, which will be included with the UIC Class VI permit applications. In the unlikely event that monitoring indicates that the plume has the potential to migrate outside the study area, the Alliance could make adjustments to the injection rate or the duration of the injection period to prevent this from happening. The DOE-funded demonstration period, with active injection and monitoring, would begin in 2017 and end in 2022; however, commercial operations could continue beyond the DOE-funded period of the project. The CO2 injection would operate for a total of 20 years. The monitoring and verification processes would proceed throughout the planned injection period and continue for another 50 years or until such time during that 50-year post-injection period when the UIC permitting authority is satisfied that the plume is stable, not moving, and no further monitoring is required. In addition to the onsite staff managing and monitoring pipeline operations, the Alliance expects that two of the staff personnel (3 shifts per day, 7 days per week) would be onsite to continually monitor injection operations. Alternatively, the Alliance could acquire the services of a vendor that would remotely and continuously monitor the injection operations. Prior to commencement of CO2 injection, the UIC Class VI regulations require the Alliance to develop a Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan. The plan ensures that the well owner/operator obtains approval from the UIC Program Director for the procedures to be followed after injection operations cease. The Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan would also help identify the appropriate types and amounts of data needed to determine that the CO2 plume and pressure front do not endanger drinking water, and it would support a determination of whether conditions warrant site closure and, therefore, an end to Post-Injection Site Care (i.e., there is no longer a risk of endangerment to drinking water). The plan would identify the types and duration of monitoring that would occur; the minimum Post-Injection Site Care duration is 50 years unless otherwise approved by the UIC Program Director. CO2= carbon dioxide; ft = feet; in = inch; UIC = Underground Injection Control; USDW = underground source of drinking water CO2 = carbon dioxide; ft = feet; in = inch; KCl = potassium chloride; MD = measured depth; TVD = true vertical depth; UIC = underground injection control; USDW = underground source of drinking water CO2= carbon dioxide; yr = year Figure S-14. Predicted Areal Extent of CO2 Plume Under subpart RR of the UIC Class VI rule, facilities conducting geologic sequestration are required to report the amount of CO2 received, develop and implement a USEPA-approved monitoring, reporting, and verification plan, and report the amount of CO2 sequestered using a mass balance approach. USEPA provides exemptions on subpart RR to geologic sequestration research and development projects, in which case those projects need to report basic information under subpart UU on the CO2 received for injection. The UIC regulations also require the Alliance to develop a Construction Operations Plan, Testing and Monitoring Plan, Injection Well Plugging Plan, Emergency and Remedial Response Plan, and Financial Responsibility Plan. Figure S-15. Monitoring Well Network Conceptual Layout Educational Facilities The Alliance would construct and operate visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the educational facilities) at suitable locations in the Jacksonville area to support public outreach and communication, and to provide training and research opportunities associated with near-zero emissions power generation and CO2 capture and storage technologies. These facilities would:  Familiarize visitors with the inner workings of the oxy-combustion power generation plant, the CO2 pipeline,and the CO2 storage project areas, as well as other local points of interest;  Provide research opportunities focused on monitoring processes and results, including improvements to monitoring system designs; and  Educate and train trade workers, technicians, engineers, and scientists to manage and monitor CO2 sequestration operations and implement near-zero emissions power generation technologies. The conceptual design assumes that a single facility would house the visitor center and research functions and that a second facility would house the training function. The facilities may be co-located. The intended general location for the educational facilities is the vicinity of Jacksonville, Illinois, which is the largest community in Morgan County. The Alliance would work with local stakeholders to identify the specific location or locations that would be most advantageous to the FutureGen 2.0 Project and to the local community. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The affected environment, also referred to as the region of influence (ROI), for the project was defined for 19 different environmental resource areas depending on the extent of potential impacts resulting from the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The size of the ROI varies by resource depending upon the extent of potential impacts on respective resources. In general, the EIS considered the environmental setting in Morgan County and applicable portions of neighboring counties in Illinois. Table S-2 summarizes the affected environment for each of the 19 resource areas. The affected environment for each of these resources is described in greater detail in Chapter 3 of the EIS. Table S-2. Affected Environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Existing Conditions Air Quality Climate and Greenhouse Gases Geology Emissions of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion within the state of Illinois totaled 317 million tons (288 million metric tons) in 2007, with 105 million tons (95 million metric tons) resulting from electric power generation. Illinois’ Clean Coal Portfolio Standard Law (20 Illinois Compiled Statutes [ILCS] 3855/1-5) establishes carbon sequestration targets for new coal-fueled power plants. Plants that begin operations during 2016-2017 must capture and store 70 percent of the carbon emissions the facility would otherwise emit, and plants beginning operations after 2017 must capture and store 90 percent. The law also requires large utilities serving Illinois to enter into long-term, cost-based contracts to purchase up to 5 percent of their electricity from clean coal facilities that capture at least 50 percent of their greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The bedrock in the ROI is sedimentary rock sequences formed within the Illinois Basin, which stretches from northwest Illinois to Kentucky and Tennessee. Glacial and modern alluvial deposits are draped over the bedrock formations, and create the topographic relief while providing the source material for soils. A stratigraphic well drilled in the CO2 storage study area reached the Mt. Simon Formation, a thick layer of sandstone, at 3,918 feet below ground surface (bgs) with a thickness of 499 feet. The Mt. Simon and a small sandstone member of the Eau Claire (Elmhurst) comprise the injection zone. CO2 injection would occur within a horizon of the Mt. Simon Formation. The primary confining zone consists of two members of the Eau Claire Formation (Proviso and Lombard), 413 feet of dolomite and shale layers, which are present at 3,439 feet bgs. Above the Eau Claire is the secondary confining zone, which consists of the Franconia dolomite, found at 3,086 feet bgs. The St. Peter is the deepest underground source of drinking water (USDW), as defined by the USEPA, and is located at 1,754 feet bgs. Deep seismic surveys did not identify any faults or cross-cutting structures present in the CO2 storage study area. There have been no earthquakes within 30 miles of the CO2 storage study area since the U.S. Geological Survey has tracked seismicity; however two earthquakes were reported in the early 20th century. In November 1923, a 3.3 magnitude (estimated) earthquake occurred near Petersburg, Illinois, approximately 15 miles northwest of the CO2 storage study area. In July 1909, a 4.5 magnitude (estimated) earthquake occurred approximately 26 miles north of the CO2 storage study area. There are three historical oil and gas fields in Morgan County. The Waverly field is now used for natural gas storage, the Jacksonville field has three active wells, and the Prentice field currently has no producing wells. Table S-2. Affected Environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource  Existing Conditions  Groundwater  Surface Water  The project components would be located in the Lower Illinois River Watershed. Major water quality issues in the Lower Illinois River watershed include sedimentation, toxic substances in sediment, high concentrations of nutrients and agricultural chemicals, and low dissolved oxygen concentrations. The Meredosia Energy Center is located along the east side of the Illinois River. The CO2 pipeline corridor contains over 700 miles of streams, the vast majority of which are intermittent, and nearly 500 acres of freshwater ponds and lakes. The CO2 storage study area site contains 48 miles of stream (all intermittent) and approximately 13 acres of small ponds and lakes.    The proposed project would be constructed within Morgan County, which is primarily agricultural and rural with small areas of developed land. The oxy-combustion facility would be constructed on Meredosia Energy Center property, which is a heavily developed industrial site with areas of fields and open space (e.g., trees and grassy areas). The pipeline would traverse northern Morgan County to the CO2 storage study area. Agricultural land is the most abundant land use Land Use type found within the pipeline corridor and CO2 storage study area. A portion of the southern route option for the pipeline would align with existing highway ROWs. The energy center, pipeline, and CO2 storage study area are not subject to existing zoning ordinances or comprehensive plans. The educational facilities would likely be located in the city of Jacksonville, which has a zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan. Table S-2. Affected Environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Existing Conditions Materials and Waste Management The Meredosia Energy Center historically used coal from within Illinois and from the Powder River Basin in Wyoming, and the proposed project would continue to source coal from these locations. Suppliers exist within the region surrounding the energy center for construction and operational materials that would be needed for the project. Over 175 million cubic yards of landfill capacity exists within the surrounding counties. There are 18 hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal, and recycling facilities in the state of Illinois, and 45 additional facilities in neighboring states. There are no known areas of historical or current contamination within the proposed project’s study area. Existing dominant noise sources in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center mainly consist of noise associated with the nearby grain elevator operations at the Cargill, Inc. facility located to the north of the energy center site; vehicular traffic on Old Naples Road, South Washington Street, and IL-104; rail traffic on the Norfolk Southern rail line providing access to the industrial sites to the south of the Meredosia Energy Center; and prior to the end of 2011, equipment and vehicle noise related to the operations of the energy center. After 2011, the Meredosia Energy Center no longer contributes to the ambient noise in the area. Noise sources along the pipeline corridor and within the CO2 storage study area primarily consist of vehicular traffic from nearby roadways within a predominantly rural environment. Areas in the vicinity of the city of Jacksonville, Illinois, have typical urban noise levels from vehicular traffic. Noise Utilities Table S-2. Affected Environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Existing Conditions Morgan County is served by the Morgan County Sheriff’s Office, District 9 of the Illinois State Police, and 6 additional police departments located throughout the county. There are 10 police departments, 4 sheriff’s offices, and Districts 9 and 20 of the Illinois State Police that serve Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. There are 8 fire departments in Morgan County and a total of 25 fire stations in Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. The Illinois Emergency Community Management Agency and Mutual Aid Box Alarm System are responsible for statewide disaster Services planning and local emergency medical services mobilization, respectively. A volunteer ambulance service provides emergency response in Meredosia, and 2 ambulance providers operate in the city of Jacksonville, as well as paramedic services that operate from Passavant Area Hospital. The ROI is served by 2 hospitals. There are 21 public schools and 5 private schools in Morgan County. The adjacent counties of Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott have a total of 32 public schools and 3 private schools. Socioeconomics Collectively, Morgan County and the four adjacent counties (Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott) have a population of approximately 77,911. Morgan County had a total population of 35,547 in 2010 with a rate of decline higher than the overall regional rate since 2000. The five counties include approximately 34,223 housing units of which approximately 3,897 units were vacant and 19.1 percent vacancy rate within the ROI. The median household income in the ROI ranged from $39,191 to $49,450. In 2010, the average unemployment rates were 9.0 percent for the ROI and 9.4 percent for Morgan County, compared to an unemployment rate of 8.9 percent in both the United States and Illinois. bgs = below ground surface; CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas; ILCS = Illinois Compiled Statutes; ROI = region of influence; ROW = right-of-way; SHPO = State Historic Preservation Office; USDW = underground source of drinking water; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS DOE evaluated the potential impacts of the no action alternative and the proposed project in relation to the baseline conditions described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Table S-2, above. A detailed discussion of potential impacts is provided in Chapter 3. Table S-3 summarizes the criteria considered when analyzing potential impacts, and summarizes the potential impacts for each of the 19 resource areas for the no action alternative and for the proposed project. The EIS uses the following descriptors to qualitatively characterize impacts on respective resources:  Beneficial – Impacts would benefit the resource.  Negligible – No apparent or measurable impacts are expected; may also be described as “none” if appropriate.  Minor – The action would have a barely noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource.  Moderate – The action would have a noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource. This category could include potentially significant impacts that would be reduced to a lesser degree by the implementation of mitigation measures.  Substantial – The action would have obvious and extensive adverse effects that could result in potentially significant impacts on a resource despite mitigation measures. MITIGATION The NEPA regulations of the President’s Council on Environmental Quality direct the lead agency for an EIS to “include appropriate mitigation measures not already included in the proposed action or alternatives” (40 CFR 1502.14(f)). Per established protocols, procedures, and requirements, the Alliance would comply with all applicable federal, state, or municipal regulations and ordinances, as well as associated permitting processes, through the implementation of standard operating procedures and best management practices. These are generally required by environmental regulatory mandates applicable to the design, construction, and operation of the project. The Alliance has also incorporated other mitigation measures in its preliminary designs for the project as outlined in Section 4.2, Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts. Therefore, as the lead agency for this EIS, DOE considers that these measures are “already included in the proposed action or alternatives” consistent with 40 CFR 1502.14(f). The impacts summarized in Table S-3 are based on the expectation that these measures would be implemented by the Alliance. DOE has also explored the range of reasonable mitigation measures, beyond those included in the proposed action, which have been outlined in Section 4.2 of the EIS. Where additional measures would be necessary and appropriate to reduce impacts that would otherwise be considered substantial, or to reduce impacts noticeably from anticipated moderate levels, the measures are identified in Table S-3 along with the anticipated effect in reducing impacts. For potential impacts that are identified as minor or negligible in Table S-3, DOE does not consider additional mitigation measures to be necessary or appropriate, because the effects of mitigation on the environment would generally not be measurable or noticeable. If DOE decides to proceed with the proposed action, the Record of Decision (ROD) will “state whether all practicable means to avoid or minimize environmental harm from the alternative selected have been adopted, and if not, why they were not” in conformance with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1505.2(c)). For those additional mitigation measures deemed appropriate in its ROD, DOE will adopt and describe a monitoring and enforcement program to ensure that the measures would be implemented (40 CFR 1505.2(c)). Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. No Direct Impacts. Indirect Adverse Impacts related to not furthering commercial-scale advanced oxycombustion coal-based power generation technologies with CO2 capture and sequestration. Further, without the project, regional electricity needs would likely be met by conventional coal- or natural gas-based electric power generation. Therefore, regional GHG Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would result in short-term, minor, localized increased tailpipe and fugitive dust emissions. Because the proposed project would occur in an area listed as either in “attainment” or “unclassified" for all criteria pollutants, Clean Air Act conformity requirements are not applicable and thus there are no emissions thresholds that pertain to the construction phase of this project. Emissions would be concentrated at the construction sites and would steadily decrease with distance. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During normal operations of the oxy-combustion facility, the gas quality control system would incorporate state-of-the-art flue gas scrubbing technology to minimize criteria pollutant emissions from the stack. Beneficial impacts could result from overall lower emissions, as electricity generated by this project may displace electricity generated by traditional coal-fired power plants that emit significantly higher levels of pollutants. Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would generate approximately 44,408 tons (40,411 metric tons) of CO2 emissions over the multi-year construction period. Operations: Beneficial Impacts: The capture and geological storage of GHG emissions by the project would produce a beneficial cumulative effect on a national and global scale. Operation of the project components would result in approximately 150,316 tons per year (136,661 metric tons per year) of new CO2 emissions (net after CO2 capture and storage). The proposed project would capture and sequester approximately 1.2 million tons per year (1.1 million metric tons per year) of CO2 emissions from the generation of 168 MWe (99 MWe net) of electric power, which would generate approximately 90 percent lower GHG emissions compared to a similarly sized conventional coal-fired power plant, or approximately 70 percent lower compared to a natural-gas fired power plant. The reduction in CO2 emissions resulting from the project would incrementally reduce the rate of GHG accumulation in the atmosphere and help to incrementally mitigate climate change related to atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. On a broader scale, successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread acceptance and deployment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage of CO2, thus fostering a long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States. Operation of the project components would result in approximately 150,316 tons per year (136,661 metric tons per year) of new CO2 emissions (net after CO2 capture and storage). DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Table S-3. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Impacts were assessed based upon whether the proposed project would:  Result in permanent or temporary soil removal;  Cause the permanent loss of prime farmland soil or farmland of statewide importance (through conversion to nonagricultural uses);  Result in significant soil erosion;  Cause soil contamination due to spills of hazardous materials; or  Change soil characteristics and composition. Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Cause or be damaged by geologic-related events (e.g., earthquake, landslides, sinkholes);  Reduce the value of mineral or petroleum resources or unique geologic formations, or render them inaccessible;  Alter unique geologic formations resulting in the migration of geologically stored CO2 Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would increase the potential for soil erosion and compaction, increase the amount of impermeable surfaces, and withdraw some prime farmland soils from agricultural production. Overall, construction of the proposed project would disturb a total of 364 acres of soil classified as prime farmland; however, all but 25 acres (93 percent) would be restored to its preconstruction state or reused for agriculture. Construction at the Meredosia Energy Center would disturb (both temporary and permanent) 136 acres of soils classified as farmland of statewide importance (though this soil is not currently used for agricultural purposes and is likely no longer suitable for agricultural use), 19 acres of Urban soils, and 3 acres of hydric soils. Construction of the CO2 pipeline route would disturb approximately 250 acres of soils, the majority of which is classified as prime farmland. Approximately 28 acres of soils would be disturbed to construct the injection well site(s), monitoring wells, and associated facilities; up to 64 acres would be disturbed to build the access roads to the injection well site(s); and between 20 to 32 acres of soils would be disturbed to connect the injection wells to the CO2 pipeline. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During operations, 96 acres of soils would be permanently disturbed at the Meredosia Energy Center, and 25 acres would be withdrawn from agricultural use at the injection well site(s). Where practicable, the property above the CO2 pipeline would be returned to agricultural use after the construction period ends. Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction at the Meredosia Energy Center and CO2 pipeline may require excavation of glacial materials. Construction of the injection wells would result in removal of geologic media through the drilling process. This process would not be unique to the area and would not affect the availability of local geologic resources. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility and CO2 pipeline would not affect geologic resources. At the injection wells, the potential of CO2 migrating out of the injection zone is considered highly unlikely. Computer modeling conducted by the Alliance for their proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal wells installed at one injection well site predicted that the CO2 plume would expand to encompass an area of approximately 4,000 acres within the CO2 storage Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Conflict with applicable flood management plans or ordinances; or  Conflict with the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s national standard for floodplain management (i.e., maximum allowable increase of water surface elevation of 1 foot for a 1 percent annual chance [100-year recurrence interval] flood event). Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Cause displacement of terrestrial or aquatic communities or loss of habitat;  Diminish the value of habitat for wildlife or plants;  Cause a decline in native wildlife populations;  Interfere with the movement of native resident or migratory wildlife species;  Conflict with applicable management plans for terrestrial, avian, and aquatic species and their habitat;  Cause the introduction of noxious or invasive plant species;  Diminish the value of habitat for fish species (including altering drainage patterns causing displacement of fish DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Table S-3. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Be incompatible with land use adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center and within and adjacent to the CO2 pipeline corridor, CO2 storage study area, and associated components and facilities;  Result in land use restrictions on adjacent properties; or  Conflict with regional or local land use plans and zoning. No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Since there are no applicable zoning and land use plans in unincorporated Morgan County, construction of the proposed project would not conflict with any designated county zoning plans. The educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would be designed to abide by the existing zoning and comprehensive plan. The Meredosia Energy Center property offers sufficient infrastructure to support most of the construction activities required for the oxy-combustion facility. Additional land area outside of the energy center would be used for construction staging and equipment laydown, but that land area would only be temporarily impacted as it would revert back to its original condition after construction. Impacts due to construction of the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s) would be negligible to minor. Short-term impacts would result from temporarily restricting access and disrupting the ability to use the land for existing purposes (e.g., agricultural crops); land would be returned to its original condition after construction to the extent practicable. Long-term impacts would occur in areas that require conversion of land, such as vegetated land, for the pipeline ROW and for the 25-acre CO2 injection well site(s). Construction of the educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would have negligible impacts since the Alliance would follow stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance. Operations: Negligible Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility would not conflict with any designated county zoning plans. Additionally, operation of the oxy-combustion facility would be compatible with the developed, industrial land use within and adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center; therefore, impacts would be negligible. Impacts due to operation of the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s) would be negligible to minor. Most of the land along the pipeline is agricultural and would continue to be used for agricultural purposes during operations. Operation of the injection well site(s) would result in minor impacts associated with permanently removing approximately 25 acres of mostly agricultural land from existing use. To the extent practicable, the Alliance would avoid net reductions in agricultural land. To replace acreages of land potentially removed from agricultural use due to the project, the Alliance would designate land that is currently not farmed as agricultural land. Land potentially placed into new agricultural use would be in the immediate vicinity of land taken out of agricultural use. Operation of the educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would have negligible impacts since the Alliance would follow stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Conflict with any state or local noise ordinances;  Cause perceptible increases in ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors during construction—from either mobile or stationary sources;  Cause long-term perceptible increases in ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors during operations—from either mobile or stationary sources; or Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change. Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project CO2 = carbon dioxide; dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; GHG = greenhouse gas; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; MVA = monitoring, verification, and accounting; MWe = megawatt electrical; NRHP = National Register of Historic Places; ppmv = parts per million by volume; ROI = region of influence; ROW = right-of-way; SHPO = State Historic Preservation Office; UIC = Underground Injection Control; USACE = U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; USDW = underground sources ofdrinking water DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE addressed the impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project incrementally when added to the reasonably foreseeable impacts of other significant known or proposed projects within the geographic area in accordance with the cumulative impact requirements of NEPA (40 CFR 1508.7). As a result of the cumulative impacts analysis, DOE concluded that the FutureGen 2.0 Project, in combination with other reasonably foreseeable future actions, may result in cumulative impacts on the resource areas listed in Table S-4. In no case would the incremental effects of the FutureGen 2.0 Project on any resource, when added to the effects of other reasonably foreseeable actions, result in cumulative impacts that would be substantially greater than the impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project or other actions individually. Resource Air Quality Climate and Greenhouse Gases Table S-4. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Potential Cumulative Impacts Surface Water Aesthetics The FutureGen 2.0 Project in combination with current and reasonably foreseeable future projects would result in minor, short-term cumulative adverse impacts to water quality during construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Increased sedimentation (turbidity) of surface water features from soil erosion could occur during earth-moving activities associated with construction and from stormwater discharges associated with operations. These impacts would be mitigated, to the extent possible, through the use of best management practices and adherence to permit conditions. Table S-4. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Potential Cumulative Impacts Materials and Waste Management The FutureGen 2.0 Project would add incrementally to the nationwide demands for coal but without substantially affecting the available capacities or operations at existing mines. Minor to moderate adverse cumulative impacts on regional landfill capacity could occur as a result of the proposed project and the foreseeable future projects. Generation of construction-related wastes from these projects, when combined with fly ash and bottom ash generated by the proposed project, could reduce landfill capacity available to local municipalities and businesses. These adverse impacts could be mitigated through beneficial reuse of some of the major waste streams generated by the proposed project. CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas; ROI = region of influence;ROW = right-of-way DOE/EIS-0460D DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  SUMMARY  GLOSSARY  Term  Definition  100-Year Floodplain  Land that becomes or will become submerged by a flood that has a chance to  occur every 100 years (1 percent annual chance of flooding).  A-Weighted Scale  Assigns weight to sound frequencies that are related to how sensitive the human  ear is to each sound frequency.  Air Liquide Process  An international company that has been involved in the development of oxy & Construction, Inc.  combustion technologies for power generation with carbon capture for the past  (Air Liquide)  10 years. For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, Air Liquide is responsible for  developing complex components of the oxy-combustion facility, such as the air  separation unit and the compression and purification unit.  Air Separation Unit  An integrated component of the oxy-combustion facility that will supply  oxygen for the oxy-combustion boiler by separating oxygen and nitrogen from  the air through a cold distillation process.  Alluvial  Relating to, composed of, or found in alluvium, which is defined as loose,  unconsolidated soil or sediments, which have been eroded, reshaped by water in  some form, and deposited in a non-marine setting.  Ambient  Of or relating to the conditions of the surrounding environment or atmosphere  as it normally exists.  Ameren Energy  An integrated energy commodity holding company, created in 2000 for  Resources (Ameren)  providing energy solutions to the midwestern United States market. The original  owner and operator of the Meredosia Energy Center, which was selected by the  Department of Energy’s clean coal power program to be the site for the  FutureGen 2.0 Project.  Aquifer  Underground geologic formation composed of permeable layers of rock or  sediment that holds and transmits water.  Archaeological  Any material remains of the past, which offer the potential for investigation,  Resource  analysis, and contribution to the understanding of past human communities.  Area of Potential  The geographic area or areas within which an undertaking may directly or  Effect  indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties.  Attainment Area  A geographic area that meets the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for a  criteria pollutant.  Auxiliary Boiler  The boiler that would be used to provide steam to the plant that is needed during  the startup process.  Term  Definition  Babcock & Wilcox  An international company that designs, manufactures, and constructs steam  Power Generation  generating systems and emissions control equipment for utilities and industry.  Group, Inc.  Developer of the boiler island and gas quality control system for the FutureGen  (Babcock & Wilcox)  2.0 oxy-combustion facility.  Bedrock  Unweathered rock overlaid in most places by soil or rock fragments.  Booster Pump  The building that would house the well injection pumps and associated flow  Building  meters, flow control valves, and variable speed drive cabinets.  Bottom Ash  Coarse particles generated during the combustion of coal that fall by gravity to  the bottom of the boiler.  Brine  Highly salty and heavily mineralized water that may contain heavy metal and  organic contaminants.  Caprock  The geologic formation or formations that overlie the injection zone and act as a  confining layer to prevent the upward vertical migration of CO2 out of the  injection zone. Caprock is typically comprised of low permeability and porosity  rock layers (typically shale, limestone, or dolomite) making it relatively  impermeable.  Carbon Capture and  The process of capturing CO2 and ultimately injecting it into underground  Storage  geologic formations for secure storage. Sometimes referred to as carbon capture  and sequestration.  Carbon Dioxide  A greenhouse gas created by natural processes such as animal and plant  respiration as well as from human activity such as the burning of fossil fuels.  Circulating Dry  Scrubber used in the oxy-combustion gas quality control system to remove  Scrubber  sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide from flue gas. Also called a circulating  fluidized bed – flue gas desulfurization unit.  Compression and  Component of the oxy-combustion facility that purifies and compresses treated  Purification Unit  flue gas for delivery to the CO2 pipeline.  Cooling Tower  A structure that is used to provide cool water for the condensation of steam in  the steam condenser, and to remove excess heat from other system processes  (e.g., air separation and compression and purification units) by circulating the  water along a series of panels through which cool air passes.  Criteria Pollutant  The Clean Air Act of 1970 required the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  to set air quality standards for common and widespread pollutants to protect  human health and welfare. There are six criteria pollutants: ozone, carbon  monoxide, sulfur dioxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, and particulate matter.  Critical Habitat  A geographic area that contains features essential for the conservation of a  threatened or endangered species that may require management and protection.  Term  Definition  Cultural Resource  Archaeological resources, including prehistoric and historic archaeological  sites; historic resources; cultural or historic landscapes or viewsheds; Native  American resources; and paleontological resources.  Cumulative Impact  The impact on the environment that results from the incremental impact of the  action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future  actions regardless of what agency (federal or non-federal) or person undertakes  such other actions.  Decibel  A unit for expressing the relative intensity of sounds on a logarithmic scale.  Direct Contact  Component of the oxy-combustion gas quality control system facility that  Cooler Polishing  removes moisture and sulfur dioxide from treated flue gas.  Scrubber  Effluent  Waste stream flowing into the atmosphere, surface water, groundwater, or soil.  Emissions  Release of gases and particles into the atmosphere from various sources.  Endangered Species  A species, subspecies, or varieties in danger of extinction throughout all or a  significant portion of their range. The federal list of endangered species can be  found in 50 CFR 17.11 (wildlife), 50 CFR 17.12 (plants), and 50 CFR 222.23  (marine organisms). The Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board also  maintains a list of endangered species regulated by the Illinois Department of  Natural Resources.  Environmental  The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people – regardless of  Justice  race, ethnicity, and income or education level – in environmental decision  making. Environmental Justice programs promote the protection of human  health and the environment, empowerment via public participation, and the  dissemination of relevant information to inform and educate affected  communities.  Fault  A subsurface fracture or discontinuity in geologic strata, across which there is  observable displacement as a result of earth movement.  Floodplain  Flat or nearly flat land adjacent to a stream or river that experiences occasional  or periodic flooding.  Flue Gas  Residual gases resulting from combustion that are vented to the atmosphere  through a flue or chimney.  Fly Ash  Fine particles generated during combustion that are collected by electrostatic  precipitators or baghouses prior to discharge of the flue gas to the atmosphere.  Formation  The primary unit associated with formal geological mapping of an area.  Geologic formations possess distinctive geologic features and can be combined  into groups or subdivided into member or units.  Term  Definition  Fugitive Dust  Airborne particulate matter typically associated with disturbance of unpaved haul roads, wind erosion of exposed surfaces, and other activities in which soil is removed and redistributed.   FutureGen Alliance (Alliance)  A non-profit organization created to benefit the public interest and the interests of science through research, development, and demonstration of near-zero emissions coal technology. Formed to partner with the Department of Energy on the FutureGen Initiative. Current members include Alpha Natural Resources, Inc.; Anglo American, SA; Joy Global, Inc.; Peabody Energy Corporation; and Xstrata PLC.  FutureGen Initiative  A $1 billion, 10-year demonstration project initiated by President Bush in 2003 to create the world’s first coal-based, zero emissions electricity and hydrogen power plant to support other federal initiatives, including the National Climate Change Technology Initiative (2001) and the Hydrogen Fuel Initiative (2003).  Gas Quality Control System  Collection of oxy-combustion facility components that treat flue gas generated during the combustion process to remove pollutants, recover heat, and prepare the flue gas for the compression and purification unit.  Greenhouse Gas  Gas that contributes to the greenhouse effect by absorbing and remitting infrared radiation and ultimately warming the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases include water vapor, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane, nitrous oxide, and several classes of halogenated substances that contain fluorine, chlorine, or bromine (including chlorofluorocarbons).  Hazardous Air Pollutant  Air pollutants that are not covered by ambient air quality standards, but may present a threat of adverse human health effects or adverse environmental effects, and are specifically listed in 40 CFR 61.01.  Hazardous Waste  Solid waste that exhibits at least one of four characteristics (ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity), or that is specifically listed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as a hazardous waste; but is not specifically exempted in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations. Hazardous waste is regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Subtitle C.  Historic Resource  Prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places.  Hydric Soil  A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic (oxygen-lacking) conditions that favor the growth and regeneration of water-adapted vegetation.  Injection Well  A deep well used to inject supercritical CO2 into the injection zone for permanent geologic storage.  DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT SUMMARY  Term Definition  Injection Zone Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle Lime Loam Low-Income Population Mainline Block Valve Minority Minority Population Mitigation Measure Mt. Simon Formation National Ambient Air Quality Standards National Environmental Policy Act A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is of sufficient areal extent, thickness, porosity, and permeability to receive CO2 through an injection well or wells associated with a geologic sequestration project. A process that uses synthesis gas derived from coal to drive a gas combustion turbine and exhaust gas from the gas turbine to generate steam from water to drive a steam turbine. This technology was considered under the original FutureGen Initiative; however, it is not a component of the proposed project. General term for calcium-containing inorganic materials, in which carbonates, oxides, and hydroxides predominate. Used as an absorbent for removal of acid gases. A rich, friable soil containing a relatively equal mixture of sand and silt and a somewhat smaller proportion of clay. Identified where households have an annual income below the poverty threshold, which was $22,050 for a family of four at the time of the 2010 Census. Design feature of a pipeline that blocks flow at a certain point as to isolate and contain any line leak. As defined by the Council on Environmental Quality, an individual who is American Indian or Alaskan Native; Black or African American; Asian; Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander; or Hispanic or Latino. Identified where either more than 50 percent of the population of the affected area is minority, or the affected area’s minority population percentage is meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the general population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis. Measures taken to reduce adverse impacts on the environment. The Mt. Simon Formation is the major deep saline formation where CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center would be injected through deep injection wells. The Mt. Simon Formation is the primary formation that makes up the injection zone. Nationwide standards set up by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for widespread air pollutants, as required by Section 109 of the Clean Air Act. Currently, six pollutants are regulated: carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide (i.e., the six criteria pollutants). Signed into law on January 1, 1970. U.S. statute that requires all federal agencies to consider the potential effects of proposed actions on the human and natural environment. Term  Definition  National Pollutant  Provision of the Clean Water Act that prohibits discharge of pollutants into U.S.  Discharge  waters unless a permit allowing such a discharge is issued by the U.S.  Elimination System  Environmental Protection Agency, a state, or where delegated, a tribal  government on a Native American reservation.  National Register of  The official list of the nation’s historic places worthy of preservation.  Historic Places  Authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and managed by  the National Park Service. To be considered eligible, a property must meet the  National Register Criteria for Evaluation, including the property’s age,  integrity, and significance.  No Action  The project baseline condition or future condition if no action is taken. Used to  Alternative  measure the effects of action alternatives.  Oxy-Combustion  The combustion of coal with a mixture of manufactured oxygen and recycled  flue gas, versus atmospheric air, resulting in a gas by-product primarily  comprised of CO2.   Paleontological  Any fossilized remains, traces, or imprints of organisms, preserved in or on the  Resource  earth’s crust, that are of paleontological interest and that provide information  about the history of life on earth.  Particulate Matter  Fine liquid or solid particles such as dust, smoke, mist, fumes, or smog, found  in air or emissions.  Potable Water  Water that is safe and satisfactory for drinking and cooking.  Prime Farmland  A special category of highly productive cropland that is recognized and  described by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resource  Conservation Service and receives special protection under the Federal  Farmland Protection Act.  Process Water  The water intake structures and wells that would be used to supply water to the  Systems  plant, and new water treatment systems to remove water impurities.  Programmatic  A document that spells out the terms of a formal, legally binding agreement  Agreement  between an agency and other state or federal agencies. Two basic kinds: (1)  describes the actions that will be taken by the parties in order to meet their  environmental compliance responsibilities for a specific project; (2) establishes  a process through which the parties will meet their compliance responsibilities  for an agency program, a category of projects, or a particular type of resource.  Proposed Action  The activity, including the project and its related support activities, proposed to  accomplish a federal agency’s purpose and need.  Pulse Jet Fabric  Component of the oxy-combustion gas quality control system facility that  Filter  removes particulate matter (e.g., fly ash) from the flue gas discharged from the  circulating dry scrubber.  Term  Definition  Region of Influence  Defines the geographic extent of the area to be analyzed in the environmental impact statement for potential impacts to each respective resource area.  Saline  Water with high concentrations of salts (typically more than 10,000 parts per million dissolved solids), making it unsuitable for use.  Scoping  An early and open process for determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for identifying the significant issues related to a proposed action.  Scrubber  A device that removes noxious gases (such as sulfur dioxide) from flue gas by using absorbents suspended in a liquid solution.  Seismic  Pertaining to, characteristic of, or produced by earthquakes or earth vibrations.  Sensitive Receptor  Any specific resource (i.e., population or facility) that would be more susceptible to the effects of implementing the proposed action than would otherwise be. Includes, but is not limited to, asthmatics, children, and the elderly, as well as specific facilities, such as long-term health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, retirement homes, residences, schools, playgrounds, and childcare centers.  Site Control Building  The building that would house the major operational components of the pipeline and the injection well site(s), including the instruments for monitoring and controlling the injection wells, pipeline operations, and site access.  Socioeconomics  An umbrella term that may refer broadly to the use of economics in the study of society. More narrowly, a discipline studying the reciprocal relationship between economic science on the one hand and social philosophy, ethics, and human dignity on the other.  Stratigraphic Well  An exploratory well drilled for the purpose of gathering geologic information on the composition and relative position of rock strata of an area. The Alliance completed a stratigraphic well at the CO2 storage study area in December 2011 to collect data with which to characterize the geology and hydrogeology of the area to support the design and permitting of the project as well as the analysis of impacts in this environmental impact statement.  Supercritical CO2  CO2 usually behaves as a gas in air or as a solid in dry ice. If the temperature and pressure are both increased (above its supercritical temperature of 88ºF [31.1ºC] and 73 atmospheres [1073 pounds per square inch]), it can adopt properties midway between a gas and a liquid, such that it expands to fill its container like a gas, but has a density like that of a liquid.  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition   The communication system that would transmit information and data about pipeline performance.  Term Definition Temporary Barge The existing boat ramp area located north of the Meredosia Energy Center and Unloading Facility southwest of the village of Meredosia that would be used to unload a number of large modules for the construction of the oxy-combustion facility. Till The unsorted sediment deposited directly by a glacier, which exhibits a wide range of particle sizes, from fine clay to rock fragments and boulders. Trona A naturally-occurring hydrated sodium carbonate mineral that is used in the gas quality control system to reduce sulfur trioxide concentrations in the flue gas and in the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber to reduce sulfur dioxide at the compression and purification unit inlet. Turbidity The cloudiness or haziness of a fluid caused by individual particles (suspended solids) that are generally invisible to the naked eye, similar to smoke in air. Viewshed The land, water, cultural, and other aesthetic elements that are visible from a fixed vantage point. Wastewater A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from residences, commercial establishments, farms, and industrial facilities. Watershed A land area bounded by topography that drains water to a particular stream, river, or entire river system. Well Maintenance The buildings that would contain equipment to supply the injection well with and Monitoring fluid to maintain annulus pressurization in order to prevent leakage from the System Buildings injection well.  Wetland Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Responsible Federal Agency: U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Cooperating Agencies: None Title: Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the FutureGen 2.0 Project (DOE/EIS-0460D) Location: Morgan County, Illinois Contact:  For further information about this For general information on the DOE process for Environmental Impact Statement,  implementing the National Environmental Policy Act, contact: contact: Cliff Whyte, NEPA Compliance Officer Carol Borgstrom, Director U.S. Department of Energy Office of NEPA Policy and Compliance (GC-54) National Energy Technology Laboratory U.S. Department of Energy 3610 Collins Ferry Road 1000 Independence Avenue, SW Morgantown, WV 26507-0880 Washington, DC 20585-0103 (304) 285-2098 (202) 586-4600 or leave message Fax: (304) 285-4403 at (800) 472-2756 Email: Cliff.Whyte@netl.doe.gov Email: AskNEPA@hq.doe.gov Abstract: This Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) evaluates the potential impacts associated with DOE’s proposed action to provide financial assistance to the FutureGen Alliance (the Alliance) for the FutureGen 2.0 Project, including the direct and indirect environmental impacts from construction and operation of the proposed project. DOE’s proposed action would provide approximately $1 billion of funding (primarily under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) to support construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The funding would be used for project design and development, procurement of capital equipment, construction, and to support a 56-month demonstration period for a coal-fueled electric generation plant integrated with carbon capture and storage. For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance would construct and operate a 168-megawatt electrical (MWe) gross output coal-fueled electric generation plant using advanced oxy-combustion technology. The plant would use existing infrastructure, including the existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4), at Ameren Energy Resources’ Meredosia Energy Center on the Illinois River just south of Meredosia, Illinois. The proposed project would include facilities designed to capture at least 90 percent of the carbon dioxide (CO2) that would otherwise be emitted to the atmosphere, equivalent to approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 captured per year. The captured CO2 would be compressed and transported via a new underground pipeline, approximately 30 miles long and 12 inches in diameter, to a geologic storage area in eastern Morgan County, where it would be injected and stored in the Mt. Simon Formation (a saline aquifer) approximately 4,000 to 4,500 feet below the ground surface. The project would also employ systems for the monitoring, verification, and accounting of the CO2 being geologically stored. A visitor and research center and a training facility would be sited in the vicinity of Jacksonville, Illinois. The proposed project would provide performance and emissions data, as well as establish operating and maintenance experience, that would facilitate future large-scale commercial deployment of oxy-combustion technology and geologic CO2 storage. DOE is the lead federal agency responsible for preparation of this EIS. DOE prepared the EIS pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and in compliance with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) implementing regulations for NEPA (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1500 through 1508) and DOE NEPA implementing procedures (10 CFR 1021). The EIS evaluates the potential environmental impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project as part of DOE’s decision-making process to determine whether to provide financial assistance. The EIS also analyzes the no action alternative, under which DOE would not provide financial assistance for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Comment Period: DOE encourages public participation in the NEPA process. Comments received or postmarked by June 17, 2013, will be addressed in the Final EIS. DOE will consider late comments to the extent practicable. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK TABLE OF CONTENTS – VOLUME I 1 PURPOSE AND NEED ................................................................................................................... 1-1 1.1 Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 1-1 1.2 Project Background .................................................................................................................... 1-2 1.2.1 Original FutureGen Project .......................................................................................... 1-2 1.2.2 FutureGen 2.0 Project ................................................................................................... 1-3 1.3 Proposed Action ......................................................................................................................... 1-5 1.4 Purpose and Need for Agency Action ........................................................................................ 1-6 1.5 National Environmental Policy Act........................................................................................... 1-7 1.5.1 DOE Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 1-7 1.5.2 NEPA Scoping Process ................................................................................................ 1-8 1.6 Scope of the Environmental Impact Statement .......................................................................... 1-9 1.6.1 Issues Identified Prior to the Scoping Process .............................................................. 1-9 1.6.2 Comments Received and Issues Identified During the Scoping Process .................... 1-11 1.6.3 Decision to be Made by DOE ..................................................................................... 1-13 1.7 Organization and Contents of the EIS...................................................................................... 1-13 2 PROPOSED ACTION AND ALTERNATIVES........................................................................... 2-1 2.1 DOE Proposed Action ................................................................................................................ 2-1 2.2 No Action Alternative ................................................................................................................ 2-2 2.3 Alternatives Considered but Dismissed from Further Evaluation ............................................. 2-3 2.3.1 Alternative Fuel Sources .............................................................................................. 2-3 2.3.2 Alternative Advanced Coal-based Electric Generating Technologies.......................... 2-4 2.3.3 Alternative Retrofitting Technologies.......................................................................... 2-4 2.3.4 Alternative Sites for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test ....................................... 2-4 2.3.5 Alternative CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir Locations ......................................... 2-5 2.4 FutureGen 2.0 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test .................................................................... 2-6 2.4.1 The Meredosia Energy Center ...................................................................................... 2-6 2.4.1.1 Boiler and Turbine Steam and Water Systems ........................................... 2-11 2.4.1.2 Air and Flue Gas System ............................................................................ 2-11 2.4.1.3 Waste Management Systems ...................................................................... 2-11 2.4.1.4 Transportation Resources ........................................................................... 2-12 2.4.1.5 Suspension of Energy Center Operations ................................................... 2-13 2.4.2 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test ............................................................................. 2-14 2.4.2.1 Oxy-Combustion Process and System Features ......................................... 2-17 2.4.2.2 Additional Equipment and Systems ........................................................... 2-20 2.4.3 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test Construction Phase ............................................. 2-25 2.4.3.1 Oxy-Combustion FacilityConstruction ..................................................... 2-27 2.4.3.2 Temporary Barge Unloading Facility ......................................................... 2-28 2.4.3.3 Construction Schedule and Workforce ....................................................... 2-29 2.4.3.4 Construction Materials and Waste ............................................................. 2-29 2.4.3.5 Construction Safety Policies and Programs ............................................... 2-31 2.4.4 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test Operation Phase ................................................. 2-31 2.4.4.1 Resource Requirements and Inputs ............................................................ 2-31 2.4.4.2 Process Wastes, Discharges, and By-Products ........................................... 2-34 2.4.4.3 Health and Safety Policies and Programs ................................................... 2-37 2.4.4.4 Permit Requirements .................................................................................. 2-38 2.4.4.5 Power Purchase Agreement........................................................................ 2-38 2.4.5 Decommissioning ....................................................................................................... 2-38 2.5 FutureGen 2.0 Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir ................................................................ 2-39 2.5.1 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................................... 2-39 2.5.1.1 Pipeline Corridor and Routes ..................................................................... 2-40 2.5.1.2 Pipeline Design .......................................................................................... 2-43 2.5.1.3 Pipeline Construction ................................................................................. 2-44 2.5.1.4 Pipeline Operations .................................................................................... 2-47 2.5.2 CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................................................................. 2-49 2.5.2.1 CO2 Storage Area Siting ............................................................................. 2-50 2.5.2.2 Surface Facilities ........................................................................................ 2-52 2.5.2.3 Injection Wells ........................................................................................... 2-58 2.5.2.4 Monitoring, Verification, and Accounting ................................................. 2-65 2.5.3 Visitor, Research, and Training Facilities .................................................................. 2-71 2.5.3.1 Educational Facilities Construction ............................................................ 2-72 2.5.3.2 Educational Facilities Operations ............................................................... 2-72 2.5.4 Decommissioning ....................................................................................................... 2-73 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS...................................................................... 3.0-1 3.1 Air Quality .............................................................................................................................. 3.1-1 3.1.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.1-1 3.1.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.1-1 3.1.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.1-1 3.1.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.1-3 3.1.1.4 Permitting Requirements ........................................................................... 3.1-6 3.1.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.1-9 3.1.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.1-9 3.1.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities ........ 3.1-13 3.1.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.1-13 3.1.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.1-13 3.1.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.1-18 3.1.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.1-27 3.2 Climate and Greenhouse Gases ............................................................................................... 3.2-1 3.2.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.2-1 3.2.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.2-1 3.2.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.2-1 3.2.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.2-1 3.2.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.2-4 3.2.2.1 Regional and Local Climate ...................................................................... 3.2-4 3.2.2.2 Greenhouse Gases ..................................................................................... 3.2-6 3.2.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.2-11 3.2.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.2-11 3.2.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.2-12 3.2.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.2-15 3.3 Physiography and Soils........................................................................................................... 3.3-1 3.3.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.3-1 3.3.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.3-1 3.3.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.3-1 3.3.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.3-1 3.3.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.3-2 3.3.2.1 Physiography ............................................................................................. 3.3-2 3.3.2.2 Soils ........................................................................................................... 3.3-2 3.3.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.3-5 3.3.2.4 CO2 Pipeline .............................................................................................. 3.3-7 3.3.2.5 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.3-11 3.3.2.6 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.3-12 3.3.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.3-13 3.3.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.3-13 3.3.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.3-19 3.3.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.3-20 3.4 Geology ................................................................................................................................... 3.4-1 3.4.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.4-1 3.4.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.4-1 3.4.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.4-1 3.4.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.4-2 3.4.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.4-3 3.4.2.1 Regional Geologic Setting ........................................................................ 3.4-3 3.4.2.2 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.4-9 3.4.2.3 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................ 3.4-10 3.4.2.4 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.4-10 3.4.2.5 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.4-12 3.4.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action ............................................................................... 3.4-12 3.4.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.4-12 3.4.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.4-14 3.4.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.4-24 3.5 Groundwater ........................................................................................................................... 3.5-1 3.5.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.5-1 3.5.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.5-1 3.5.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.5-1 3.5.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.5-1 3.5.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.5-2 3.5.2.1 Regional Hydrogeology ............................................................................ 3.5-2 3.5.2.2 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.5-4 3.5.2.3 CO2 Pipeline .............................................................................................. 3.5-5 3.5.2.4 CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................................................ 3.5-6 3.5.2.5 Educational Facilities ................................................................................ 3.5-8 3.5.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action ................................................................................. 3.5-8 3.5.3.1 Construction Impacts ................................................................................. 3.5-8 3.5.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.5-10 3.5.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.5-14 3.6 Surface Water .......................................................................................................................... 3.6-1 3.6.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.6-1 3.6.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.6-1 3.6.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.6-1 3.6.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.6-1 3.6.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.6-2 3.6.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.6-3 3.6.2.2 CO2 Pipeline .............................................................................................. 3.6-7 3.6.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................................................ 3.6-8 3.6.2.4 Educational Facilities ................................................................................ 3.6-8 3.6.3 Impacts of Proposed Action ...................................................................................... 3.6-8 3.6.3.1 Construction Impacts ................................................................................. 3.6-8 3.6.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.6-15 3.6.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.6-20 3.7 Wetlands and Floodplains ....................................................................................................... 3.7-1 3.7.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.7-1 3.7.1.1 Wetlands .................................................................................................... 3.7-1 3.7.1.2 Floodplains ................................................................................................ 3.7-3 3.7.1.3 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.7-4 3.7.1.4 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.7-4 3.7.1.5 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.7-5 3.7.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.7-5 3.7.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.7-6 3.7.2.2 CO2 Pipeline .............................................................................................. 3.7-6 3.7.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.7-12 3.7.2.4 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.7-13 3.7.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.7-14 3.7.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.7-14 3.7.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.7-22 3.7.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.7-24 3.8 Biological Resources............................................................................................................... 3.8-1 3.8.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.8-1 3.8.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.8-1 3.8.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.8-1 3.8.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.8-1 3.8.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.8-3 3.8.2.1 Terrestrial Habitat ..................................................................................... 3.8-5 3.8.2.2 Aquatic Habitat ......................................................................................... 3.8-8 3.8.2.3 Protected Species ..................................................................................... 3.8-10 3.8.2.4 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.8-12 3.8.2.5 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................ 3.8-16 3.8.2.6 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.8-17 3.8.2.7 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.8-18 3.8.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.8-18 3.8.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.8-24 3.8.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.8-29 3.8.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.8-33 3.9 Cultural Resources .................................................................................................................. 3.9-1 3.9.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3.9-1 3.9.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................... 3.9-1 3.9.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered ............................................ 3.9-1 3.9.1.3 Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 3.9-3 3.9.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................... 3.9-5 3.9.2.1 Regional Cultural Context......................................................................... 3.9-5 3.9.2.2 Historyof theMeredosia EnergyCenter and the Central Illinois Public Service Company ...................................................................................... 3.9-5 3.9.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center.......................................................................... 3.9-6 3.9.2.4 CO2 Pipeline .............................................................................................. 3.9-7 3.9.2.5 CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................................................ 3.9-8 3.9.2.6 Educational Facilities ................................................................................ 3.9-8 3.9.3 Impacts of Proposed Action ...................................................................................... 3.9-8 3.9.3.1 Construction Impacts ................................................................................. 3.9-8 3.9.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.9-10 3.9.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.9-11 3.10Land Use ............................................................................................................................... 3.10-1 3.10.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.10-1 3.10.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.10-1 3.10.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.10-1 3.10.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.10-1 3.10.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.10-2 3.10.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.10-2 3.10.2.2 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................ 3.10-3 3.10.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.10-4 3.10.2.4 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.10-4 3.10.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.10-5 3.10.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.10-5 3.10.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.10-9 3.10.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative .................................................................... 3.10-11 3.11Aesthetics .............................................................................................................................. 3.11-1 3.11.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.11-1 3.11.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.11-1 3.11.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.11-2 3.11.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.11-2 3.11.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.11-2 3.11.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.11-2 3.11.2.2 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................ 3.11-3 3.11.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.11-3 3.11.2.4 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.11-3 3.11.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.11-5 3.11.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.11-5 3.11.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.11-7 3.11.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.11-8 3.12Materials and Waste Management ........................................................................................ 3.12-1 3.12.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.12-1 3.12.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.12-1 3.12.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.12-1 3.12.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.12-1 3.12.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.12-3 3.12.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.12-4 3.12.2.2 CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................ 3.12-7 3.12.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area .......................................................................... 3.12-7 3.12.2.4 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.12-7 3.12.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.12-7 3.12.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.12-7 3.12.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.12-9 3.12.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative .................................................................... 3.12-13 3.13Traffic and Transportation ....................................................................................................3.13-1 3.13.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.13-1 3.13.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.13-1 3.13.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.13-1 3.13.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.13-2 3.13.2.1 Regional and Local Roadway System ..................................................... 3.13-2 3.13.2.2 Rail, Air, and Public Transportation ....................................................... 3.13-3 3.13.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.13-4 3.13.2.4 CO2Pipeline and CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................. 3.13-4 3.13.2.5 Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.13-7 3.13.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.13-7 3.13.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.13-7 3.13.3.2 Operational Impacts .............................................................................. 3.13-12 3.13.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative .................................................................... 3.13-15 3.14Noise and Vibration .............................................................................................................. 3.14-1 3.14.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.14-1 3.14.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.14-1 3.14.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.14-1 3.14.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.14-3 3.14.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.14-6 3.14.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.14-6 3.14.2.2 CO2 Pipeline .......................................................................................... 3.14-12 3.14.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area ........................................................................ 3.14-12 3.14.2.4 Educational Facilities ............................................................................ 3.14-12 3.14.2.5 Existing Traffic Noise (for All Project Components) ........................... 3.14-13 3.14.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................. 3.14-13 3.14.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................. 3.14-14 3.14.3.2 Operational Impacts .............................................................................. 3.14-21 3.14.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative .................................................................... 3.14-23 3.15Utilities .................................................................................................................................. 3.15-1 3.15.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.15-1 3.15.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.15-1 3.15.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.15-1 3.15.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.15-1 3.15.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.15-1 3.15.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.15-1 3.15.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities ........ 3.15-2 3.15.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.15-3 3.15.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.15-3 3.15.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.15-6 3.15.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.15-8 3.16Community Services ............................................................................................................. 3.16-1 3.16.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.16-1 3.16.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.16-1 3.16.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.16-1 3.16.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.16-1 3.16.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.16-1 3.16.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.16-1 3.16.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action ............................................................................... 3.16-5 3.16.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.16-5 3.16.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.16-6 3.16.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.16-8 3.17Human Health and Safety..................................................................................................... 3.17-1 3.17.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.17-1 3.17.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.17-1 3.17.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.17-1 3.17.1.3 Risk Analysis........................................................................................... 3.17-3 3.17.1.4 Potential Health Effects of CO2 (and other captured gas constituents) ... 3.17-5 3.17.1.5 Relevant Safety Factors and Statistics ..................................................... 3.17-7 3.17.2 Affected Environment ........................................................................................... 3.17-10 3.17.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center...................................................................... 3.17-10 3.17.2.2 CO2 Pipeline .......................................................................................... 3.17-10 3.17.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area ........................................................................ 3.17-13 3.17.2.4 Educational Facilities ............................................................................ 3.17-13 3.17.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................. 3.17-13 3.17.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................. 3.17-14 3.17.3.2 Operational Impacts .............................................................................. 3.17-14 3.17.3.3 Post-Injection Impacts ........................................................................... 3.17-28 3.17.4 Intentional Destructive Acts .................................................................................. 3.17-34 3.17.5 Impacts of the No Action Alternative .................................................................... 3.17-36 3.18Socioeconomics .................................................................................................................... 3.18-1 3.18.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.18-1 3.18.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.18-1 3.18.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.18-1 3.18.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.18-1 3.18.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities .............................................................................. 3.18-1 3.18.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.18-4 3.18.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.18-4 3.18.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.18-7 3.18.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.18-9 3.19Environmental Justice ........................................................................................................... 3.19-1 3.19.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 3.19-1 3.19.1.1 Region of Influence ................................................................................. 3.19-1 3.19.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered .......................................... 3.19-1 3.19.1.3 Regulatory Framework ............................................................................ 3.19-2 3.19.2 Affected Environment ............................................................................................. 3.19-2 3.19.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.19-2 3.19.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities ........ 3.19-4 3.19.3 Impacts of Proposed Action .................................................................................... 3.19-6 3.19.3.1 Construction Impacts ............................................................................... 3.19-6 3.19.3.2 Operational Impacts ................................................................................ 3.19-7 3.19.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative ...................................................................... 3.19-7 SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES..................................................... 4.1-1 4.1 Impacts of Alternatives ........................................................................................................... 4.1-1 4.2 Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts ................................................................................... 4.2-1 4.2.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 4.2-1 4.2.2 Mitigation Measure Summary by Resource Area ..................................................... 4.2-1 4.3 Potential Cumulative Impacts ................................................................................................. 4.3-1 4.3.1 Background ................................................................................................................ 4.3-1 4.3.2 Analysis Methodology ............................................................................................... 4.3-1 4.3.3 Foreseeable Future Actions Considered .................................................................... 4.3-4 4.3.4 Cumulative Impacts ................................................................................................... 4.3-8 4.3.4.1 Summary of Cumulative Impacts .............................................................. 4.3-8 4.3.4.2 Climate and Greenhouse Gases ............................................................... 4.3-23 4.3.4.3 Geology ................................................................................................... 4.3-25 4.4 Incomplete and Unavailable Information................................................................................ 4.4-1 4.5 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments ........................................................................... 4.5-1 4.6 Relationship Between Short-TermUses of the Environment and Long-Term Productivity .. 4.6-1 5 REGULATORY AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS .................................................................. 5-1 6 REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................. 6-1 7 FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL, AND TRIBAL CONTACTS....................................................... 7-1 8 DISTRIBUTION LIST .................................................................................................................... 8-1 9 LIST OF PREPARERS................................................................................................................... 9-1 10 GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................................... 10-1 LIST OF TABLES Table 1-1. Summary of Scoping Comments ................................................................................... 1-12 Table 2-1. Reported Air Emissions atthe Meredosia Energy Center ............................................. 2-12 Table 2-2. Overview of Oxy-Combustion FacilityComponents and Features ............................... 2-15 Table 2-3. Electrical andThermal Performance Summaryfor Oxy-Combustion Facility ............. 2-17 Table 2-4. Estimated Process Material Requirements for the Oxy-Combustion Facility ............... 2-32 Table 2-5. Estimated Water Requirements and Sources ................................................................. 2-34 Table 2-6. Estimated Process Waste Generation ............................................................................. 2-34 Table 2-7. Estimated Wastewater Generation and Disposal ........................................................... 2-36 Table 2-8. Oxy-Combustion FacilityEmissions under Normal Operating Conditions .................. 2-38 Table 2-9. Major Pipeline Crossings to CO2 Storage Study Area ................................................... 2-44 Table 2-10. Proposed CO2 Acceptance Specifications ...................................................................... 2-48 Table 2-11. Surface Facility Construction Materials and Truckloads for  Primary and Secondary Injection Well Sites ...................................................................................... 2-55 Table 2-12. Surface Area Impacted byInjection and Monitoring Well System ............................... 2-68 Table 3.1-1. National and Illinois Ambient Air Quality Standards ................................................... 3.1-4 Table 3.1-2. Air QualityIndex Descriptor Categories and Health Effects ....................................... 3.1-6 Table 3.1-3. Thresholds for Determination of Major Modification to Existing Source .................... 3.1-7 Table 3.1-4. Air Pollutant Prevention of Significant Deterioration Increments for Class I, II, and III Areas .................................................................................................................3.1-8 Table 3.1-5. Air Monitoring Stations Used to Characterize Ambient Air for FutureGen 2.0 Project ......................................................................................................................... 3.1-10 Table 3.1-6. Air Monitoring Data Used to Characterize Ambient Air for FutureGen 2.0 Project ......................................................................................................................... 3.1-11 Table 3.1-7. Meredosia EnergyCenter Emissions for Recent Years .............................................. 3.1-12 Table 3.1-8. Equipment and Vehicle Emissions for Construction at Meredosia Energy Center.... 3.1-14 Table 3.1-9. Equipment and Vehicle Emissions for Construction of CO2 Pipeline ........................ 3.1-15 Table 3.1-10. Equipment and Vehicle Emissions for Construction of Injection Well Site(s) .......... 3.1-16 Table 3.1-11. Equipment and Vehicle Emissions for Construction of Educational Facilities .......... 3.1-17 Table 3.1-12. Total Construction Emissions ..................................................................................... 3.1-18 Table 3.1-13. Meredosia Energy Center Proposed Emissions Units ................................................. 3.1-19 Table 3.1-14. Project Emissions Summary during Proposed Operations ......................................... 3.1-19 Table 3.1-15. Oxy-Combustion FacilityEmissions under Normal Operating Conditions............... 3.1-20 Table 3.1-16. Significant Impact Limits ........................................................................................... 3.1-21 Table 3.1-17. FutureGen 2.0 Significant Impact Analysis Results ................................................... 3.1-22 Table 3.1-18. Cumulative Impact Analysis ....................................................................................... 3.1-23 Table 3.1-19. FutureGen 2.0 Significant Contribution Analysis Results .......................................... 3.1-23 Table 3.1-20. Significant Net Emissions from EnergyCenter Operations ....................................... 3.1-24 Table 3.1-21. Comparison of Existing and Proposed Cooling Towers ............................................. 3.1-25 Table 3.1-22. Generator Emissions at Injection Well Site(s) during Operations .............................. 3.1-26 Table 3.1-23. Vehicle Emissions during Project Operations ............................................................ 3.1-26 Table 3.2-1. Federal Actions to Address Greenhouse Gas Concerns ................................................ 3.2-2 Table 3.2-2. Regional and State Actions to Address Greenhouse Gas Concerns ............................. 3.2-4 Table 3.2-3. Seasonal Weather Data for Morgan County................................................................. 3.2-5 Table 3.2-4. Severe Weather Events in Morgan County................................................................... 3.2-6 Table 3.2-5. United States CO2 Emissions from Electric Power Sector Energy Consumption ...... 3.2-10 Table 3.2-6. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Construction Activities ......................... 3.2-12 Table 3.2-7. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Operations of Proposed Project ............ 3.2-13 Table 3.2-8. Estimated Emissions of each Greenhouse Gas fromOperations of the Proposed Project ......................................................................................................................... 3.2-13 Table 3.2-9. Comparison of Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Various Sources ................................ 3.2-14 Table 3.3-1. Soil Map Units Found at the Meredosia Energy Center ............................................... 3.3-7 Table 3.3-2. Soil Map Units Along the Southern and Northern CO2 Pipeline Routes ...................... 3.3-7 Table 3.3-3. Soil Map Units Found in the CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................... 3.3-11 Table 3.3-4. Soils Disturbed byConstruction at the Meredosia Energy Center............................. 3.3-16 Table 3.3-5. Soils Present within the Construction Right-of-Way for the  Southern and Northern CO2 Pipeline Routes .................................................................................... 3.3-17 Table 3.3-6. Soils Present within the CO2 Storage Study Area ....................................................... 3.3-18 Table 3.4-1. Coal, Oil, and Gas Wells Located in the UIC Survey Area ........................................ 3.4-12 Table 3.4-2. Summary of Possible Testing and Monitoring Activities ........................................... 3.4-23 Table 3.5-1. Summaryof Past Water Use at the Meredosia Energy Center ..................................... 3.5-5 Table 3.6-1. Summary of Impaired Waters Data for Illinois River ................................................... 3.6-5 Table 3.6-2. Average Flow Rates of the Illinois River in Morgan County ....................................... 3.6-6 Table 3.6-3. Surface Waters within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor........................................................ 3.6-7 Table 3.6-4. Surface Waters within the CO2 Storage Study Area ..................................................... 3.6-8 Table 3.6-5. Surface Water Crossings for Pipeline Routes ............................................................. 3.6-12 Table 3.6-6. Hydrostatic Water Needs for Pipeline Routes ............................................................ 3.6-13 Table 3.6-7. Estimated Wastewater Discharge to Illinois River ..................................................... 3.6-18 Table 3.6-8. NPDES Permit No. IL0000116 Effluent Concentration Limits (Daily Maximum) ... 3.6-19 Table 3.6-9. Operational Scenarios for Pre- and Post-Suspension of Meredosia EnergyCenter ... 3.6-19 Table 3.7-1. Wetlands within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor .................................................................. 3.7-9 Table 3.7-2. Floodplains within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor............................................................ 3.7-12 Table 3.7-3. Wetlands within the CO2 Storage StudyArea ............................................................ 3.7-13 Table 3.7-4. Floodplains within the CO2 Storage Study Area ........................................................ 3.7-13 Table 3.7-5. Wetlands within the Proposed Construction Right-of-Way for CO2Pipeline Routes ......................................................................................................................... 3.7-17 Table 3.7-6. Floodplains within the Proposed Construction Right-of-Way for CO2Pipeline Routes ......................................................................................................................... 3.7-19 Table 3.7-7. Wetlands within the Operational Right-of-Way for CO2 Pipeline Routes.................. 3.7-23 Table 3.7-8. Floodplains within the Operational Right-of-Way for CO2 Pipeline Routes .............. 3.7-24 Table 3.8-1. Federally- and State-Protected Species Potentially Occurring in Morgan County..... 3.8-11 Table 3.8-2. Land Cover Types within Potential Areas of Disturbance at the Meredosia Energy Center ............................................................................................................. 3.8-12 Table 3.8-3. Land Cover Types within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor and CO2 Storage Study Area ... 3.8-16 Table 3.8-4. Potential Land Cover Lost within the Disturbed Areas of the Proposed Project ........ 3.8-19 Table 3.8-5. Potential for Effects to Protected Species Potentially Occurring within the Region of Influence ................................................................................................................. 3.8-20 Table 3.9-1. Cultural Resources Surveys Completed within the Region of Influence ...................... 3.9-2 Table 3.9-2. Cultural Resources Identified within the Region of Influence.................................... 3.9-10 Table 3.10-1. Land Use Acreage by Type ......................................................................................... 3.10-2 Table 3.10-2. Land Use Types within Potential Areas of Disturbance at the Meredosia Energy Center .......................................................................................................................... 3.10-3 Table 3.10-3. Land Use within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor and Storage Study Area ......................... 3.10-4 Table 3.10-4. Potential Pipeline Route Construction Disturbances to Land Use .............................. 3.10-7 Table 3.12-1. Illinois Landfills within the Region of Influence and Expected Year of Closure ....... 3.12-4 Table 3.12-2. Historical Material Usage Rates .................................................................................3.12-5 Table 3.12-3. Historical Coal Combustion Residuals Generation .................................................... 3.12-6 Table 3.12-4. Historical Hazardous Waste Generation..................................................................... 3.12-6 Table 3.12-5. Historical Solid (Non-hazardous) Waste Generation .................................................. 3.12-7 Table 3.12-6. Estimated Process Material Requirements for the Oxy-Combustion Facility ............ 3.12-9 Table 3.12-7. Estimated Other Waste Generation Rates ................................................................. 3.12-11 Table 3.13-1. Illinois Department of Transportation Proposed Highway Improvement Near the Region of Influence .................................................................................................... 3.13-3 Table 3.13-2. Level of Service on Roadway Segments Near the Meredosia Energy Center– Existing Conditions..................................................................................................... 3.13-5 Table 3.13-3. Roadways within the Pipeline Corridor and Adjacent to the CO2 Storage Study Area ............................................................................................................................. 3.13-7 Table 3.13-4. Additional Daily Trips fromConstruction at the Meredosia Energy Center and CO2 Pipeline ............................................................................................................... 3.13-8 Table 3.13-5. Level of Service on NearbyRoadways - During Peak Construction (2015).............. 3.13-9 Table 3.13-6. Comparison of Level of Service on Nearby Roadways ............................................ 3.13-10 Table 3.13-7. Daily Trips from Operations .....................................................................................3.13-12 Table 3.13-8. Level of Service on Nearby Roadways -During Meredosia Energy Center Operation (2017)....................................................................................................... 3.13-13 Table 3.14-1. Perceived Change in Decibel Level ............................................................................ 3.14-2 Table 3.14-2. Sound Level and Loudness of Typical Noises ............................................................ 3.14-2 Table 3.14-3. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development  Guidelines for Evaluating Sound Level Impacts on Residential Properties ......................................................... 3.14-3 Table 3.14-4. Permissible Sound Levels for Class C Land to Class A Land .................................... 3.14-4 Table 3.14-5. Noise Abatement Criteria ........................................................................................... 3.14-5 Table 3.14-6. Guidelines for Potential Vibration Annoyance........................................................... 3.14-5 Table 3.14-7. Thresholds for Potential Vibration Damage ............................................................... 3.14-6 Table 3.14-8. Summary of Noise Monitoring Sites .......................................................................... 3.14-8 Table 3.14-9. Existing Ambient Sound Levels at the Monitoring Sites .......................................... 3.14-11 Table 3.14-10. Estimated Sound Levels Adjacent to Nearby Roadways - Existing Conditions ....... 3.14-13 Table 3.14-11. Common Noise Levels Associated with Outdoor Construction ............................... 3.14-14 Table 3.14-12. Number of Sensitive Receptors within 500 and 1,000 Feet of Pipeline Right-of-Way ...........................................................................................................................3.14-15 Table 3.14-13. Number and Type of Pipeline Crossings .................................................................. 3.14-16 Table 3.14-14. Ambient Sound Measurements at Nearest Residence toStratigraphic Well ............ 3.14-17 Table 3.14-15. Sound Measurements at VariousDistances and Directions fromStratigraphic Well during Drilling Activities ................................................................................. 3.14-19 Table 3.14-16. Estimated Sound Levels at Various Distances fromInjection Well Construction ... 3.14-19 Table 3.14-17. Estimated Sound Levels Adjacent to NearbyRoadways - Proposed Project ........... 3.14-21 Table 3.16-1. Fire Department Statistics ........................................................................................... 3.16-2 Table 3.16-2. Law Enforcement Employee Information .................................................................. 3.16-3 Table 3.16-3. Crime Statistics ........................................................................................................... 3.16-3 Table 3.16-4. Healthcare Statistics .................................................................................................... 3.16-4 Table 3.16-5. Public School Statistics ............................................................................................... 3.16-4 Table 3.16-6. Private School Statistics .............................................................................................. 3.16-5 Table 3.17-1. Potential Health Effects from Exposure to CO2 and Trace Gases ............................... 3.17-5 Table 3.17-2. Longer Duration Criteria for CO2 and Trace Gases Not Likelyto Cause Appreciable Health Risks to Humans ......................................................................... 3.17-6 Table 3.17-3. Occupational Injury Data for Related Industries in United States in 2010 ................. 3.17-7 Table 3.17-4. Fatality Data for Related Industries in United States in 2010 ..................................... 3.17-8 Table 3.17-5. Pipeline Safety Record in United States (1992 through 2011)................................... 3.17-8 Table 3.17-6. Meredosia Energy Center Region of Influence Demographics ................................ 3.17-10 Table 3.17-7. Alliance CO2 Acceptance Specifications .................................................................. 3.17-16 Table 3.17-8. Pasquill Meteorological Stability Classes ................................................................. 3.17-18 Table 3.17-9. Meteorological Conditions Used in SLAB Simulations .......................................... 3.17-18 Table 3.17-10. Simulated Vapor Plume Transport Distances for Pipeline Releases ........................ 3.17-19 Table 3.17-11. Estimated Number of People Affected by  CO2and Trace Gases fromthe Hypothetical Pipeline Releases ................................................................................. 3.17-22 Table 3.17-12. Simulated Vapor Plume Transport Distances for Vertical Injection Well ................ 3.17-25 Table 3.17-13. Simulated Vapor Plume Transport Distances for Horizontal Injection Well ........... 3.17-27 Table 3.17-14. Potential Types of Releases fromCO2 Storage StudyArea ..................................... 3.17-29 Table 3.17-15. Potential Subsurface CO2Releases fromWells and Subsurface Storage Formation .................................................................................................................. 3.17-32 Table 3.17-16. Potential Acute Human Health Effects within 300 Feet of Post-injection Releases. 3.17-34 Table 3.17-17. Potential Chronic Human Health Effects within 300Feet of Post-injection Releases .................................................................................................................... 3.17-35 Table 3.18-1. Population Data ........................................................................................................... 3.18-2 Table 3.18-2. Housing within the Region of Influence ..................................................................... 3.18-3 Table 3.18-3. Employment and Income Data .................................................................................... 3.18-3 Table 3.19-1. County, State, and National Population and Low-Income Distributions (2010)........ 3.19-4 Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project ..... 4.1-2 Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project ...................................... 4.2-2 Table 4.3-1. Levels of Importance of the Potential for Cumulative Impacts by Resource ............... 4.3-2 Table 4.3-2. Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions Considered .................................................... 4.3-5 Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts ................................................................................. 4.3-9 LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1-1. Steps in the NEPA Process .............................................................................................. 1-8 Figure 2-1. The FutureGen 2.0 Project ............................................................................................... 2-2 Figure 2-2. Project Location Map ....................................................................................................... 2-3 Figure 2-3. Meredosia Energy Center................................................................................................ 2-6 Figure 2-4. Meredosia EnergyCenter Features – Aerial Overview ................................................... 2-8 Figure 2-5. Meredosia EnergyCenter – Coal Handling and Nearby Features ................................... 2-9 Figure 2-6. Meredosia Energy Center Features – Coal and Fuel Handling Systems ....................... 2-10 Figure 2-7. Simplified Diagram of Oxy-Combustion Facility ......................................................... 2-14 Figure 2-8. Conceptual Oxy-Combustion Facility Site Layout........................................................ 2-16 Figure 2-9. Basic Air Separation Process ......................................................................................... 2-18 Figure 2-10. Oxy-Combustion Cool Recycle Process Schematic ...................................................... 2-18 Figure 2-11. Basic Compression and Purification Process ................................................................. 2-20 Figure 2-12. Proposed Access Roads ................................................................................................. 2-21 Figure 2-13. Stormwater Management ............................................................................................... 2-24 Figure 2-14. Temporary and Permanent Impact Areas ...................................................................... 2-26 Figure 2-15. Project Concept .............................................................................................................. 2-39 Figure 2-16. CO2 Pipeline Corridor to the CO2 Storage Study Area .................................................. 2-41 Figure 2-17. Southern and Northern CO2Pipeline Route Options to CO2Storage StudyArea ......... 2-42 Figure 2-18. Recommended Construction Right-of-Way Cross Section ........................................... 2-46 Figure 2-19. Primary Injection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout................................ 2-53 Figure 2-20. SecondaryInjection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout............................ 2-54 Figure 2-21. Geological Stratigraphic Columnfor the CO2Storage StudyArea and Proposed Vertical Injection Well Construction Details ................................................................. 2-59 Figure 2-22. Proposed Horizontal Injection Well Construction Details ............................................. 2-60 Figure 2-23. Predicted Areal Extent of CO2 Plume ............................................................................ 2-62 Figure 2-24. Drill Rig during Daytime Operations ............................................................................ 2-63 Figure 2-25. Drill Rig during Nighttime Operations .......................................................................... 2-63 Figure 2-26. Monitoring Well Network Conceptual Layout.............................................................. 2-69 Figure 3.1-1. Air Quality Control Regions in Illinois ........................................................................ 3.1-2 Figure 3.1-2. Illinois Air Monitoring Sites ......................................................................................... 3.1-5 Figure 3.2-1. Wind Rose for Region, Springfield, Illinois Airport .................................................... 3.2-7 Figure 3.2-2. Historical Trends in Global Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations and Emissions ............ 3.2-9 Figure 3.2-3. Economic Sectors and Greenhouse Gases Contributing to Global Anthropogenic Emissions ...................................................................................................................... 3.2-9 Figure 3.2-4. United States CO2 Emissions by Sector...................................................................... 3.2-11 Figure 3.3-1. Physiographic Divisions of Illinois............................................................................... 3.3-3 Figure 3.3-2. Soils Map of Meredosia Energy Center........................................................................ 3.3-6 Figure 3.4-1. Cross Section of the Bedrock through Morgan County................................................ 3.4-4 Figure 3.4-2. Generalized Stratigraphic Column for the CO2 Storage Study Area............................ 3.4-6 Figure 3.4-3. Peak Horizontal Acceleration Values (as %g) with a 2 Percent Probability of Exceedance in 50 years............................................................................................... 3.4-10 Figure 3.4-4. Oil, Gas, and Gas Storage Wells in the UndergroundInjection Control Survey Area ............................................................................................................................. 3.4-13 Figure 3.4-5. Effectiveness of Trapping Mechanisms Over Time ................................................... 3.4-16 Figure 3.5-1. Shallow Groundwater Aquifers ....................................................................................3.5-3 Figure 3.5-2. Shallow Groundwater Wells in the Underground Injection ControlSurvey Area ....... 3.5-7 Figure 3.6-1. Watershed Boundaries and Surface Water Features in the ROI ................................... 3.6-4 Figure 3.6-2. The Elevation of the Lower Illinois River Watershed and Locations of the U.S. Geological Survey Surface Water Monitoring Stations ................................................ 3.6-5 Figure 3.7-1. Wetlands at the Meredosia Energy Center .................................................................... 3.7-7 Figure 3.7-2. Floodplains at the Meredosia Energy Center ................................................................ 3.7-8 Figure 3.7-3. Wetlands and Floodplains in CO2 Pipeline Corridor (Western Portion).................... 3.7-10 Figure 3.7-4. Wetlands and Floodplains in CO2 Pipeline Corridor (Eastern Portion) and CO2 Storage Study Area .............................................................................................. 3.7-11 Figure 3.8-1. Illinois Level III and IV Ecoregions............................................................................. 3.8-4 Figure 3.8-2. Land Cover at the Meredosia Energy Center .............................................................. 3.8-13 Figure 3.11-1. Typical Regional Landscape ....................................................................................... 3.11-2 Figure 3.11-2. Surrounding Area with Meredosia Energy Center in Background ............................. 3.11-4 Figure 3.11-3. Morgan County CO2 Storage Study Area View from North ...................................... 3.11-4 Figure 3.13-1. Primary Roadways within 40 Miles of the Meredosia Energy Center ........................ 3.13-6 Figure 3.14-1. Noise Class Designations for Properties Adjacent to Meredosia EnergyCenter....... 3.14-7 Figure 3.14-2. Noise Monitoring Sites ............................................................................................... 3.14-9 Figure 3.14-3. Sound Measurement Locations at Stratigraphic Well ............................................... 3.14-18 Figure 3.17-1. 2010 Population Density in Vicinity of Meredosia Energy Center and Western Part of Pipeline Route to CO2 Storage Study Area ................................................... 3.17-11 Figure 3.17-2. 2010 Population Density in Vicinity of Eastern Part of Pipeline Route and CO2 Storage Study Area in Morgan County ..................................................................... 3.17-12 Figure 3.17-3. Population Density in Vicinity of Area of Injection Well Site(s) ............................. 3.17-24 Figure 3.19-1. Minority Populations within the FutureGen 2.0 Project Area .................................... 3.19-3 Figure 3.19-2. Low-Income Populations within the FutureGen 2.0 Project Area .............................. 3.19-5 DOE/EIS-0460D DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  TABLE OF CONTENTS  APPENDICES – VOLUME II  APPENDIX A APPENDIX B APPENDIX C APPENDIX D APPENDIX E APPENDIX F APPENDIX G  PUBLIC SCOPING CONSULTATION LETTERS MAP VIEWS OF PIPELINE WETLANDS SURVEYS BIOLOGICAL SURVEYS CULTURAL SURVEYS GEOLOGICAL REPORT  INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK DOE/EIS-0460D  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  ACRONYMS  ACRONYMS  Acronym  Definition  7Q10 7-day, 10-year low-flow frequency  ACHP Advisory Council on Historic Preservation  AEGL Acute Exposure Guideline Level  AoR area of review  APE area of potential effect  AQCR air quality control region  AQI air quality index  bgs below ground surface  BMPs best management practices  Btu British thermal unit  CAA Clean Air Act  CCPI Clean Coal Power Initiative  CEQ Council on Environmental Quality  CFR Code of Federal Regulations  CIPSCO Central Illinois Public Service Company  CO2 carbon dioxide  CO2-eq CO2 equivalents  Co-Op cooperative  CR County Road  CWA Clean Water Act  dB decibel  dBA A-weighted sound level in decibels  DOE U.S. Department of Energy  DOT U.S. Department of Transportation  EO Executive Order  EIS Environmental Impact Statement   ERPG Emergency Response Planning Guidelines  ESA Endangered Species Act  °F degrees Fahrenheit  FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency  FHWA Federal Highway Administration  Acronym  Definition FR Federal Register FTA U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Transit Administration FTE full-time equivalent GHG greenhouse gas GIS geographic information system gpd gallons per day gpm gallons per minute HAPs hazardous air pollutant HUD U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development I-# Interstate Highway IAC Illinois Administrative Code IDNR Illinois Department of Natural Resources IDOA Illinois Department of Agriculture IDOT Illinois Department of Transportation IEMA Illinois Emergency Management Agency IEPA Illinois Environmental Protection Agency IGCC integrated gasification combined cycle IL-# Illinois Highway ILCS Illinois Compiled Statutes IWI Illinois Wetland Inventory kV kilovolt  kW kilowatt kWh kilowatt-hours L50 sound levels exceeded 50 percent of the time L90 sound levels exceeded 50 percent of the time Ldn or DNL day-night sound level or 24-hour Leq LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Leq equivalent sound level Leq(h) equivalent sound level over one hour LOS level of service MACT Maximum achievable control technology mgd million gallons per day MOVES Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator Acronym  Definition MSDS material safety data sheet MVA monitoring, verification, and accounting MWe megawatt electrical MWh megawatt hour NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards NAC noise abatement criteria NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NESHAPs National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants NETL National Energy Technology Laboratory NHPA National Historic Preservation Act NOA Notice of Availability NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration NOI Notice of Intent NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NRCS Natural Resources Conservation Service NRHP National Register of Historic Places NWP Nationwide Permit OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration  PAC protective action criteria PCB polychlorinated biphenyl PEL permissible exposure limit  PM10 particulate matter of diameter of 10 micrometers or less PM2.5 particulate matter of diameter of 2.5 micrometers or less PSD Prevention of Significant Deterioration psi pounds per square inch psig pounds per square inch pressure RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act RIMS II Regional Input-Output Modeling System II ROD Record of Decision ROI region of influence ROW right-of-way SACTI seasonal/annual cooling tower impact SCADA supervisory control and data acquisition Acronym  Definition SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act SHPO State Historic Preservation Office SIL Significant Impact Level SPCC Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures STOMP Subsurface Transport Over Multiple Phases Model SWPPP Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan TEEL temporary emergency exposure limit TMDL total maximum daily load U.S. United States UIC Underground Injection Control US-# U.S. Highway USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers USC  United States Code USDA  U.S. Department of Agriculture USDW underground source of drinking water USEPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency USFWS U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service USGS U.S. Geological Survey VOC volatile organic compound DOE/EIS-0460D  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  1. PURPOSE AND NEED  1  PURPOSE AND NEED  1.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter introduces the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project and describes the purpose and need for agency action and the scope of this environmental impact statement (EIS). This chapter also summarizes the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 process, project history and objectives, and the public scoping process undertaken for this EIS. In 2010, the United States (U.S.) Department of Energy (DOE) proposed to fund the final design, construction, and initial operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, subject to the requirements of NEPA. To assess the potential environmental impacts of the project, DOE has prepared this EIS in accordance with NEPA (42 United States Code [USC] 4321 et seq.) and in compliance with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) implementing regulations for NEPA (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1500 through 1508) and DOE’s NEPA implementing procedures (10 CFR 1021). To date, DOE has authorized the expenditure of funds for the purpose of project definition, cost estimating, and preliminary and front-end engineering design activities, and to facilitate environmental review. Such activities do not have an adverse impact on the environment or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives. This EIS will inform DOE’s decision of whether to authorize the expenditure of additional funds for final design, construction, and initial operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. FutureGen 2.0 is a public-private partnership formed for the purpose of developing the first large-scale oxy-combustion repowering project in the world that would use carbon capture and storage technology. The FutureGen 2.0 Project consists of two components: the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Pipeline and Storage Reservoir. Additionally, visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the educational facilities) would be provided at a suitable location to support public outreach and communication, and to provide training and research opportunities associated with near-zero emissions power generation and CO2 capture and storage technologies. DOE has entered into a cooperative agreement with the Oxy-Combustion Technology FutureGen Industrial Alliance (Alliance) under which the Oxy-combustion is the combustion of coal Alliance, cooperating with Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren), with a mixture of oxygen and recycled flue would upgrade an energy center currently owned by Ameren near gas (instead of air), resulting in a gas by-Meredosia, Illinois, with oxy-combustion and carbon capture product that is primarily CO2. This facilitates technology provided by the Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation the capture of CO2, which, in the case of the Group (Babcock & Wilcox) and Air Liquide Process and FutureGen 2.0 Project, would be permanently stored underground rather than released to Construction, Inc. (Air Liquide). The plant would capture at least the atmosphere. 90 percent of its CO2 emissions and reduce other emissions to near zero. The captured CO2 would be transported through a 30mile pipeline to injection wells that would be used to inject the CO2 approximately 4,000 to 4,500 feet below the earth’s surface into a geologic formation for permanent storage. The project would be designed to capture, transport, and inject approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 annually, up to a total of 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) over approximately 20 years. The Alliance would construct and operate a visitor center and research and training facilities related to carbon capture and storage in the local area. The Alliance is a non-profit membership organization created to benefit the public interest and the interests of science through research, development, and demonstration of near-zero emissions coal technology. It was formed to partner with DOE on the FutureGen Initiative. Members of the Alliance include some of the largest coal producers, coal users, and coal equipment suppliers in the world. The Alliance’s current members are: Alpha Natural Resources, Inc.; Anglo American, SA; Joy Global Inc.; Peabody Energy Corporation; and Xstrata, PLC. The active role of industry in this FutureGen Initiative ensures that the public and private sector share the cost and risk of developing the advanced technologies necessary to commercialize the FutureGen concept. The Alliance has an open membership policy to encourage the addition of other coal producers, coal users, and coal equipment suppliers, both domestic and international. Consistent with the FutureGen Initiative, DOE encourages participation from international organizations to maximize the global applicability and acceptance of FutureGen 2.0’s results, helping to support an international consensus on the role of coal and geologic CO2 storage in addressing global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and energy security. 1.2 PROJECT BACKGROUND For more than 25 years, DOE has been co-funding large-scale demonstrations of clean coal technologies to hasten their adoption into the commercial marketplace. Developing this technology is critical for reducing conventional air pollutants and CO2 emissions, maintaining the ability to continue to use abundant domestic coal reserves, and keeping the nation’s electricity supplies secure and affordable. Federal financial support is needed to help reduce the risks inherent in these first-of-a-kind projects. One of DOE’s clean coal demonstration efforts, the FutureGen Initiative, is designed to demonstrate the commercial feasibility of coal-fueled energy generation with carbon capture and storage at a commercial scale. This section describes the original FutureGen Project and the current FutureGen 2.0 Project. 1.2.1 Original FutureGen Project On February 27, 2003, President George W. Bush announced the FutureGen Initiative, a $1 billion, 10-year demonstration project to create the world’s first coal-based, zero emissions electricity and hydrogen power plant. The President’s announcement emphasized the need for the FutureGen Initiative to support other federal initiatives, including the National Climate Change Technology Initiative (June 11, 2001) and the Hydrogen Fuel Initiative (January 28, 2003). These initiatives aimed to reduce the nation’s output of GHG emissions to improve the global environment and provide advanced technologies to meet the world’s energy needs. In response to the President’s FutureGen Initiative, DOE developed plans for the FutureGen Project, which was intended to establish the technical and economic feasibility of producing electricity and hydrogen from coal, while capturing and geologically storing the CO2 generated in the process. On April 21, 2003, DOE issued a Request for Information seeking expressions of interest from prospective consortia of industries most heavily impacted by potential future limitations on carbon emissions. DOE outlined a plan to enter into a cooperative agreement with a consortium led by the coal-fueled electric power industry and the coal production industry. A consortium of coal-fueled utilities, coal production companies, and coal production equipment suppliers formed the Alliance, and responded to DOE’s request. On December 2, 2005, DOE and the Alliance signed a limited-scope cooperative agreement to initiate the FutureGen Project with a project definition phase that yielded a conceptual design report and project plans. This phase led to the signing of a full-scope cooperative agreement on March 23, 2007, that was intended to establish the remainder of the project. DOE and the Alliance were to share the costs of the development, construction, and operation of the FutureGen Project. The FutureGen Project was to provide a platform to test advanced technologies for producing both electricity and hydrogen from coal, based on the design concept known as integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC). This technology has the potential for increasing energy conversion efficiency while reducing air pollution emissions rates. Geologic storage of CO2 was to be a unique component of the project. The CO2 was to be captured and stored in a deep underground saline formation. In accordance with the cooperative agreement, the Alliance implemented a competitive siting process to identify the IGCC power plant and CO2 storage site that could best meet the goals of the FutureGen Project. This process began with the Alliance’s issuance of a Request for Proposals on March 7, 2006, in which it sought proposals from potential site hosts. The Alliance rigorously evaluated the 12 proposals received and identified four candidate sites for full consideration by the Alliance and DOE. The candidate sites, announced by the Alliance on July 21, 2006, were located in Mattoon, Illinois; Tuscola, Illinois; Jewett, Texas; and Odessa, Texas. On July 28, 2006, and in accordance with NEPA, DOE published a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an EIS to consider whether to provide financial assistance for the FutureGen Project and to evaluate the potential environmental impacts of constructing and operating the FutureGen Project at each of the four candidate sites (71 Federal Register [FR] 42840). Subsequently, DOE prepared a Draft and a Final EIS documenting its environmental analyses. In the Final EIS, issued on November 17, 2007, DOE stated its preferred alternative was to provide financial assistance to the FutureGen project and tentatively found all four sites acceptable. On December 18, 2007, the Alliance announced that, after extensive review and evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of the four candidate sites, both individually and in comparison to one another, it had selected the site in Mattoon, Illinois, as the host site for the FutureGen Project, pending the outcome of DOE’s Record of Decision (ROD) (Alliance 2007). However, on January 29, 2008, DOE announced that it would terminate its funding for the FutureGen Project, primarily due to higher than expected costs. Instead, DOE stated its intention to implement a new strategy for the FutureGen Initiative that would promote equipping multiple new clean coal power plants with advanced carbon capture and storage technology, instead of one single research-oriented power plant. Despite the Alliance’s efforts to modify the design and the proposed cost-share structure of the original FutureGen Project, in June 2008, DOE notified the Alliance that it had decided to withdraw from the FutureGen Project and that it would not renew its cooperative agreement. The Alliance, believing in the merits of the project, continued its development using private sector funds and grant funding provided by the state of Illinois. In 2009, DOE reassessed its earlier decision and reached an agreement with the Alliance to complete a preliminary design, a revised cost estimate, and a funding plan pursuant to a new limited-scope cooperative agreement. On July 14, 2009, DOE issued a ROD that stated its intention to implement the FutureGen Initiative by proceeding with financial assistance for the FutureGen Project at any one of the four alternative sites analyzed in the EIS. DOE also stated that it anticipated committing $1 billion in American Recovery and Reinvestment Act funds, with remaining funds to come from the Alliance, revenues from the sale of electricity, and other funding sources. 1.2.2 FutureGen 2.0 Project  As the estimated capital costs of the original FutureGen Project escalated and came to exceed $2 billion, DOE decided in 2010 that the project as then envisioned was too expensive in a budget-constrained environment. Seeking a fiscally responsible approach to achieving the important technical objectives of advanced clean coal technologies and carbon capture and storage as described in President George W. Bush’s FutureGen Initiative, and recognizing that a number of projects involving IGCC technology and the coal-to-hydrogen concept had been announced, DOE elected to shift from the construction and operation of a new IGCC power plant to repowering an existing coal-fueled power plant. Retrofitting opportunities that would allow for the capture of CO2 consisted of oxy-combustion projects and post-combustion scrubbing projects. Oxy-combustion burns coal with a mixture of oxygen and CO2 instead of ambient air to produce a concentrated CO2 stream, which facilitates CO2 injection and permanent storage underground. Because DOE already had post-combustion scrubbing projects in its research and demonstration portfolio, it decided to pursue an oxy-combustion retrofitting project with CO2 storage at the Mattoon, Illinois, site that had been selected for the original FutureGen Project. FutureGen 2.0 would still meet the objective of the FutureGen Initiative to establish the feasibility and viability of producing electricity from coal with at least 90 percent CO2 capture and near-zero emissions. On August 5, 2010, DOE announced the award of $1 billion in American Recovery and Reinvestment Act funding to the Alliance, Ameren, Babcock & Wilcox, and Air Liquide to build FutureGen 2.0, an oxycombustion repowering and CO2 storage project. DOE stated that the project partners would repower Unit 4 at Ameren’s Meredosia, Illinois energy center with oxy-combustion technology and would construct a 150-mile pipeline from Meredosia to Mattoon that would transport more than 1.1 million tons (1 million metric tons) of captured CO2 per year. The Mattoon site would also be used to conduct research pertaining to site characterization, injection and storage, and monitoring and measurement. The Mattoon sequestration site proponent, however, decided that the pursuit of FutureGen 2.0 was not in its best interest, stating that the restructured project did not provide the highest and best use of the Mattoon site. With Mattoon no longer available as the CO2 storage site, the Alliance developed and implemented another competitive process to identify a CO2 storage site in Illinois. Under the terms of a cooperative agreement signed in 2010 with DOE, the Alliance undertook a four-stage siting process as described in Chapter 2, Proposed Action and Alternatives (Section 2.5.2.1). Following the issuance of Guidance to Prospective Offerors on October 6, 2010, the Alliance prepared and released a Request for Proposals on October 25, 2010. The Request for Proposal described the surface and subsurface qualifying, scoring, and best value criteria that the Alliance would use to site the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 injection wells and the data that site offerors needed to provide. On November 15, 2010, six bidders submitted proposals. After careful review of the proposals and other available data, including data from the Illinois State Geologic Survey, on February 28, 2011, the Alliance announced its selection of Morgan County as the preferred location for the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 injection wells, visitor center, and research and training facilities. At that time, the Alliance identified sites in Christian County and Douglas County as alternate locations should concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site. Throughout 2011 and 2012, the Alliance conducted a detailed geological stratigraphic analysis at the Morgan County storage location to characterize and verify the viability of the proposed CO2 storage reservoir. The geological findings have proved the location to be favorably suited for CO2 injection and sequestration as part of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. As a result of this geological analysis combined with a cost analysis of the pipelines to the alternative sites, on June 19, 2012, the Alliance Board of Directors confirmed that the proposed Morgan County site remained its preferred site and voted to direct the Alliance to no longer pursue the sites in Christian County and Douglas County as alternate sites. The Alliance notified the proponents of those sites that the Alliance would no longer be considering them as alternate sites and would not be constructing or operating a CO2 storage reservoir at those sites, releasing the site proponents to find other reasonable uses for their proposed sites. Since the initial announcement of the FutureGen 2.0 Project in 2010, Ameren decided, for economic reasons, to suspend operations at the Meredosia Energy Center at the end of 2011 (see Section 2.4.1.5) and to reduce its role in FutureGen 2.0. With DOE’s concurrence, the Alliance has agreed to acquire those portions and components of the Meredosia Energy Center that are needed for FutureGen 2.0 and to undertake the repowering of Unit 4 with oxy-combustion technology by Babcock & Wilcox and Air Liquide. Thus, the Alliance would be responsible for both the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir components of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Ameren has continued to assist with environmental permitting and maintaining the energy center to be in a retrofit-ready condition. 1.3 PROPOSED ACTION DOE proposes to fund the final design, construction, and initial operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project to implement the 2003 FutureGen Initiative. DOE announced $1 billion in funding under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law No. 111-5) for the project through four cost-share phases:  Phase I: Project Definition   Phase II: NEPA, Permitting, and Preliminary/Final Design  Phase III: Construction and Commissioning  Phase IV: Operations  Although not part of DOE’s proposed action, after completion of DOE’s participation, there would be two commercial phases:  Phase C-1: Commercial Operations  Phase C-2: Post-Operations Monitoring DOE has authorized the expenditure of funds for Phase I (project definition) and much of Phase II (through front-end engineering design), with cost-sharing by the private partners. DOE proposes to fund the remainder of Phase II (final design) and Phases III (construction and commissioning) and IV (operations) of the FutureGen 2.0 Project through cooperative agreements with the Alliance to support the implementation of project components that, if successful, would advance the goals of the FutureGen Initiative. This EIS addresses the environmental impacts of continuing to fund FutureGen 2.0 through Phase IV, also cost-shared by the private partners, and the impacts of continuing commercial operations and post-operations monitoring after DOE’s participation ends. The project components, consisting of the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir, would provide critical performance and emissions data, as well as establish operating, permitting, maintenance, and other experience needed for future commercial deployment of these technologies. Objectives of FutureGen 2.0 Phases Phase I: Project Definition – Select a site for the CO2 storage facility, obtain site purchase options, complete a conceptual design and cost estimate for the project, initiate the NEPA process, and execute a Cooperation and Technology Agreement between FutureGen Industrial Alliance and Ameren Energy Resources. Phase II: NEPA, Permitting, and Preliminary/Final Design – Complete environmental permitting and the NEPA process; obtain commitments on properties needed for the pipeline and injection well site(s); complete front-end engineering and design and final design and cost estimates; prepare a monitoring, verification, and accounting plan; and execute the power purchase agreement and other appropriate agreements for facilities operation. Phase III: Construction and Commissioning – Construct the pipeline, the surface and subsurface facilities at the injection well site(s), and the visitor, research, and training facilities, and commission the system. Phase IV: Operations – Commence operation of the pipeline and storage facility systems to transport and store CO2, and to test technologies and protocols for CO2 monitoring necessary to establish the permanence of storage and provide a full accounting for all captured CO2. For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, the Alliance would acquire portions of the Meredosia Energy Center (formerly named the Meredosia Power Station) in west central Illinois from Ameren and incorporate advanced oxy-combustion technology into the reconstruction of Unit 4 at the existing plant. Ameren originally entered into a cooperative agreement with DOE to implement the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, but the company discontinued operations at the Meredosia Energy Center at the end of 2011 and informed DOE that it would not continue with its cooperative agreement. Subsequently, DOE authorized the Alliance to assume responsibility for Ameren’s cooperative agreement. The scope of the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test consists of final design, procurement, manufacture, installation, startup, testing and operation of an integrated oxy-combustion coal boiler with CO2 capture, purification, and compression. The plant would be designed to generate approximately 168 megawatts electrical (MWe) gross with a net output estimated at approximately 99 MWe, and it would operate continuously to generate baseload electric power. The CO2 would be cleaned, compressed for transport, and delivered to a pipeline for transport to the CO2 injection wells. For the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a CO2 transmission pipeline and a geologic injection and storage facility. The pipeline would transport CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells in Morgan County where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mt. Simon Formation, which is the major deep saline formation in the Illinois Basin. The injection wells would be located approximately 30 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center. The pipeline and storage reservoir would be designed to store up to 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) over an approximately 20-year operating period. Research would include site characterization, injection and storage, and CO2 monitoring and measurement. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would begin final design in 2013 after completion of the NEPA process. Construction would begin in 2014, with commissioning in 2017. Operations and monitoring would continue until 2022 (56 months after commissioning) with DOE funding. Performance and economic test results would be shared among all participants, industry, non-governmental organizations, and the public. After DOE’s involvement ceases, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be expected to continue commercial operations, including carbon capture and storage, for approximately 20 years, and the Alliance (or its successor) would be financially responsible for post-injection monitoring of the underground CO2 for up to 50 years. 1.4 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR AGENCY ACTION According to the Energy Information Administration, coal is an abundant and indigenous energy resource and in 2010 supplied 45 percent of electric power in the U.S. Electricity is vital to the nation’s economy and global competitiveness with demand for electricity projected to increase by 22 percent from 2010 to 2035. Based on its analyses, the Energy Information Administration concludes that this power increase can only be achieved if coal use is also increased (EIA 2012). In addition, nearly half of the nation’s electric power generating infrastructure is more than 30 years old, with a significant portion of this infrastructure having been in service for 60 years or more (EIA 2009). These aging facilities are (or soon will be) in need of substantial refurbishment or replacement. Additional capacity must also be put in-service to keep pace with the nation’s ever-growing demand for electricity. Therefore, nearly 40 percent of the nation’s electricity needs will continue to be served by coal for at least the next several decades (EIA 2012). However, there is also a need to address the associated environmental and climate change challenges related to the continued use of coal. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has concluded that global atmospheric concentrations of CO2 have increased 39 percent since the pre-industrial period, and that the primary source of the increase results from the consumption of fossil fuels (IPCC 2007; IPCC 2011). In addition, in 2009 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) found that GHGs endanger both the public health and welfare through their contribution to climate change. Subsequently, on April 13, 2012, the USEPA announced a proposed rule that would set CO2 emissions limits on new fossil fuel-fired generating units. Such rulemaking would significantly affect the future development of coal-based power generation systems unless methods to reduce CO2 emissions, like the approach included in the proposed action, are successfully demonstrated and adopted. Given the heightened awareness of environmental stewardship, while at the same time meeting the demand for a reliable and cost-effective electric power supply, it is in the public interest for the nation’s energy infrastructure to be upgraded with the latest and most advanced commercially viable technologies to achieve improved efficiencies, environmental performance, and cost-competitiveness. To realize acceptance and replication of these advanced technologies into the electric power generation sector, the technologies need to be demonstrated first, i.e., designed and constructed to industrial standards and operated at significant scale under industrial conditions. Thus, agency action is needed to demonstrate advanced technologies to meet the nation’s energy needs with an abundant natural resource and reduce the nation’s output of GHG emissions to improve the global environment. Implementation of FutureGen 2.0 would support the objectives of the FutureGen Initiative to establish the feasibility and viability of producing electricity from coal with at least 90 percent CO2 capture and near-zero emissions of other pollutants. One of DOE's primary strategic goals is to protect our national and economic security by promoting a diverse supply and delivery of reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound energy. DOE’s proposed action contributes to this strategic goal through cutting-edge research and development focused on clean energy production and use of the nation's domestic fossil energy resources. The principal need addressed by DOE’s proposed action includes the collection and evaluation of data only available from the experience of actually designing, permitting, operating, and maintaining an industrial scale oxycombustion repowering project with CO2 capture, transport, and geologic storage. Studies by DOE's National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) have identified oxy-combustion technology as a potentially cost-effective approach to implementing carbon capture at existing coal-fueled facilities, including a large cross-section of the world's existing pulverized coal plants (NETL 2008, NETL 2011a, Farzan 2011). It also has the potential for use in new power plants. Because oxycombustion technology is inherently scalable, it is possible to demonstrate the technology at a relatively small commercial-scale such as the project proposed for the Meredosia Energy Center (168 MWe), and then replicate it at larger-scale (e.g., 500+ MWe) power plants. The ability to demonstrate the technology at a smaller but commercially relevant scale has substantial cost-saving benefits. A successful project would generate technical, environmental, and financial data from the design, construction, and operation of the integrated electric generation, pipeline, and injection facilities to confirm that oxy-combustion technology with CO2 capture and permanent underground storage can be implemented at a commercial scale. The cost-shared financial assistance from DOE would reduce the risk to the Alliance in demonstrating the technology at the level of maturity needed for decisions on commercialization. 1.5 NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT 1.5.1 DOE Responsibilities NEPA requires all federal agencies to include, in every recommendation or report on proposals for major federal actions that may significantly affect the quality of the human environment, a detailed statement describing: (1) the potential environmental impacts of the proposed project; (2) any adverse environmental effects that cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented; (3) alternatives to the proposed project, including the alternative of taking no action; (4) the relationship between local short-term uses of the environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity; and (5) any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources that would be involved in the proposed project should it be implemented. NEPA also requires consultations with agencies that have jurisdiction or special expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved, and that the detailed statement along with the comments and views of consulted governmental agencies be made available to the public (42 USC 4332). In compliance with NEPA, DOE prepared this EIS for FutureGen 2.0 to inform its decisions regarding whether to provide financial assistance for project activities beyond preliminary design (including detailed design, construction, and operation of the proposed facilities). DOE’s policy is to comply fully with the letter and spirit of NEPA, giving early consideration to environmental values and factors in federal pllanning and ddecision-makiing. This EISS evaluates thhe environmenntal impacts of alternativees and facilitates public particcipation. DOEE’s actions wiith regard to aany proposal,, including finnancial awardds, are limited prrior to compleetion of the NNEPA processs (i.e., in acccordance withh 40 CFR 15006.1(a)). DOEE will not providde funds for project activities that couuld either havve an adversee impact on tt eent or he environm limit the cchoice of reassonable alternnatives before the NEPA prrocess is commpleted. DOE deteermined that providing finnancial assistance to FutuureGen 2.0 wwould constituute a major fefederal action thaat may signifiicantly affect the quality oof the human environmentt. Therefore, DOE has preepared this EIS too assess the ppotential impaacts on the huuman environnment of the pproposed projject and reasoonable alternativees. DOE has used informmation provideed by the Allliance and AAmeren, as wwell as informmation provided by state and federal agenccies, subject mmatter expertss, and others.. This EIS haas been preparred in accordancce with Section 102(2)(C)) of NEPA, aas implementted under reggulations promulgated by CEQ (40 CFR 1500 throughh 1508) and aas provided inn DOE regullations for coompliance witth NEPA (100 CFR 1021). Figure 1-1 illustrates tthe steps invoolved in the EIS process. To formallyy initiate the NEPA proceess for FutureGenn 2.0, DOE ppublished a NOOI to preparee an EIS in thee FR on May 23, 2011, unnder Docket IDD No. FR Doc. 22010–12632 ((76 FR 297288). After issuiing the NOI, DOE conduccted a thorouggh scoping prrocess that incluuded three public scopingg meetings aand consultaation with vaarious interessted governmmental agencies and stakehollders. Informmation related to the publiic scoping mmeetings is ddescribed beloow in Sections 1.4 and 1.5 and incluuded in Apppendix A, Public Scopping, and cconsultation-reelated corresponndence is provided in Apppendix B, Coonsultation Leetters. DOE uused the resuults of the sccoping efforts to define the scoope and areass of emphasis (or focus) off this EIS. DOE = U.S. DDepartment of Enerrgy; EIS = Environnmental Impact Sttatement 1.5.2 NEPA Scooping Proccess DOE deteermined the scope of this EEIS based onn internal plannning and anaalysis, consulltation with fefederal and state aagencies, andd involvementt of the publicc. During the public scopinng period, DOOE solicited ppublic input to eensure that: (1) significannt issues werre identified early and prroperly analyyzed; (2) issuues of minimal significance would not cconsume exccessive time and effort; and (3) the EIS would be in accordancce with appliccable regulatioons and guidaance. DOE held public scoping meetings on the dates indicated at the following locations:  June 7, 2011 at Taylorville High School, Taylorville, Illinois  June 8, 2011 at Ironhorse Golf Club, Tuscola, Illinois  June 9, 2011 at Elks Lodge, Jacksonville, Illinois The meeting locations were selected to provide appropriate geographic coverage and reasonable accessibility for stakeholders affected by actions associated with the Meredosia Energy Center site, potential pipelines, and the initial alternative CO2 injection and geologic storage areas. DOE announced the meeting locations and times in its NOI published in the FR on May 23, 2011, and also published announcements in the following local newspapers on the dates indicated:   Journal-Courier, Jacksonville; May 22, 29; June 1, 5  State Journal-Register; Springfield; May 22; June 5  Breeze-Courier; Taylorville; May 23; June 3, 5  Herald & Review; Decatur; June 1, 5  Daily Union; Shelbyville; May 31; June 4  News-Progress; Sullivan; May 25; June 1  Tri-County Journal; Tuscola; May 26; June 2  Tuscola Journal; Tuscola; May 25; June 1  Record-Herald; Arcola; May 26; June 2  Journal-Gazette / Times-Courier; Mattoon / Charleston; June 1, 4 Each scoping meeting began with an informal open house from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. During this time, attendees were able to view project-related posters, handouts, and a video; and to ask questions of DOE, Alliance, and Ameren representatives. The formal scoping meeting at each location began at 7:00 p.m. and included presentations by DOE, the Alliance, and Ameren, followed by an opportunity for public comments. The presentations and comments were transcribed by a court reporter at each meeting location. The public scoping period ended on June 22, 2011, after a 30-day comment period. During the comment period, DOE accepted comments by telephone, facsimile, U.S. mail, and electronic mail. DOE announced in the NOI that it would consider late comments to the extent practicable. Appendix A, Public Scoping provides additional information on the NEPA public scoping process for this project. 1.6 SCOPE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 1.6.1 Issues Identified Prior to the Scoping Process DOE initially identified the environmental resource areas and issues listed below for consideration in the EIS. These resource areas were identified in early planning efforts and listed in the NOI. This list was neither intended to be all-inclusive, nor a predetermined set of resources to be assessed for potential environmental impacts. Resource areas and issues initially identified by DOE include:  Air quality – potential impacts from emissions during construction and operation of FutureGen 2.0 on local or regional air quality;  Climate change – potential impacts from emissions of CO2 and other GHG emissions;  Geology – potential impacts from the injection and storage of CO2 on underground resources such as groundwater supplies, mineral resources, and fossil fuel resources, and the fate and stability of CO2 being stored;  Water resources – potential impacts from water utilization, consumption, and wastewater discharges, as well as potential impacts during construction, including stream crossings for linear features;  Floodplains and wetlands – potential wetland and floodplain impacts from construction and operation of project facilities;  Biological resources – potential impacts to vegetation, wildlife, threatened or endangered species, and ecologically sensitive habitats;  Historic and cultural resources – potential impacts related to site development and the associated linear facilities (e.g., pipelines);  Infrastructure and land use – potential impacts associated with delivery of feed materials and distribution of products (e.g., access roads, pipelines), and compatibility with adjacent land uses;  Visual resources – potential impacts to the viewshed, scenic views (e.g., impacts from the injection wells, pipeline, and support facilities for the injection wells and pipeline), and perception of the community or locality;  Solid wastes – pollution prevention and waste management issues (generation, treatment, transport, storage, disposal or reuse), including potential impacts from the generation, treatment, storage, and management of hazardous materials and other solid wastes;  Traffic – potential impacts from the construction and operation of the facilities, including changes in local traffic patterns, deterioration of roads, traffic hazards, and traffic controls;  Noise and light – potential disturbance impacts from construction, transportation of materials, and facility operations;  Health and safety issues – potential impacts associated with use, transport, and storage of hazardous chemicals, as well as CO2 capture and transport to the injection wells and risks of leakage;  Socioeconomics – potential impacts to schools, housing, public services, and local revenues, including the creation of jobs;  Environmental justice – potential for disproportionately high and adverse impacts on minority or low-income populations;  Connected actions – potential impacts from the integrated operations of the oxy-combustion project and sequestration project, as well as potential development of support facilities or supporting infrastructure;  Cumulative effects that could result from the incremental impacts of the proposed project when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions; and  Regulatory and environmental permitting requirements and environmental monitoring plans associated with the carbon capture facility and CO2 geologic storage activities. 1.6.2 Comments Received and Issues Identified During the Scoping Process Scoping comments were received with respect to specific natural and human environmental resources. Comments were expressed orally by individuals attending the scoping meeting; others were received on comment forms provided at the meeting, as well as by letter or email. In general, the majority of respondents expressed various concerns, with a primary emphasis on potential impacts to farmers and farmland (e.g., loss of farmland or impacts to soil). Other concerns not directly related to a specific environmental resource included: issues with the experimental nature of the project; a lack of confidence that economic benefits would occur; concerns about the use of public funds for a private endeavor; belief that DOE funding should go toward renewable and alternative energy technologies aside from coal; and concerns about potential increased electricity costs for consumers. In terms of environmental resource-specific concerns, the majority of comments were related to socioeconomics and carbon capture and storage, with a general belief that this technology ultimately contaminates the land instead of the air. The majority of natural resource topics were addressed in terms of impacts to farmlands; issues strictly related to natural resources tended to be general in nature (e.g., potential impacts to surface waters should be addressed). Additionally, two petitions in opposition to the project, signed by a total of about 340 residents and landowners in Morgan County, and one petition signed by 55 residents and landowners in Douglas County, were submitted to DOE. Of the commenters that responded favorably for the project, many commented positively primarily due to economic and job creation benefits for the community, as well as benefits in terms of self-sufficient national energy production. Following the intent of NEPA, DOE uses the scoping process to focus the analysis of issues and impacts in the EIS. Rather than providing responses to specific comments received during scoping, DOE endeavors to ensure that the EIS addresses and analyzes issues and potential environmental impacts appropriately based on commenter concerns. Table 1-1 provides a summary of the scoping comments received, organized by comment category or applicable resource area, and it identifies the appropriate sections in the EIS where the respective issues are addressed. The subjects and issues raised in specific comments are summarized in more detail in Table 3 of Appendix A, Public Scoping. DOE has addressed all substantive scoping comments in this EIS. However, some comments received are outside the scope of this EIS. For example, several respondents indicated that the EIS should include alternatives such as the utilization of renewable energy resources (e.g., wind and solar power). Because the particular goal of the FutureGen Initiative is to demonstrate an advanced power generation facility based on fossil fuels, specifically coal, technologies that would not be based on coal use are not within the scope of this EIS. However, DOE oversees numerous programs that are investigating and supporting a wide variety of energy generation technologies, including many based on renewable sources, as well as programs that promote energy conservation. Several comments were received relating to the environmental and safety impacts of coal mining. Coal is a commercial fuel produced by a regulated industry. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would obtain coal as a commodity fuel source from existing mines. No specific mine has been identified as a source of coal, and no new mines would be developed specifically to support the project. Furthermore, the FutureGen 2.0 Project does not aim to change mining techniques, and DOE has no decisions that would affect coal mining techniques for the proposed project. It is assumed that the coal intended for the project would be used as a feedstock for another facility in the event that the FutureGen 2.0 Project were not constructed, because coal is an abundant fuel source in the United States. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would not change nationwide coal production and, therefore, would not change the environmental impacts of mining, which are generally well known and well described. Hence, DOE considers the environmental impacts of coal mining policies and operations to be outside the scope of this EIS. A few commenters requested detailed cost information about the project, including a life-cycle cost analysis. Among the purposes for DOE’s involvement in the FutureGen 2.0 Project are the demonstration of the technologies involved, the identification of potential efficiencies, and the development of a reference base for the costs associated with oxy-combustion facilities and CO2 capture and storage. Thus, the life cycle cost of the project relative to other technologies is not currently known with certainty, but it is not relevant in DOE's decision-making process for the proposed action.  Table 1-1. Summary of Scoping Comments Number of Relevant Sections Subject Representative Issues and Concerns Comments of EIS Purpose and Need  Federal funding for project; preference for DOE to invest in alternative energy projects other than coal, which would also create jobs; cost-competitiveness of oxycombustion system.  3  1.4; 1.6.2; 2.3  Number and location of injection wells; preference for alternatives to include energy efficiency and renewable 1.2; 1.6.2; 2.3; Alternatives  5 energy projects; preference for use of saline formations in 2.5.2 less inhabited areas with less risk to farmland.  2 3.1 1 3.2 2 3.3 6 1.6.2, 3.4 Groundwater Surface Water Biological Resources Land Use Materials and Waste Utilities  18 3.4 Table 1-1. Summary of Scoping Comments Number of Relevant Sections Subject Representative Issues and Concerns Comments of EIS Components and toxicity of sequestered CO2 stream; Human Health consequences of and precautions taken if accidental CO2 6 3.17 and Safety release at the injection well site(s); safety concerns for future generations after 20-year life of project. 3 1.6.2 CO2 = carbon dioxide; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; EIS = Environmental Impact Statement; GHG = greenhouse gas 1.6.3 Decision to be Made by DOE This EIS identifies and analyzes the potential impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project at the Meredosia Energy Center, the proposed CO2 pipeline, the injection wells, and the educational facilities in Morgan County. Evaluations of potential impacts included in this EIS are intended to support the federal decision whether to provide cost-shared funding to the Alliance for final design, construction, and operation of the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and for the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir. If DOE decides to fund these subsequent phases of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, DOE would specify measures to mitigate potential adverse impacts. The Alliance would be required to implement the measures identified through the NEPA process in order to continue receiving DOE funds. In the absence of DOE cost-shared funding (the no action alternative), it is unlikely that the FutureGen 2.0 Project would proceed. Thus, for purposes of analysis in this EIS, the no action alternative is defined as a “no-build” scenario. No sooner than 30 days after the USEPA publication of a Notice of Availability (NOA) of the Final EIS in the FR, DOE will announce in a ROD the selection of either the proposed action or the no action alternative. Should the proposed action be selected in the ROD, the Alliance would make the additional engineering design decisions to ensure compliance with any required conditions contained in the ROD. 1.7 ORGANIZATION AND CONTENTS OF THE EIS The balance of this EIS is organized into the following chapters with associated contents: Chapter 2 describes the DOE proposed action and no action alternative, and alternatives that DOE considered but determined not to be reasonable. The chapter also describes the activities, including measures to mitigate potential adverse impacts, to be undertaken by the Alliance for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir. The chapter provides information on the locations of proposed project components; the technologies involved; and resource requirements, process outputs, and construction and operation plans.  Chapter 3, Affected Environment and Impacts, describes the baseline conditions in the region and the potential impacts of the DOE proposed action and the no action alternative for 19 subjects that encompass the full range of resources in the physical, natural, and human environment. Each section describes the region of influence (ROI) of project activities, the method of analysis, and the potential impacts of project construction and operation. Also, as appropriate for each resource, the chapter describes means of reducing impacts. Chapter 4, Summary of Environmental Consequences, summarizes the potential adverse impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and provides additional information about environmental effects, including measures to mitigate adverse impacts, potential cumulative impacts, and other subjects required by NEPA and CEQ regulations. The final chapters provide the regulatory and permit requirements (Chapter 5), technical references (Chapter 6), consultations undertaken (Chapter 7), the distribution list for the Draft EIS (Chapter 8), a list of EIS preparers (Chapter 9), and a glossary (Chapter 10). 2 PROPOSED ACTION AND ALTERNATIVES This chapter describes DOE’s proposed action and other alternatives considered by the agency. Section 2.1 provides an overview of DOE’s proposed action with details of the FutureGen 2.0 Project components being presented in Sections 2.4 and 2.5. These sections describe the resource requirements; process outputs; and construction, operation, and decommissioning plans associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Section 2.2 describes the no action alternative as required by NEPA and applicable CEQ and DOE regulations. A comparison of potential environmental impacts for each alternative is presented in the Summary (Table S-3) and in Chapter 4, Summary of Environmental Consequences (Table 4.1-1). Section 2.3 discusses other alternatives that were considered but dismissed from further evaluation and the reasons for their dismissal. DOE developed the range of reasonable alternatives for the FutureGen 2.0 Project based on the following:  Evaluation of various clean coal technologies reviewed through the Clean Coal Power Initiative (CCPI) Program;  Data obtained and reviewed through various funding opportunity announcements;  Analysis of the original FutureGen Project in terms of technology, costs, and suitability for geologic storage; and  Interest of industries to participate in projects to support FutureGen 2.0. 2.1 DOE PROPOSED ACTION DOE proposes to provide approximately $1 billion of financial assistance to the Alliance for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The financial assistance would support final design (Phase II), construction and commissioning (Phase III), and operations (Phase IV). The FutureGen 2.0 Project consists of two major components: the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir (see Figure 2-1). These components are summarized in this section and described in detail in Sections 2.4 and 2.5 respectively. For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, the Alliance would acquire FutureGen 2.0 Project Features portions of the Meredosia Energy Center in west central Illinois from Ameren and incorporate advanced oxy-combustion technology into Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test – the reconstruction of an idle electric generating unit (Unit 4). Through Construction and operation of an the use of the existing Meredosia Energy Center, the oxy-combustion integrated oxy-combustion coal boiler with CO2 capture, purification, and component of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be constructed on a compression. brownfield site (i.e., a previously developed site), which would enable the project to move forward with less expense and fewer CO2 Pipeline – Construction and environmental impacts than would occur if the project were to be operation of approximately 30 miles of pipeline to transport CO2 from the constructed on a greenfield site (i.e., an undeveloped site). The scope Meredosia Energy Center to a storage of the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test consists of final design, reservoir in Morgan County. procurement, manufacture, installation, startup, testing, and operation of the proposed integrated oxy-combustion coal boiler. A coal boiler is Storage Reservoir – Construction and a vessel that is used to generate heat through the combustion of coal in operation of surface facilities, and injection and permanent storage of order to produce steam that can then be put to productive use (i.e., the captured CO2 into a deep geologic generation of electricity). The term“oxy-combustion” refers to the use formation. of manufactured oxygen in the coal combustion process. The proposed oxy-combustion technology would include CO2 capture, purification, and compression equipment. The reconstructed electric generating unit would be designed to generate approximately 168 MWe (gross output) with a net output estimated at approximately 99 MWe. The CO2 captured from the oxy-combustion facility would be cleaned, compressed for transport, and delivered to a pipeline for transport to the CO2 Storage Reservoir. Evolving Project Design It is important to recognize that the FutureGen 2.0 Project has evolved since it was initially developed in 2011 and will continue to evolve as the Alliance works with local landowners and identifies cost-saving opportunities. However, the preliminary design described in this chapter and analyzed in this EIS is expected to reflect conservative, bounding parameters for critical features, which would not change substantially such that the impacts described in this EIS would be exceeded. For the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a CO2 transmission pipeline and a geologic injection and storage facility. The pipeline would transport CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center (Meredosia, Morgan County, Illinois) to the CO2 storage study area in Morgan County approximately 30 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center (see Figure 2-2). Deep injection wells would be installed at the CO2 storage study area and used to inject CO2 into the storage reservoir (i.e., the Mt. Simon Formation) at a depth of 4,000 to 4,500 feet below ground surface (bgs). The Mt. Simon Formation is the major deep saline formation in the Illinois Basin. The pipeline and storage reservoir would be designed to respectively transport and store up to 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 20-year operating period. In addition, the Alliance would construct and operate facilities for research, training, and visitors near Jacksonville, Morgan County, Illinois. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would begin final design in 2013 after completion of the NEPA process. Construction would begin in 2014, with commissioning in 2017. Operations and monitoring would continue with DOE funding until 2022 (56 months after commissioning). Performance and economic test results would be shared among all participants, industry, non-governmental organizations, and the public. After DOE’s involvement ceases, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be expected to continue commercial operations, including CO2 capture and storage, for 20 years. After commercial operations cease, post-injection monitoring of the underground CO2 would continue for up to 50 years. 2.2 NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE Under the no action alternative, DOE would not continue to fund the FutureGen 2.0 Project into the final design, construction, and operation phases. Without DOE funding, it is unlikely that the Alliance, or industry in general, would undertake the utility-scale integration of CO2 capture and geologic storage with a coal-fueled power plant using oxy-combustion. Therefore, the no action alternative also represents a “no-build” alternative. Without DOE's investment in a utility-scale facility, the development of oxycombustion repowered plants integrated with CO2 capture and geologic storage would occur more slowly or not at all. 2.3 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT DISMISSED FROM FURTHER EVALUATION This section discusses other alternatives that were considered but dismissed from further evaluation and the reasons for their dismissal. Chapter 1 of this EIS, Purpose and Need, describes the background and history of the FutureGen Initiative culminating in the FutureGen 2.0 Project (see Section 1.2), which explains the alternative technologies considered in the evolving project. DOE’s primary objective to advance the programmatic goal of CO2 capture and storage through the FutureGen Initiative was addressed in the Final EIS for the original FutureGen Project (DOE 2007a) and associated ROD (74 FR 35174 [2009]). CO2 = carbon dioxide Figure 2-2. Project Location Map 2.3.1 Alternative Fuel Sources Because the FutureGen Initiative was conceived for the purpose of encouraging commercial development of advanced coal-based carbon capture and storage technologies, other technologies that cannot serve to carry out that goal are not reasonable alternatives. Nuclear power, renewable energy sources (e.g., wind and solar power), and energy conservation improvements do not address the specific goal of capturing and storing CO2 emissions from coal-fueled energy production and therefore are not considered to be reasonable alternatives for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. These fuel sources, as well as many others, are addressed by other programs and projects in DOE’s diverse portfolio of energy research, development, and demonstration efforts. 2.3.2 Alternative Advanced Coal-based Electric Generating Technologies Technologies for carbon capture at advanced coal-based electric generating facilities fall into two general categories, pre-combustion and post-combustion. Pre-combustion capture technologies remove carbon from the process stream (fuel gas) after the solid coal feed has been converted (i.e., gasified). Post-combustion capture technologies remove carbon from the process stream (flue gas) after it has been combusted in the boiler. As explained in Section 1.2, the original FutureGen Project considered the demonstration of IGCC technology for the generation of electricity with pre-combustion capture and storage of CO2 that would otherwise be emitted. Rising costs for the original project delayed DOE’s decision and during the intervening time a number of commercial IGCC projects were proposed, many of which would employ pre-combustion carbon capture technology similar to that which was to be proven by the original FutureGen Project. At the time of award of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, DOE had already awarded funding for four other large-scale projects intended to demonstrate the underlying IGCC concept of the original FutureGen Project. Due to the now-commercial status of IGCC, along with multiple pre-combustion carbon capture projects within DOE’s demonstration portfolio, DOE identified the need for a utility-scale demonstration of post-combustion carbon capture technologies. Accordingly, the agency does not consider pre-combustion technologies to be reasonable alternatives for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. 2.3.3 Alternative Retrofitting Technologies Through review and consideration of the data and analysis associated with the original FutureGen Project, DOE identified the repowering of an existing power plant with oxy-combustion technology as the approach that would best meet cost and technology advancement objectives of the FutureGen Initiative. Instead of funding the construction and operation of a new IGCC plant, DOE considered two options for retrofitting an existing power plant to facilitate carbon capture and storage: repowering with oxycombustion technology or post-combustion scrubbing. DOE determined that the selection of the oxycombustion technology for testing and evaluation would complement its CCPI portfolio by providing the opportunity to address a technology option that otherwise would be absent from DOE’s slate of projects. Therefore, DOE chose to consider retrofitting an existing power plant with oxy-combustion technology as a lower-cost replacement for the IGCC process originally proposed in the FutureGen Project. Because DOE is already assessing the merits of post-combustion scrubbing in other projects, the agency does not consider that technology to be a reasonable alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. 2.3.4 Alternative Sites for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test After concluding that there were insufficient funds available for a new IGCC power plant at the site that had been selected by the Alliance for the original FutureGen Project in Mattoon, Illinois, DOE identified the Meredosia Energy Center as an existing power plant that could be repowered with oxy-combustion technology. The Meredosia Energy Center is close enough to the Mattoon site that CO2 could be readily transported by pipeline to the Mattoon site for injection and permanent storage in the Mt. Simon Formation. An idle electrical generating unit (Unit 4) at the Meredosia Energy Center would provide a reconstructable turbine generator at a scalable size for the commercial demonstration of oxy-combustion repowering technology. The facility would also provide for the capture of CO2 at a sufficient operating capacity to demonstrate the transport and geologic storage of CO2 at a commercial scale. DOE did not identify any other existing, appropriately sized power plants fromwhich captured CO2 could be transported economically to the Mattoon site for injection and permanent storage. It is difficult for owners of existing power plants to accept the financial and operational risks associated with repowering existing equipment and adding untested CO2 capture and storage to their plants. Further, commercial ventures generally cannot accept the intensive testing and interruptions of power generation that would be associated with repowering and the startup and testing of carbon capture and storage. Commercial operators are bound by power purchase agreements that are unforgiving of delivery failures, and the power market does not offer much flexibility in negotiating the terms and conditions in these agreements. Ameren was willing to make the Meredosia Energy Center’s Unit 4 available for the FutureGen Initiative in part because the aging unit was not a baseload power generator and operated only sporadically to provide peaking power. Therefore, Unit 4 repowering efforts at Meredosia Energy Center would not pose unacceptable disruptions of power generation or affect existing power purchase agreements. With no other power plant owners willing to undertake the inherent financial and operational risks, DOE considers the Meredosia Energy Center to be the only viable location for the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component of FutureGen 2.0. DOE does not consider other power plants that are not available to the FutureGen 2.0 Project to be reasonable alternatives. 2.3.5 Alternative CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir Locations After DOE and the Alliance identified the Meredosia Energy Center for the FutureGen Initiative, the Mattoon site proponents withdrew their site from further consideration based on a determination that use of the site strictly for CO2 storage was not in the community’s best interest. In response to the Mattoon site being withdrawn as a storage site, DOE asked the Alliance to identify alternative storage sites from which it would be economically viable to transport the CO2 captured at the Meredosia Energy Center for injection and permanent storage in the same formation as proposed for that Mattoon site (the Mt. Simon Formation). The Alliance then undertook a siting process, similar to the process originally used to select the Mattoon site, to identify possible locations. The Alliance’s siting process included screening sites against specific qualifying criteria related to geologic conditions as well as a variety of other factors including land use and environmental considerations (see Section 2.5.2.1). DOE proactively reviewed the qualifying and selection criteria before release to the public and prospective bidders. After proposals were received and scored by the Alliance, the Alliance briefed DOE on the outcome and prepared a summary report, which was submitted to DOE in March 2011. This process culminated in the selection of a site in Morgan County as the Alliance’s preferred site, with sites in Christian County and Douglas County being identified as potential alternate sites. DOE reviewed the Alliance’s report on the selection process for fairness, technical accuracy, and compliance and determined that the Alliance’s preferred site and alternate sites were appropriate for detailed analysis. Throughout 2011 and 2012, the Alliance conducted a detailed geological analysis at the preferred Morgan County site (i.e., the CO2 storage study area) to characterize and verify the viability of the proposed CO2 storage reservoir. The Alliance also conducted pipeline routing studies for the three sites under consideration, as well as desktop and targeted field studies to confirm the absence of any sensitive environmental resources that could be adversely affected by the project. Through these analyses, the Alliance also determined that the costs of siting, constructing, and operating a CO2 pipeline to either the Christian County or Douglas County sites would be cost-prohibitive. The Alliance estimated that an additional $50 million to $100 million would be required to construct pipelines that would be approximately 50 miles (Christian County) and 100 miles (Douglas County) longer than pipelines required for the Morgan County site. Due to the findings of the geological analysis and environmental studies, combined with a cost analysis of the pipelines to the alternate sites, the Alliance confirmed that the proposed Morgan County site remained its preferred site. On July 17, 2012, the Alliance Board of Directors confirmed that the proposed Morgan County site remained its preferred location and voted to direct the Alliance to no longer pursue the sites in Christian County and Douglas County as alternate sites due to cost considerations. The Alliance notified DOE and the proponents of Christian County and Douglas County that their locations were no longer being considered as alternate sites and that the Alliance would not construct or operate a CO2 storage reservoir at either site. As a result, the site proponents were released to find other reasonable uses for their proposed sites. Because of the Alliance’s decision to no longer consider the Christian County and Douglas County sites, DOE has determined that these sites are not reasonable alternatives as CO2 storage reservoirs for FutureGen 2.0. Therefore, these sites have been eliminated fromfurther consideration in this EIS. 2.4 FUTUREGEN 2.0OXY-COMBUSTION LARGE SCALE TEST For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance would purchase from Ameren portions of the Meredosia Energy Center as described in Section 2.4.1. With support from Babcock & Wilcox and Air Liquide, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate an advanced oxy-combustion power generation plant. The oxy-combustion facility has a proposed design capacity of 168 MWe and would be integrated into the Meredosia Energy Center in order to make use of existing facilities and infrastructure. The facility would operate continuously to generate baseload electric power with a net output estimated at 99 MWe. The project would repower the existing Unit 4 steam turbine generator, and capture and compress approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year for subsequent transport and geologic storage. The project would be designed to meet DOE’s CO2 capture target of at least 90 percent (the project is actually designed to capture up to 98 percent) while reducing emissions levels of sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, mercury, acid gases, and particulate matter during normal operations. 2.4.1 The Meredosia Energy Center In October 2011, Ameren announced that the Meredosia Energy Center would suspend operations at the end of 2011 (see Section 2.4.1.5 for further discussion). The facility is currently not operating, but Ameren is complying with applicable permits and associated requirements and will maintain the facilities to be available for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. All equipment remains in operable condition, which would enable Ameren to operate the generating facilities if the resumption of operations were to fit Ameren’s requirements. This possibility would remain until final decisions for the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be made and the project implemented. This section describes features and operating conditions at the energy center as they existed during 2011 and in recent history. The Meredosia Energy Center, shown in Figure 2-3, is located adjacent to the east side of the Illinois River, south of the village of Meredosia, Illinois. Meredosia has a population of approximately 1,044 (USCB 2010a) and is approximately 18 miles west of Jacksonville, Illinois. The 5,300-foot western boundary of the 263-acre Meredosia Energy Center fronts the Illinois River, where the station's oil and coal barge unloading facilities are located. Land use immediately east of the energy center consists of roadways, roadway rights-of-way (ROWs), rail access, and an unused railroad ROW. Beyond these immediate areas, land use is primarily residential to the north and northeast, scattered residential and agricultural to the east, and industrial to the south. Across the river, approximately 700 feet west, are forested lands, a small portion of a levee, and transmission line ROW. Figure 2-3. Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center is a thermal plant designed to produce electricity. In a thermal plant, energy from fuel (e.g., coal) is used to heat water and create steam. The generated steam converts the heat energy captured in the steam into mechanical energy by spinning turbines that in turn spin electric generators that produce electricity. The two main features of a thermal plant are the boiler that generates heat through the combustion of coal or other fuels, and the turbine-generator system that includes the steam turbine and electric generator. Other plant components support these systems. Major boiler support systems are the coal handling and fuel systems, steam and water systems for the boiler and turbine, air and flue gas system, and waste management systems. Figure 2-4 provides an overall aerial view of the existing Meredosia Energy Center property and surrounding areas, and Figures 2-5 and 2-6 show close-up aerial views of the existing coal handling facilities and the main plant area, respectively. The Meredosia Energy Center includes four electric generating units. An electric generating unit refers to the combination, or unit, of equipment that is used to generate electricity including the boilers that create heat energy through combustion, steam cycle equipment that uses the heat to generate steam, steam turbines that convert the steam to mechanical energy, and electric generators that convert the mechanical energy to electricity. These units also include supporting equipment and facilities. Units 1 and 2 were driven by steamfrom four coal-fired boilers (Boilers 1, 2, 3, and 4), with each unit having a nominal rated generating capacity (i.e., capacity) of 60 MWe. Unit 3 received steam from one coal-fired boiler (Boiler 5) and has a capacity of 229 MWe. Units 1 and 2 were placed in service in 1948 and 1949, respectively. Unit 3 was placed in service in 1960. Unit 4 consists of one oil-fired boiler (Boiler 6) and has a capacity of 200 MWe. Unit 4 was placed in service as an interimmeasure in 1975 to meet anticipated load growth until new generating facilities came online in 1977. During the 1980s and early 1990s, Unit 4 was operated as a peaking unit and has accumulated approximately 20,000 hours of operation, with 900 starts. Peaking units are electric generating units that are only used during periods of high electricity demand. Under the FutureGen 2.0 Project, Unit 4 would be repowered using a new oxy-combustion coal-fired boiler in place of the existing oil-fired boiler. The main facilities include a building that houses Boilers 1 through 5 as well as the steam turbine generators for Units 1, 2, 3, and 4. Additional structures include the coal breaker building, tractor shed, and several warehouses. Exclusive of the chimneys (stacks), which are the tallest structures at the facility (the tallest stack, at Unit 1, is 526 feet in height), components of the main buildings range in height from 24 to 209 feet. The energy center property covers approximately 263 acres. The Meredosia Energy Center currently has two main fuel systems: coal for Units 1, 2, and 3 (Boilers 1 through 5) and fuel oil for Unit 4 (Boiler 6). Secondary fuel systems include distillate fuel oil as auxiliary fuel for startup of Boilers 1 through 6 and flame stabilization for Boilers 1 through 5, plus natural gas for the main burner ignition on Boiler 6. The existing coal handling system at the Meredosia Energy Center serves Units 1 and 2, which typically burned bituminous coal from Illinois sources, and Unit 3, which typically burned 100 percent Powder River Basin sub-bituminous coal from Wyoming. However, Unit 3 has burned both Illinois coal and a blend of Illinois and Powder River Basin coals. During operations, the bituminous coal was delivered by truck, while the Powder River Basin coal was delivered by barge (from St. Louis, Missouri, where it was delivered from Wyoming via rail). Powder River Basin coal was unloaded from the barge via a clamshell bucket into the barge unloading hopper. From there, the coal was transferred via various conveyors and other mechanisms to storage and boiler-usage locations. Particulate emissions associated with the coal handling and storage were controlled by various dust suppression measures, including a water spray, enclosures, and covers. Before 2012, the coal handling system was running about 5 to 6 hours a day, 7 days a week, to supply coal from the barges directly to the Boiler 5 coal bunkers. ASU = air separation unit; cy = cubic yard; kV = kilovolt; NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Figure 2-6. Meredosia Energy Center Features – Coal and Fuel Handling Systems Unit 4’s Boiler 6 was designed to be run on fuel oil. Fuel oil was delivered by tanker barge and unloaded at the fuel oil unloading facility downstream of the coal barge unloading facility, or by truck near the fuel oil tanks. The fuel oil was piped from the tanker barges to two fuel oil storage tanks located east of the coal storage area, each with 4.6 million-gallon capacity, and each located inside bermed areas (see Figure 2-4). The fuel oil was also used to power onsite mobile equipment (scraper, dozers, etc.) and some stationary equipment. Eight 14,000-gallon distillate fuel oil tanks and a 14,000-gallon diesel tank are located south of the coal breaker house (see Figure 2-5). Boiler 6 also used natural gas for main burner ignition and either distillate fuel oil or natural gas as an auxiliary fuel during startup. 2.4.1.1 Boiler and Turbine Steam and Water Systems Makeup water for the boiler and turbine steam system was supplied by onsite groundwater production wells shared in common by all units. Wells 5, 6, and 7 were installed in 1974, 1978, and 1994, respectively. Each well has a capacity of 400 to 500 gallons per minute (gpm). Only Wells 5, 6, and 7 are in operation; Wells 3 and 4 are older and no longer used. Well locations are shown in Figure 2-6. All wells are screened near the bottom of the Cahokia formation at a little over 100 feet in depth. Raw well water was treated in a resin demineralizer for use as demineralized water, and also used for other plant functions such as potable water, dust suppression for the coal handling facilities, and freeze protection of the bottomash pond. The deep well water storage tank is located west of the water treatment building. The main use of cooling water in a thermal plant is to condense the steam in the steam cycle. Boilers 1 through 5 were designed for once-through cooling, and Boiler 6 has a closed recirculating system with a cooling tower (located at the north end of the energy center, bordering the river). The Illinois River supplied the main condenser and auxiliary cooling water for Units 1 through 3, makeup cooling water for Unit 4 cooling tower, and miscellaneous Unit 4 auxiliary cooling needs. River water was withdrawn through screens in the intake structure shown in Figure 2-4. The intake structure design capacity is approximately 272,000 gpm (or 392 million gallons per day [mgd]). Currently, there is no permit limitation on the amount of river water that can be withdrawn. The public water supply for the energy center was provided by the Meredosia water distribution system and was used for fire protection water and some maintenance activities. The existing fire protection water storage tank capacity is 325,000 gallons. 2.4.1.2 Air and Flue Gas System The energy center includes three chimneys that vent flue gas from boiler combustion. The chimney for Boilers 1 through 4 is 32 feet in diameter at the base and 526 feet tall. Boiler 5’s chimney is 301 feet tall and Boiler 6’s chimney is 184 feet tall. The Meredosia Energy Center holds several air operating permits, including those for the operation of Units 1 through 4. Reported emissions at the energy center in tons per year for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 are summarized in Table 2-1. 2.4.1.3 Waste Management Systems Coal Combustion Residual (Ash) Fly ash (fine particles generated during the combustion of coal that were collected by the electrostatic precipitators prior to discharge to the atmosphere) and bottom ash (coarse particles generated during the combustion of coal that fall by gravity to the bottom of the boiler) were sluiced to separate ponds as shown in Figure 2-4. The bottom ash pond capacity is 300,000 cubic yards (8,100,000 cubic feet) and the fly ash pond capacity is 1,000,000 cubic yards (27,000,000 cubic feet). Prior to 2012, the ash ponds served Units 1, 2, and 3. These ash ponds would not be used for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. See Section 2.4.4.2 for a description of how bottom ash and fly ash would be handled in the proposed project. See Section 2.4.1.5 for a discussion regarding the management of the existing ash ponds. a. Filterable particulates only. CO = carbon monoxide; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM = particulate matter; PM2.5 = particulate matter with diameter less than 2.5 microns; PM10= particulate matter with diameter less than 10 microns; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Wastewater   The Meredosia Energy Center discharged wastewater to the Illinois River under National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit IL0000116. The permit lists the following discharges, with the Illinois River as the receiving water for each:  001 – Condenser cooling water (Units 1, 2, and 3)  A01 – Boiler blowdown  002 – Cooling tower blowdown  A02 – Cooling tower emergency overflow  003 – Bottom ash pond discharge  A03 – Chemical metal cleaning wastewater  004 – Fly ash pond discharge  006 – Intake screen backwash The locations of these outfalls are shown in Figure 2-4. The discharge characteristics and NPDES permitting limits of the existing outfalls are discussed in greater detail in Section 3.6, Surface Water. The majority of onsite runoff from the developed areas of the property currently drains into the fly ash and bottom ash ponds. The energy center did not operate a wastewater treatment system. The sanitary wastewater was collected and routed to a single pointof discharge to the village of Meredosia’s sewer system. 2.4.1.4 Transportation Resources Illinois Highway (IL-) 104 is the main regional route into Meredosia and to the energy center site. The closest interstate is Interstate (I-) 72, which is about 10 miles south of Meredosia. From IL-104, Washington Street and Old Naples Road provide direct access to Cips Drive, the main entrance roadway into the energy center site. Truck traffic accessing the site transported fuel oil and coal. These trucks used a bypass road from IL-104 to avoid traveling through the village of Meredosia, accessing the site fromthe south. An old gravel road that cuts through a patch of wooded area within the northern property provides access into the energy center from an existing boat ramp site, but is not typically used. Another gravel road exists in the southern portion of the property, which provides access into the site, but is also not typically used. The energy center site originally had a rail spur for coal delivery; however, this has been removed. As noted earlier, barge facilities are located on the Illinois River along the northwestern border of the site for Powder River Basin coal and fuel oil deliveries. 2.4.1.5 Suspension of Energy Center Operations At the end of 2011, Ameren suspended operations at the Meredosia Energy Center due mainly to the expected costs of complying with recently implemented air regulations, specifically the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule issued in July 2011 by the USEPA. The Cross-State Air Pollution Rule was subsequently vacated and remanded by the U.S. Court of Appeals on August 21, 2012. Since Ameren suspended operations at the end of 2011, only security personnel work at the energy center, with a few Ameren employees onsite from time to time to performperiodic inspections of the facility to comply with ongoing environmental monitoring requirements and to maintain facility integrity for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Suspension of operations means that the energy center currently is not operating, but Ameren is complying with applicable permits and their associated requirements. All equipment remains in operable condition, which would allow Ameren to reactivate the facilities in the future if those operations fit into Ameren's requirements. If the FutureGen 2.0 Project were to be implemented, the energy center’s boiler operations and auxiliary operations not associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be terminated. Ameren has no current plans to resume operation of the power generation infrastructure at the energy center. Closure of the ash ponds could occur during the FutureGen 2.0 Project depending upon timing of the submittal and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) approval of the ash pond closure plan and the time required to complete the closure. Ameren and the Alliance have agreed that the ash ponds would not be part of the asset transfer associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Environmental liability associated with the existing ash ponds and compliance with current or future regulations remain with Ameren until such time as the property and environmental liability may be transferred to a third party. The management of the ash ponds (past, current, and future) is the responsibility of Ameren and would not affect the implementation, construction, or operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Therefore, any potential environmental impacts resulting from the ash ponds are not relevant to the evaluation of potential impacts from the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Ameren has not undertaken environmental decommissioning activities, as they have been deemed premature at this time. Ameren conducted an asbestos survey at the energy center and labeled thermal piping as either containing or not containing asbestos. Ameren has also conducted evaluations for polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)-containing equipment. There is minimal electrical equipment containing PCBs, and such equipment is properly labeled. There has been no evaluation of lead-based paint within the energy center; nor has there been a Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment conducted at the site. Ameren formally notified the U.S. Coast Guard that operations of the fuel oil unloading river facility and the associated fuel oil storage facility have been suspended. As a result, the security requirements for these facilities under Maritime Security have been suspended. Air and water permits will remain active to maintain current water discharge outfalls and air emissions sources. In conjunction with the suspension of operations, Ameren shut down equipment associated with Units 1, 2, and 3 in place along with Boiler 6. Ameren retained the availability of the Unit 4 turbine generator and its balance of plant equipment for use by FutureGen 2.0. Project common systems, such as intake structures, service water, well water, demineralizer, condensate storage, fire protection, coal handling, auxiliary power, service and instrument air, and other systems required to support the FutureGen 2.0 Project were also retained. Ameren would remove chemicals, oils, and fuel not required for FutureGen 2.0 from the site and either use these materials at other Ameren facilities, recycle them where practical, or characterize and properly dispose of them in accordance with applicable regulations. Ameren will oversee periodic monitoring of the facility to ensure its integrity for use by FutureGen 2.0. In addition, the ash ponds will be monitored with respect to dam safety and NPDES requirements. Ameren will maintain other inspection, monitoring and reporting requirements in accordance with active environmental permits. Site restoration activities would depend upon Ameren’s future decisions with respect to the property. 2.4.2 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test The Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would include the design, construction, and operation of an oxy-combustion power generation plant (Alliance 2012a). A simplified diagram of an oxy-combustion facility is provided in Figure 2-7. This facility would be integrated into the existing infrastructure of the Meredosia Energy Center and would include the addition of a new oxy-combustion coal boiler with equipment to capture, purify, and compress CO2 for use in the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir component of the project (see Section 2.5 for details on pipeline and storage).  Source: Babcock &Wilcox 2010 ASU = air separation unit; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CPU = compression and purification unit; H2O = water; N2= nitrogen; NCGs = non-condensable gases; O2 = oxygen; SO2= sulfurdioxide Major components of the proposed oxy-combustion facility (new and existing) and an overview of their key features are provided in Table 2-2. Existing infrastructure that would be used by the project includes coal handling systems (delivery, storage, and conveyance), water supply systems (intake structures and wells), wastewater discharge outfalls, the main cooling tower (to be rebuilt from the existing Unit 4 cooling tower), substation equipment, the Unit 4 steam generator, the Unit 4 electric generator, and other common plant infrastructure such as roadways. A conceptual layout of the facility that depicts the location of new and existing equipment is presented in Figure 2-8. Details of the oxy-combustion facility and process features are provided in Section 2.4.2.1. To accommodate the proposed oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, several existing warehouses, a deaerator, and one of the condensate storage tanks would be relocated. Three existing groundwater supply wells (Wells 3, 4, and 5) would be decommissioned and a new replacement well would be installed. The main cooling tower would be reconstructed and two additional cooling towers would be constructed, one for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber and one for both the air separation unit and compression and purification unit. The capacity and configuration of the proposed facility is based on using the Babcock & Wilcox–Air Liquide cool recycle oxy-combustion process and would fire a mix of high-sulfur bituminous coal and low-sulfur Powder River Basin coal. The resulting overall thermal and electrical performance is summarized in Table 2-3. Table 2-2. Overview of Oxy-Combustion Facility Components and Features Component  Description  Air Separation Unit (new)  Generates oxygen for the oxy-combustion boiler: - Compresses and dries ambient air; - Separates oxygen and nitrogen through compression and cryogenic distillation; - Directs manufactured oxygen to the boiler for combustion process; and - Vents separated nitrogen to atmosphere.  Power Block Boiler (new) Gas Quality Control System (new) Steam Turbines (existing) Electric Generators (existing) Electrical Control System (existing and new) Generates thermal energy through combustion, converts the thermal energy to steam, and uses steam to create mechanical energy to drive the electric generator that produces electricity.  Combusts pulverized coal with a mixture of oxygen and recycled flue gas. Uses heat generated in the combustion process to generate steam. Treats flue gas generated during the combustion process to remove pollutants and impurities. Directs treated gas to the compression and purification unit and also back to the boiler. Includes the following: - Circulating dry scrubber to remove sulfur compounds (e.g., sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide); - Pulse jet fabric filter to remove particulates; and - Direct contact cooling polishing scrubber for reduction of moisture and removal of remaining pollutants. Converts thermal energy captured in steam to mechanical energy through the spinning of the turbines. Uses mechanical energy (spinning) from turbines to drive electric generators that produce electricity. Transfers electricity from generators to the transmission grid.  Compression and Purifies and compresses treated flue gas for delivery to CO2 pipeline. Purification Unit (new) Additional Equipment Additional equipment is needed to supply process water, provide cooling to plant and Systems processes, supply and handle fuel (coal), and treat waste streams. Cooling Towers The cooling towers include two new cooling towers and reconstruction of the existing (existing & new) Unit 4 cooling tower. Cooling towers are used to provide cool water for the condensation of steam in the steam condenser, and to remove excess heat from other system processes (e.g., air separation and compression and purification units).  Process Water Systems Includes use of existing water intake structures and wells (one new well) to supply (existing & new) water to the plant, and new water treatment systems to remove water impurities.  Wastewater Treatment Includes two new wastewater treatment systems that would remove pollutants from Systems (new) wastewater generated in Unit 4 processes as well as effluent from the compression and purification unit. Coal Storage and Includes delivery, storage, and conveyance systems. Handling (existing) Exhaust Stack (new) A new exhaust stack (estimated to be 450 feet tall) would be used to discharge treated flue gas during normal operations, discharge monitored volumes of flue gas during unit startup and the transition to oxygen-fired status, and to discharge flue gas and CO2 during normal shutdown. Auxiliary Boiler (new) A new auxiliary boiler would be used to provide steam to the plant that is needed during the startup process. This would most likely be an oil-fired boiler. ASU = air separation unit; CPU = compression and purification unit; DCCPS = direct contact cooler polishing scrubber; DW = deep well; kV = kilovolt Figure 2-8. Conceptual Oxy-Combustion Facility Site Layout Note: Values are based on annual average baseload normal operation conditions, as follows:  Estimated degradation forexisting plant equipment;  Ambient Temperature: 53°F dry bulb,48°F wet bulb; and  Oxy-combustion operation of boiler at maximum continuous rating on design fuel (60% Illinois No. 6 bituminous coal and 40% Powder River Basin coal), with 1% boilerdrumblowdown. Btu/kWh = British thermal units per kilowatt hour; HHV = higher heating value; kJ/kWh = kilojoules per kilowatt hour; kV = kilovolt; MWe = megawatt electrical; % = percent 2.4.2.1 Oxy-Combustion Process and System Features To incorporate the oxy-combustion process, Boiler 6 would be demolished and a new oxy-combustion boiler (Boiler 7) would be constructed. This new boiler would repower the existing Unit 4 steam turbine. Oxy-combustion is essentially conventional coal combustion using a mixture of manufactured oxygen and recycled flue gas instead of ambient air in the combustion process. This technology effectively removes nitrogen from the combustion process, which significantly reduces the flue gas mass flow and facilitates the capture of high purity CO2 flue gas. There are three major components in the oxycombustion facility including the air separation unit, power block and balance of plant, and compression and purification unit. Air Separation Unit  The main function of the air separation unit is to generate oxygen from ambient air for use in the boiler combustion process. The first step in the air separation unit is to compress, purify, and dry ambient air by removing water and other minor impurities (see Figure 2-9). Dry (water-free) air consists of approximately 78 percent nitrogen and 21 percent oxygen. Oxygen and nitrogen in the dry air would be separated in the “cold box” through compression and cryogenic (very cold) distillation. Oxygen generated in the air separation unit would then be directed to the boiler for the combustion process, and the nitrogen would be vented to the atmosphere. Cooling water for the air separation unit would be supplied by a new cooling tower that would also service the compression and purification unit. Power Block and Balance of Plant The oxy-combustion facility associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project is shown schematically in Figure 2-10. The combustion process employs the Babcock & Wilcox-Air Liquide cool recycle process, firing a mixture of high sulfur bituminous coal and low sulfur sub-bituminous coal. Because removing the nitrogen from the combustion process significantly reduces flue gas mass flow, the Babcock & Wilcox-Air Liquide cool recycle process recycles treated flue gas back to the boiler to make up for the reduced mass and more closely mimics the heat transfer properties of a conventional air-fired boiler. The entire system would be integrated into the Meredosia Energy Center to maximize use of the existing steam cycle and equipment. Heat from the air separation unit would be incorporated into the condensate cycle, while heat from the steamcycle would be used for flue gas reheating and other process heat loads. In the cool recycle process, hot gas leaves the boiler and passes through a regenerative advanced secondary and primary recycle heater (similar to a conventional air heater). This recycle heater would be internally arranged to prevent any leakage of the oxygen fed from the air separation unit into the flue gas exiting the boiler. ASU = air separation unit; O2 = oxygen ASU = air separation unit; CDS = circulating dry scrubber; CPU = compression and purification unit; DCCPS = direct contact cooler polishing scrubber; FD = forced draft; Htr = heater; ID =induction draft; PJFF = pulse jet fabric filter Following the recycle heater, the flue gas would pass through a circulating dry scrubber1 where much of the sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide would be removed, and then into the pulse jet fabric filter, where particulate matter would be removed. From the pulse jet fabric filter, the flue gas pressure would be boosted by the induced draft fan and the flue gas flow would be split. A continuous recirculation stream of flue gas would be sent back to the inlet of the circulating dry scrubber to ensure a minimum allowable gas velocity through the absorber for all boiler loads. After this recirculation stream takeoff, the flue gas stream would split once again. One stream from this split would pass through a gas reheater to avoid downstream moisture condensation at low loads and then be boosted by the secondary recycle fan. Oxygen would be introduced into the secondary recycle flow after the secondary recycle fan before reentering the recycle heater for heating prior to the boiler windbox. The secondary recycle fan would control the secondary flow to the boiler. The remaining flue gas stream would pass through the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber where moisture is reduced and most of the remaining sulfur dioxide and particulate is removed. The saturated gas leaving the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber would be reheated to avoid downstream moisture condensation and again split with one stream flowing to the compression and purification unit, and the other supplying the primary recycle fan. The primary recycle fan would provide the flow required to dry and convey the pulverized coal to the burners. Oxygen would be introduced into the primary recycle flow after the recycle heater. The oxygen concentration in this stream would be controlled to mitigate risk of combustion in the pulverizers or coal pipes. Oxygen would also be injected directly into the burners to control combustion and the remaining oxygen mixed into the secondary recycle as previously described. When air firing (during startup and shutdown), the primary and secondary recycle and compression and purification unit streams would be isolated by dampers and all of the gas leaving the induced draft fan would flow to a new 451-foot air stack. The primary and secondary recycle control dampers would be closed and, through their air intakes, the secondary recycle and primary recycle fans would provide fresh air to the recycle gas heater. The direct contact cooler polishing scrubber and its outlet gas reheater would not be in service in this mode. The new air stack would be designed to discharge monitored volumes of flue gas during unit startup and the transition to oxygen-fired status, and to discharge flue gas and CO2 during normal shutdown. In addition, the stack would discharge small, monitored volumes of noncondensable gases during normal operation. The steam cycle and balance of plant includes the steam turbines, condensers, and cooling towers. The major components of the existing Unit 4 steam cycle and balance of plant would be incorporated into the project. The steamcycle and balance of plant look much like those found in a conventional air-fired plant, where steam is used to drive the turbines to generate electricity. Main steam from the new boiler would flow through the existing steam-turbine generator. The existing condensate and feedwater systems would be integrated with the gas quality control system, air separation unit, and compression and purification unit islands to provide heating and cooling requirements for those islands. Condensate and feedwater would be deaerated, and cooling water would be used to condense the steam. The proposed system would have three separate cooling water loops and associated cooling towers: the main cooling tower, the cooling tower for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit, and the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower. Any coal-fired boiler takes some time to start, and the startup sequence for the air separation and compression and purification units increases that time. For cold starts, a new auxiliary boiler would operate to provide steam needed for startup until the main boiler can supply the steam. The auxiliary boiler would most likely be oil-fired. The auxiliary boiler would generate steam for the main boiler 1 Circulating fluidized bed – flue gas desulfurization technology that uses hydrated lime (dry calcium hydroxide) as the absorbent toremove sulfurdioxide, sulfur trioxide, hydrochloric acid, and hydrofluoric acid. condensate system, balance of plant, and air separation unit functions. Once the oxy-combustion boiler is started, enough steam would be available within a few hours to allow shutdown of the auxiliary boiler. The project would reuse the Unit 3 electrical service in the existing 138 kilovolt (kV) substation to supply electricity to the new Unit 4 transformer. Potential modifications may be required within the existing substation to make the connection for the oxy-combustion facility, but no expansion of the substation would be required for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Therefore, any substation modifications and the new aboveground feed to the Unit 4 transformer would occur entirely within the existing developed areas of the energy center and are addressed as part of the overall construction activities for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Compression and Purification Unit In the compression and purification unit, the flue gas (mostly CO2) from the boiler would be compressed, additional contaminants removed, and the compressed and liquefied CO2 pumped to the pipeline. The pipeline would transport liquefied CO2 to the underground CO2 storage area. As shown in Figure 2-11, remaining gases that are not easily condensed (i.e., “noncondensibles”) would be vented through the stack; this stream would consist primarily of argon, CO2, nitrogen, and oxygen. Ar = argon; CO2 =carbon dioxide; CPU = compression and purification unit; N = nitrogen; O2 = oxygen 2.4.2.2 Additional Equipment and Systems Access Roads The project would require new access roads and improvements to existing roads to the energy center site, as shown in Figure 2-12. The existing access road from the barge unloading area would be improved and widened. Roads within the energy center property currently not within a roadbed would be paved with asphalt. The remaining roads on the outer perimeter of the property would be gravel-based. The roads would be designed to handle maximumloads during construction and operation. Cooling Tower Systems The FutureGen 2.0 Project would have three separate cooling water loops and associated new cooling towers: the main cooling tower, the cooling tower for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit, and the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower. Cooling towers are devices that remove heat captured by the cooling water by transferring the heat from the water to the atmosphere through evaporation. Figure 2-12. Proposed Access Roads The main circulating water system would provide a continuous supply of cooling water from the main steam condenser and the closed cooling water system. Water chemistry within the circulating water system would be maintained through chemical injection and system blowdown rates. Blowdown is water that is removed from the cooling water loop to prevent excessive concentration of minerals or other pollutants in the water. The main cooling tower would reject cycle heat from the main condenser and closed cooling water system to the atmosphere; main tower blowdown would be directly discharged to the Illinois River. The existing main cooling tower would be replaced with a new tower of fiberglass reinforced plastic superstructure constructed on the existing common concrete cold-water basin. The new tower would include a crossflow, induced-draft design with four individual cells. The cooling tower for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit would reject cycle heat from the air separation unit and compression and purification unit island closed cooling water systems to the atmosphere. Blowdown from this cooling tower would be directly discharged to the Illinois River. This cooling tower’s fiberglass reinforced plastic superstructure would be built over a common concrete cold-water basin, with a pump pit and pump enclosures. The pump enclosure would house circulating water pumps for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit. Water chemistry within the circulating water system would be maintained through chemical injection and system blowdown rates. The direct contact cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower would reject cycle heat from the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber closed cooling water system to the atmosphere. Blowdown from this tower would be directed to the new onsite wastewater treatment system. The tower would comprise a counterflow, induced-draft design with an individual cell. This cooling tower would be built over a common concrete cold-water basin, with a pump pit and pump enclosures. The pump enclosure would house the circulating water pumps. Water chemistry within the circulating water system would primarily be a function of the gas quality control system and the circulating dry scrubber operating conditions, but could be controlled when necessary through additional chemical injection and blowdown. Groundwater Wells  Groundwater would be used for steam cycle demineralizer influent, coal-handling dust suppression, fire protection (in addition to the public water supply), and potable water. Wells 3, 4, and 5 would be removed and one new well would be constructed. Figure 2-8 shows three possible locations for the new well. There would be three wells operating during the project: existing Wells 6 and 7 and the new well. Process Water Treatment System The Illinois River would be the primary source of makeup water for the proposed project. Depending upon the final use of the makeup water, water withdrawn from the river could be treated through new process water treatment systems that employ clarification, softening, ultrafiltration, and reverse osmosis. In the clarification process, solids would be removed from the water through chemical treatment and physical settling of particles in a series of tanks. Clarification equipment would include a reaction tank, solids contact clarifier, sludge recirculation and forwarding pumps, filter presses for sludge dewatering, pumps for sludge recirculation, and filter press feed. Ferric chloride and polymer would be used for the purposes of coagulating and flocculating solids in order to facilitate settling in the clarifier. By-products of the clarification process would include sludge, which would be processed into filter cake (a chemically fixed sludge that is approximately 50 percent solids). It is expected that the filter cake sludge would be non-hazardous (i.e., pass the USEPA’s toxicity characteristics leaching procedure test) and disposed of in a commercial landfill. Softening would be used to remove or bind minerals and other ions to prevent scaling, corrosion, or other undesired effects. Equipment that would be used for softening purposes includes ion exchange softener as well as chemical reagents or salt solution for regeneration of the ion exchange unit. Ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis could be employed to treat certain water streams. These technologies are able to provide high quality finish water through the removal of solids and ions that can cause undesirable effects. Equipment for these technologies include cartridge filters, ultrafiltration units, tanks, reverse osmosis feed pumps, and booster pumps, and reverse osmosis units. Chemical reagents may also be used in these processes including sodium hydroxide, acid, caustic, antiscalant, sodium biosulfate, and detergents. By-products would include wastewater from backwashing filters, reverse osmosis rejection water (i.e., raw water that does not pass through the treatment unit), and rinses from chemical cleaning of reverse osmosis units. It is anticipated that waste from chemical cleaning of these units would be processed at offsite commercial facilities. Process Wastewater Treatment Systems The proposed project would include separate wastewater treatment systems for the compression and purification unit, and Unit 4 operations. Wastewater from the compression and purification unit would be pumped and treated using sodium hydroxide for pH adjustment and a medium for mercury removal. This system would include cartridge filters, ion exchange vessels charged with specialized mercury polishing media, and pumps. Any wastes generated from mercury removal (e.g., backwash) would be sent offsite for regeneration and replacement. The Unit 4 wastewater treatment system would treat water from the cooling tower for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber and several Unit 4 processes. These processes include the steam cycle (sampling, condensate, blowdown, and miscellaneous drains), demineralization sumps, and coal handling dust suppression. Oil wastes would be treated in oil-water separators prior to being combined with other process wastewater streams. The Alliance anticipates that oily water collected from the separators would be removed from the facility on the same day for offsite disposal. There is a possibility that the oily water may be transferred to an intermediate tank with secondary containment (see further discussion in Section 3.12, Materials and Waste Management). The wastewater treatment system would include an equalization tank, reaction tank(s), solids contact clarifier, sludge recirculation and forwarding pumps, filter presses for sludge dewatering, pumps for sludge recirculation, and a filter press feed. Several chemicals and reagents would be used during treatment, including ferric chloride (coagulant), organosulfide (metal precipitation), and polymer (flocculant/coagulant aid). By-products of this process could include filter cake sludge and oil captured from the oil-water separators. It is expected that the filter cake sludge would be non-hazardous and disposed of in a commercial landfill. Collected oil would be trucked offsite and recycled or treated. Stormwater Management Stormwater from the energy center would be directed to either a new lined settling basin or a new unlined stormwater management basin, depending upon where the stormwater originates. Runoff would be conveyed using surface drainage; however, it is likely that some newly constructed stormwater inlets and underground storm sewers would be required. Neither basin has been designed, so the required sizes, depths, and retention times have not yet been determined. The Alliance has designated preliminary areas where the basins are expected to be sited (see Figure 2-13). Each basin would likely be constructed on a portion of each of these sites and would not encompass the entire area. Any stormwater runoff exposed to coal storage (including coal pile runoff, coal handling dust suppression water, coal handling equipment wash-down water, and stormwater from the coal yard) would be diverted to the new lined settling basin through berms and above-ground conveyance systems. The basin is expected to be sited within the area shown on Figure 2-13 and would be lined to detain water and provide settling for removal of suspended solids. After an appropriate detention time, the stormwater would flow to the wastewater treatment system and would then be discharged to the Illinois River. Chemical reagents including flocculants and polymers may be used in the lined settling basin to increase settling before discharge to the wastewater treatment system. Figure 2-13. Stormwater Management Stormwater from other areas where the water may be exposed to industrial materials or processes (e.g., the bottom ash bunker and fly ash silo unloading) would be identified during the final design and would either flow to the lined settling basin or flow directly to the wastewater treatment system through the use of curbing and either aboveground or underground conveyances. The treated effluent would be discharged from the wastewater treatment system to the Illinois River in compliance with an NPDES permit. Stormwater runoff not exposed to industrial pollutants would be directed to a stormwater management basin that would be constructed and managed by Ameren with input from the Alliance to ensure it is sized to accommodate stormwater runoff from the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The exact location, configuration, and design of the basin would be determined in the final design phase for the project. The basin is expected to be constructed within the area shown on Figure 2-13. The collected water would naturally evaporate and infiltrate into the groundwater system. 2.4.3 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test Construction Phase Construction activities at the Meredosia Energy Center property would begin in 2014 and conclude in 2017 when the project would become operational. Proposed site preparation and construction activities would implement conventional construction methods, and would utilize best management practices (BMPs) to mitigate potential environmental impacts. Construction-related environmental concerns would be typical of those associated with a large industrial construction project and would primarily be related to air emissions, construction traffic, fugitive dust emissions from site disturbance, and stormwater runoff from construction areas. The Alliance would obtain all necessary permits and comply with all regulatory requirements during construction, which are intended to minimize potential concerns about health, safety, and environmental protection. Figure 2-14 shows temporary and permanent impact areas at the Meredosia Energy Center property, as well as the potential impact area for a barge unloading facility. Temporary impact areas refer to those areas that would be restored to their original state with some potential modifications (e.g., planted trees instead of mature trees) at the end of the construction phase, which could be years after the areas are initially impacted. Permanent impact areas are those that would be changed permanently from their prior uses. Existing habitat in permanent impact areas would be lost, and replanting as practicable would be consistent with the permanent uses designated for those areas. Up to 68 acres of land would be temporarily disturbed during project construction (which includes the barge impact area) and up to 96 acres of land would be permanently altered. The designated barge impact area is the area that would potentially be disturbed during offloading of heavy and large equipment from barges during the construction phase. The existing boat ramp area just north of the property boundary would be used to facilitate the movement of large equipment that would be shipped to the project area. The use of this boat ramp area may require the construction of a temporary barge unloading facility on the Illinois River as discussed in Section 2.4.3.2. For the purposes of this EIS, it has been assumed that a temporary barge unloading facility would be constructed. An existing gravel road that connects the boat ramp area to the main facilities at the energy center would be improved to handle the transport of heavy and large equipment or modules for the project. There may be two or more scheduled timeframes of barge unloading events, each resulting in short-term impacts lasting for approximately 1 to 3 months. After the construction phase, the area would be restored to its original state. Electricity needs during construction would be provided by the public electrical grid to be spot-supplemented by portable generators. Construction water needs would be met by the existing Meredosia Energy Center water supply. During the construction phase, the Alliance would provide potable water, portable toilets, and hand-wash stations for construction workers. Figure 2-14. Temporary and Permanent Impact Areas 2.4.3.1 Oxy-Combustion Facility Construction  Initial site preparation activities at the energy center site before construction would include demolition activities, such as the demolition of Boiler 6, groundwater wells, and some warehouses. Additionally, the superstructure of the main cooling tower would be replaced. Following the demolition activities, the Alliance would conduct site clearing, grading, and excavation, and prepare foundation work for erecting the new structures. New roads would be constructed to handle the transport of materials and waste (see Figure 2-12). The new structural features at the energy center site are shown in Figure 2-8. The following list summarizes the major construction components of the proposed project: Oxy-Combustion Facility  Relocate several existing warehouses, a deaerator, and one of the condensate storage tanks, to make roomfor new oxy-combustion facility components.  Demolish the existing Unit 4 boiler (Boiler 6).  Construct a new oxy-combustion boiler (Boiler 7). The height of the new oxy-combustion boiler building, which would be built at the general location of the existing Boiler 6, would be approximately 180 feet. It would be 29 feet shorter than the height of the existing adjacent building.  Construct the air separation unit. The tallest structure in the air separation unit, the cold box, would be approximately 96 feet tall.  Construct the compression and purification unit.  Construct a new approximately 450-foot tall concrete chimney stack. The stack would have an outer reinforced concrete shell with a fiberglass reinforced plastic inner shell liner. The stack would have aviation lighting, including two levels of three medium intensity strobe lights. Coal Handling System  Construction of new transfer chute and gate arrangements at the existing conveyor tail section to facilitate the transfer of coal to a new conveyor.  Construction of a new conveyor to transport the fuel to the new transfer house constructed at the new boiler building. The new conveyor would be routed above the existing turbine building roof and would be enclosed by hood covers. An outside walkway would be provided along the conveyor for service and maintenance purposes. Electrical and Control Systems  The 138 kV substation would be expanded to provide a new overhead distribution line to supply power to a new Unit 4 auxiliary transformer. The project would also require a number of existing overhead transmission and distribution lines to be re-routed to free up space for the new project equipment. New electrical equipment and connections would be installed to provide power to the various components of the new oxy-combustion facility.  Demolish existing onsite transmission towers and construct four new towers to reroute existing lines. The new towers would be comparable in size and height to the existing towers. Access Roads   Construct new access roads to the energy center property, and improve and widen the existing barge unloading roadway. Figure 2-12 shows these new roadways and indicates where they would tie into existing roadways. All roads would typically be 20 feet wide, except for the barge unloading road, which would be 40 feet wide. None of the areas for roadway construction would require major vegetation removal. Roads within the energy center property would be paved with asphalt, and roads on the outer perimeter would be gravel. Roads would be designed to handle maximum loads. Water and Wastewater Systems  Decommission three existing water supply wells (Wells 3, 4, and 5) and install a new replacement well for groundwater supply to the project. The potential locations of the new replacement well are shown in Figure 2-8.  Replace existing main cooling tower with a new tower at the same location. The new tower would be constructed on the existing concrete cold-water basin. The tower structure would be fiberglass reinforced plastic construction.  Construct two additional cooling towers, one for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber, and one for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit. Each tower would be built over a concrete cold-water basin, with a pump pit and pump enclosures provided on one side. The pump enclosure would house the circulating water pumps. Both tower structures would be constructed out of fiberglass reinforced plastic. The direct contact cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower would be 30 feet high while the separation unit and compression and purification unit cooling tower height would be 32 feet.  Construct a new process water treatment system and a new wastewater treatment system.  Construct a new lined settling basin for stormwater exposed to industrial pollutants. Certain stormwater exposed to industrial pollutants (e.g., coal pile runoff) would be diverted to this appropriately lined detention basin to allow settling of suspended solids prior to treatment in the wastewater treatment system.  Construct a new stormwater management basin. This basin would collect stormwater runoff not exposed to industrial pollutants. The water would naturally evaporate and infiltrate into the groundwater system. 2.4.3.2 Temporary Barge Unloading Facility The Alliance plans to use the area between the existing boat ramp area to the north of the energy center (see Figure 2-4 labeled ‘Public Boat Ramp Area,’ and Figure 2-14 labeled ‘Barge Impact Area’) to unload a number of large equipment modules for the oxy-combustion facility. These modules would be constructed offsite and sent by barge on the Illinois River. The boat ramp area is owned by the village of Meredosia and has two boat ramps. Only one of the boat ramps would be needed to offload the modules. There are two exits from the boat ramp area to the village, only one of which would be obstructed during barge unloading. Additional phases of project engineering and coordination with the village of Meredosia would be required to determine further accessibility arrangements, but the Alliance expects to ensure that at least one of the boat ramps remains open for public access during project construction. There is a possibility that the movement of equipment from the boat ramp to the energy center would take place the day after delivery, but the parking lot associated with the boat ramp area is large enough to enable temporary staging of equipment overnight without affecting public use of the boat ramp area. A former campground near the boat ramp area is no longer in use. There are no plans to stage or place construction material, debris, or waste at or near the boat ramp area from any FutureGen 2.0 Project construction activity. It is anticipated that impacts to the boat ramp area would be short term, lasting between 1 to 3 months during each of several construction unloading timeframes. It is expected that barge unloading activities related to construction of the oxy-combustion facility would begin in early 2014 and conclude in early 2016. Two options have been evaluated for the barge unloading operations: (1) using mooring dolphins (freestanding structures above the water line used to secure vessels with ropes) to temporarily anchor the barge or (2) grounding the barge on the river bottom. Both of these options would involve some level of disturbance to the river bottom; however, no dredging activities are expected for either option. The first option would require the installation of three to five mooring dolphins in the river channel. The mooring dolphins would be placed at regular intervals such that the group would extend 100 feet out into the river. These dolphins might include individual timber pilings or metal pilings driven into the river bottom. It is expected that these pilings would be less than 48 inches in diameter, but the piling size, and therefore the pile driving hammer size, is unknown at this time. The second option would require that areas of the river bottom where the barge would be grounded be prepared by removing any large objects that may puncture the barge. If necessary, rip-rap or other suitable material would be placed on the river bottom to provide a foundation for the barge and prevent damage and continuing streambed impacts. If the Alliance elects to implement one of these two options, they would be installed by the first quarter of 2014and removed after the last module is unloaded. The Alliance is also evaluating options for unloading equipment that would avoid potential impacts by using a combination of on-shore equipment, tugs, and temporary ramps so that there would be no disturbance to the bank or bottom of the Illinois River. However, these plans are still under development and being reviewed for their feasibility. Under this scenario, a portion of the temporary ramp may extend into the river to form a usable platform between the edge of the barge and the existing boat ramp. This temporary ramp might extend 20 feet from the shoreline although it has not yet been defined. Although the actual dimensions of the barge have not been finalized, it is estimated that the barge would be 255 feet long and 72 feet wide with a 4-foot draft. Once the barge is moored, the module would be unloaded using a roll-off heavy hauler and a series of dollies. The dollies would move the modules to temporary cribbing and then to the boat ramp itself via a temporary ramp. The heavy hauler would then proceed south to the energy center via the barge unloading access road, an existing gravel road that would require some improvements. Barges would not be moored for an extended period. It is anticipated that each module would take up to 24 hours to unload, though this is only an approximation as the barge unloading activities have not yet been planned in detail. 2.4.3.3 Construction Schedule and Workforce The construction phase for the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, including initial demolition, is estimated to occur over a period of approximately 42 months beginning in 2014 and extending through 2017. However, construction would be substantially completed within 30 months, and the last 12 months of construction would overlap with a 1-year commissioning and startup effort. The number of construction and craft workers onsite would range from 100 to 200 for the first 7 months, 300 to 400 for the next 8 months, and 450 to 500 at peak for the next 8 months. Beginning with the 24th month, the onsite construction staff would reduce to approximately 300 for 8 months, then decline to between 50 and 200 for the final 11 months. The numbers of additional construction workers associated with the pipeline, CO2 injection wells, and educational facilities are discussed in Section 2.5. 2.4.3.4 Construction Materials and Waste Raw Materials and Delivery  Box trucks would carry various equipment and consumables, including welding supplies, crane rigging, control valves, small pumps and instruments, and control cable. In addition, many other miscellaneous items would be transported to the site via box truck. Approximately 40 box truck deliveries would be required and would originate from numerous locations. Flat-bed trailers hauled by semi-tractors would transport major equipment and supplies, including the chemical feed systems, supplies for site preparation, pre-cast sewer sections, transformers, motor control centers, switchgear, large pumps and supports, duct bank sections, pre-fabricated tanks, air compressors, grating and handrails, miscellaneous support steel, cooling tower structural components and fans, and all cast iron and high density propylene piping sections. Additional equipment and supplies may also be delivered by flat-bed trailer. Approximately 270 flat-bed tractor-trailer deliveries would be required and would originate from numerous locations. The Alliance anticipates that pre-mixed concrete would be delivered from a local source via concrete trucks; however, the use of an onsite batch plant would also be evaluated. The batch plant would be temporary and would be located in one of the laydown yards close to the energy center. In this case, concrete would be delivered via concrete mixer truck fromthe batch plant. Approximately 360 truckloads would be required to deliver concrete to the site. Dump trucks would be required for the site preparation effort during the early construction phase. Fill material would be procured locally whenever possible. Approximately 600 dump truckloads may be required to import gravel, road base, and other fill material to the site. Equipment for the boiler and gas quality control system would be delivered from a variety of sources. Babcock &Wilcox estimates that equipment delivery would require approximately 12 barges, 350 full truckloads, and 200 to 400 shipments of less than a full truckload. Equipment for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit would be fabricated and preassembled offsite to reduce trucking requirements. Air Liquide estimates that modules would be transported by two river barges to Meredosia. Seven transporters would be required to move the modules from the barge unloading area to the construction site. Approximately 30 additional truck deliveries would be required to bring associated materials to the Meredosia site. A summary of power consumption ranges for the construction and startup of the project is provided below. These estimates were developed based on previous projects or historical information provided by the project proponents:  Balance of plant: 2,555 to7,665 megawatt hours (MWh)  Boiler: 5,291 to 15,873MWh  Gas quality control system: 3,108 to 9,323 MWh  Air separation unit: 5,705 to 17,115 MWh  Compression and purification unit: 4,314 to 12,942 MWh  Total: 20,973to 62,918 MWh Material Wastes and Wastewater Construction of the proposed project would generate typical construction wastes. The predominant waste streams would include industrial equipment and associated components from the demolition of Boiler 6; clearing vegetation, soils, and debris; used lube oils; surplus materials; and empty containers. Solid wastes (i.e., garbage and rubbish) would be collected for disposal in a licensed offsite solid waste facility (i.e., a public landfill). Scrap and surplus materials and used lube oils would be recycled or reused to the maximum practicable extent. Temporary sanitary facilities (i.e., portable toilets and hand-wash stations) would be placed in appropriate locations at the construction sites for use by construction workers. These self-contained portable units would be serviced regularly and the wastes would be collected and hauled to permitted sewage treatment facilities by licensed waste transporters. Stormwater in areas that currently drain to the bottom ash pond or fly ash pond at the Meredosia Energy Center would continue to be directed to these treatment basins, assuming that the NPDES operating permit authorizes such discharges. In areas where stormwater cannot be routed to the bottom ash pond or fly ash pond, the Alliance would obtain a general NPDES permit (ILR10) from the IEPA to authorize discharges of stormwater during construction. BMPs would be utilized to reduce sediment discharged via stormwater runoff. These BMPs would be described in a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) required by the general NPDES permit. These BMPs may include measures such as silt fencing, inlet drain protection, ditch checks, designated concrete washout areas, vegetated buffer strips, and other measures. The Alliance would ultimately be responsible for the proper handling and disposal of construction wastes. However, construction contractors and their employees would be responsible for minimizing the amount of waste produced by construction activities. These contractors would be expected to fully cooperate with project procedures and regulatory requirements for waste minimization and the proper handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes. Each construction contractor would be required to include waste management in their overall project health, safety, and environmental site plans. Typical construction waste management activities may include the following:  Dedicated areas and a system for waste management and segregation of incompatible waste at time of generation;  A waste control plan detailing waste collection and removal fromthe site, as well as identification of where waste of different categories would be collected in separate stockpiles, bins, or other containers;  Hazardous waste storage (separately from non-hazardous waste and other, non-compatible hazardous waste) in accordance with applicable regulations, project-specific requirements, and good waste management practices;  Periodic inspections to verify that wastes are properly stored and covered to prevent accidental spills and to prevent waste from being dispersed by wind;  Appropriately labeled waste disposal containers; and  Good housekeeping procedures to ensure that work areas would be left in a clean and orderly condition at the end of each working day, with surplus materials and wastes transferred to the waste management area. 2.4.3.5 Construction Safety Policies and Programs Emergency services during construction would be coordinated with the local fire departments, police departments, paramedics, and hospitals. A first aid office would be provided onsite for minor incidents. Trained and certified health, safety, and environmental personnel would be onsite to respond to and coordinate emergencies. All temporary facilities would have fire extinguishers; fire protection would be provided in work areas where welding work would be performed. In addition, existing Ameren plans and policies applicable to the Meredosia Energy Center regarding environmental safety and health would be updated as necessary by the Alliance to accommodate the proposed project. 2.4.4 Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test Operation Phase A variety of factors could affect the possible long-term operation of the oxy-combustion facility, including potential future GHG legislation and regulations, process performance, and economics. For purposes of this EIS, DOE assumed the project would continue to operate for 20 years. 2.4.4.1 Resource Requirements and Inputs Operational Labor All operations at the Meredosia Energy Center were suspended in 2011. During its final year of operation, the energy center employed approximately 57 personnel. The proposed project would employ 87 to 115 people and operate 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, with employees working in shifts. Staff would include 25 operational personnel, 4 to 8 gas quality control system personnel, 4 to 16 air separation unit personnel, 4 to 16 compression and purification unit personnel, 7 coal handling personnel, 24 maintenance personnel, 11 administration and support personnel, and 8 laborers and store clerks. All new staff would be based at the Meredosia Energy Center. Process Inputs During operation of the project, process-related chemicals would be transported to the Meredosia Energy Center mainly by truck. The new boiler would be able to accommodate a coal blend of 60 percent Illinois coal and 40 percent Powder River Basin coal. Illinois coal would be transported to the energy center by truck and Powder River Basin coal would be transported by barge. The oxy-combustion facility would require the input of two reagents: trona and lime. Table 2-4 presents the estimated usage and delivery requirements for the process inputs to the oxy-combustion facility. a. All materials delivered by 40-ton truck (25-ton load) except sub-bituminous Powder River Basin coal, which would be delivered by barge (1,650-ton load). b. Trips would not be made daily. The major process chemicals that may be used for the new process water and wastewater treatment systems include ferric chloride, polymer, salt solution, sodium hydroxide, acid, caustic, antiscalant, sodium bisulfate, detergent, and sodium hydroxide. Process water would primarily be supplied by the Illinois River. The amounts of materials stored at the facility would be determined by the rates of consumption, customary delivery volumes available from suppliers, and the reliability of supply. In addition to regulatory requirements, the Alliance would follow the chemical suppliers’ recommendations and procedures in storing and handling all chemicals. Coal  During operation of the project, Boiler 7 would burn a blend of 60 percent Illinois No. 6 bituminous coal and 40 percent Powder River Basin sub-bituminous coal. Coal mine sources that may provide bituminous coal for the proposed project include the Viper Mine, Crown 3 Mine, and Shay Mine in Illinois, which are all located approximately 75 to 85 miles from Meredosia. Yard machines (dozers, scrapers) would form the bituminous coal into a pile and would also be used to transfer coal from this pile to the existing reclaim hopper, which would feed into existing Conveyor A (see Figure 2-5). Conveyor A would direct the reclaimed coal to the breaker building for processing and sizing. Powder River Basin coal originates from the Powder River Basin in Wyoming and would be transported by rail to St. Louis, Missouri. The coal would be transported from St. Louis to the energy center via barge. The existing barge unloading system would be used for maintaining the Powder River Basin coal pile inventory for Unit 4. The coal would be unloaded from the barge via a clamshell bucket into the barge unloading hopper. After the coal is unloaded from the barge, it would be transported via Conveyor E to the coal breaker building for further processing. Trona Trona is a naturally-occurring hydrated sodium carbonate mineral (sodium sesquicarbonate) that is used in the gas quality control system (injected upstream of the baghouse) to reduce sulfur trioxide concentrations in the flue gas. It is also used in the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber to reduce sulfur dioxide. The proposed system would consume trona at rates shown in Table 2-4. Dry trona would be delivered to the site by trucks that would be equipped with blowers for offloading. The trona would be stored in a shop-fabricated, skirted-design storage silo that would be 14 feet nominal diameter by 77 feet overall height.  Hydrated Lime Dry calcium hydroxide, also known as hydrated lime, would be used as the absorbent in the circulating dry scrubber for removal of acid gases (sulfur dioxide, sulfur trioxide, hydrogen fluoride, hydrochloric acid, etc.). The proposed system would consume lime at rates shown in Table 2-4. An onsite lime hydration system would be used to convert quicklime to hydrated lime for storage in the hydrated lime storage silo. Truck delivery of hydrated lime would be an emergency backup measure if the hydrator is out of operation. Material Deliveries Table 2-4 summarizes the delivery requirements for all major process materials. With the exception of Powder River Basin coal, all materials would be delivered by 40-ton trucks with capacity to transport 25 tons of material. Each barge delivery would transport 1,650 tons of Powder River Basin coal. Truck deliveries would generally take the “south bypass road,” which is signed as the Meredosia Energy Center entrance on IL-104. Water Consumption  Water sources for the project’s makeup water would include well water, public water supply, and the Illinois River. There would be three wells used during operations (existing Wells6 and 7 and a new well). Well water would be used for steam cycle demineralizer influent, coal handling dust suppression, fire protection (in addition to the public water supply), and potable water. The public water supply would be used for fire protection makeup water and Unit 4 floor wash; the existing fire protection water storage tank capacity is 325,000 gallons and is not expected to increase for this project. The use of the public water supply as potable water may be evaluated in the future. The Illinois River would be the primary source of makeup process water and would require additional treatment at the new process water treatment system as discussed in Section 2.4.2.2, depending on its final use. River water would provide for the following uses:  Screen and strainer backwash;  Makeup water for the Unit 4 main cooling tower;  Makeup water for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower;  Makeup water for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit cooling tower;  Gas quality control system makeup water;  Process water for the air separation unit and the compression and purification unit;  Equipment cooling; and  Equipment washdown. Table 2-5 summarizes the water sources and uses for operation of the oxy-combustion facility. Public Water Distribution System 1 1,440 a. Waterforfireprotection would be supplied byboth the public watersystemand onsite groundwaterwells. gpd = gallons perday;gpm = gallons per minute Fuel Consumption and Auxiliary Power The auxiliary electric power demand to operate the oxy-combustion facility would total 68,721 kilowatts (kW). This includes auxiliary power for the boiler, gas quality control system, air separation unit, compression and purification unit, and balance of plant (new equipment, existing reused equipment, and auxiliary transformer losses). 2.4.4.2 Process Wastes, Discharges, and By-Products Material Wastes and By-Products The operation of the project would generate various wastes. These would include fly ash, bottom ash, circulating dry scrubber wastes, process water and wastewater treatment solids, and waste petroleum-based lubricants. Fly ash and bottom ash would be the predominant wastes generated by the project. Waste generation rates for fly ash and bottom ash are provided in Table 2-6. Water and wastewater treatment solids would be generated at a rate of approximately 0.28 tons per day (see Section 2.4.2.2 for identification of waste solids generated by the proposed process water treatment system and wastewater treatment system), and waste lubricants would be generated at a rate of approximately 1,000 gallons per day (gpd). These waste types would be transported offsite for disposal. Table 2-6. Estimated Process Waste Generation Material Tons/Day Tons/Year Daily Removalsa Annual Removalsa a. All wastes removed by40-ton trucks (25-ton waste capacity). b. Flyash includes circulating dryscrubberwaste. Bottom Ash Bottom ash would be generated at rates shown in Table 2-6. The bottom ash removal system would consist of a transition chute, submerged chain conveyor with water recirculation pumps, sludge pumps and heat exchangers. Bottom ash would be removed from the combustor and would be stored in the ash bunker until being transferred to trucks that would transport it to an offsite landfill (see below, Ash Disposal). Fly Ash The ash handling systemtransfers the fly ash collected by the pulse jet fabric filter (baghouse, located east of Boiler 7) to the waste ash storage silo for disposal. The fly ash would be generated at rates shown in Table 2-6. Fly ash would be stored in the waste ash storage silo complete with bin vent and filter collector before transfer to trucks for transport to an offsite landfill (see below, Ash Disposal). The waste ash silo, which would be equipped with a baghouse, has capacity for 72 hours of operation at the design condition. Ash Disposal Ash waste that could not be beneficially re-used would be trucked offsite and disposed of at an existing commercial facility permitted to receive coal combustion residuals. In June 2010, the USEPA proposed to regulate for the first time the coal combustion residuals, or coal ash, generated by electric utilities. Coal combustion residuals are currently considered exempt wastes under an amendment to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Two possible options for the management of coal combustion residuals are being proposed under the new rule. Under the first option, USEPA would list these residuals as special wastes subject to regulation under subtitle C of RCRA, when destined for disposal in landfills or surface impoundments. Under the second option, the USEPA would regulate coal ash under subtitle D of RCRA, the section for non-hazardous wastes.2 As discussed in Section 2.4.1.5, the existing ash ponds at the energy center would not be part of the asset transfer for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Environmental liability associated with the existing ash ponds and compliance with current or future regulations remain with Ameren until such time as the property and environmental liability may be transferred to a third party. General Solid Waste Routine maintenance of process components (e.g., pumps, valves, etc.) for the oxy-combustion facility is not expected to generate significant amounts of waste. The material removed and waste generated as part of this required maintenance is not expected to be hazardous. Any waste generated would be properly managed and disposed of at a suitable waste disposal facility. In the event of a process malfunction, more significant maintenance may be required. These events could produce a waste product not considered in the maintenance scenarios above; such wastes may or may not be hazardous. These events would be rare, treated on a case-by-case basis, and not expected during normal operation. The wastes generated as a result of these activities would be handled according to applicable laws and regulations, plant operations and maintenance standards, risk management plans, material safety data sheets (MSDS) recommendations, and other industry or agency standards for proper handling and disposal. These types of emergency events would be addressed in a hazards and operability study prior to operations, such that potential problems and risks are identified, employee awareness is raised, mitigations of risks are implemented, and emergency procedures are effective. Wastewater Generation Wastewater generated by the project would include sanitary wastewater, process wastewater, non-contact cooling water, backwash from the intake screen, and oily effluent from floor and equipment drains. Table 2-7 summarizes wastewater generation and disposal during operation of the oxy-combustion facility as described in Section 2.4.2.2. The Meredosia Energy Center is currently covered under existing NPDES Permit IL0000116. This permit was renewed by Ameren in November 2011 and is currently valid until October 31, 2016. This existing permit would be modified as needed for the FutureGen 2.0 Project; however, no new outfalls would be proposed. Expected effluent pollutants and discharge standards are discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. All of the river water would continue to pass through the existing intake screens, which are backwashed using a portion of the inlet water. Backwash water would be discharged directly back to the Illinois River through Outfall 006 (see Figure 2-4). The backwash water source is the Illinois River. Under the NPDES permit, the outfall would continue to be monitored for residual chlorine when chlorine is utilized for biofouling control. 2 The comment period for the proposed coal combustion residuals rule closed on November 14, 2011. The rule is still pending, and as such, the resulting regulations issued by USEPA could impact the Alliance’s decision on options for its ash disposal(75 FR35128). gpd = gallons perday;gpm = gallons per minute Most of the Unit 4 gas quality control system and associated direct contact cooler polishing scrubber liquid waste would be recycled for fly ash wetting or re-evaporated in the flue gas to the maximum possible extent to minimize high chloride waste streams requiring external treatment. Some Unit 4 discharges, such as the main cooling tower blowdown and the air separation unit and compression and purification unit cooling tower blowdown, would be directed without further treatment to the Illinois River. These discharges would consist primarily of river water that has been concentrated due to evaporation in the cooling towers, with some small amounts of various circulating water feed chemicals (e.g. antiscalant, biocide, sulfuric acid, etc.) present. The makeup water portion from the air separation unit and compression and purification unit cooling tower would also have been softened, thereby exchanging sodium for calcium and magnesium ions. The other Unit 4 wastewater discharges would be treated at the new wastewater treatment system prior to release to the river. The collection method, main equipment components, chemical reagents, and by-products for the wastewater treatment system are described in Section 2.4.2.2; minor quantities of solid wastes would be collected and disposed of offsite. Although water quality data of the new effluent are not known at this time, it is conservatively estimated that the effluent levels would be at the current operating permit limits; however, it is expected that effluent concentrations for most regulated constituents would be significantly lower than permit limits. The discharge permit limits and impacts to water quality are discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. The wastewater streams that have the potential to be contaminated with oil would be routed to oil-water separator(s) for processing. Such streams primarily include floor and equipment drains. The oil-water separator would likely be a single-wall rectangular coalescing plate-type unit(s) installed below grade level in a covered concrete vault. Clean water effluent from the separator would be collected and either pumped (via duplex submersible pumps located in the separator clearwell) or preferably discharged by gravity to the wastewater treatment system. Separated oil would be contained in the oil-water separator and would be periodically pumped out for offsite disposal. CO2 Stream The project would be designed to recover greater than 90 percent of the CO2 during steady-state operation that would otherwise be emitted from the combustion process. The compression and purification unit is expected to have a CO2 capture rate totaling 1.2 million tons per year (1.1 million metric tons per year). Although the exact composition of the CO2 stream that would be received from the proposed oxycombustion facility is not known at this time, the pipeline design requires that at a minimum it must meet the specifications discussed in Section 2.4.2. The gas would be vented through the stack in the event that the quality requirements could not be met. “Noncondensible” gases that consist primarily of argon, nitrogen, and oxygen would also be vented through the stack. The captured CO2 stream to be transported for geologic sequestration would include CO2, inert gases (argon and nitrogen), water vapor, and trace amounts of oxygen, sulfur, and mercury. (See Section 2.5.1.4 for further discussion on the CO2 stream specifications.) Dense phase CO2 would be delivered from the oxy-combustion facility to a pipeline interface point located near the eastern boundary of the Meredosia Energy Center. An isolation valve would be installed downstream of the compression and purification unit to initiate or shutoff flow to the pipeline, as required. CO2 flow, pressure, temperature, and quality would be monitored at the compression and purification unit discharge, upstream of the pipeline isolation valve. Monitoring at the pipeline interface point, along with automated control of the isolation valve, would be developed during final design. Remote monitoring capability would also be implemented to allow the Alliance to directly monitor CO2 conditions at the compression and purification unit discharge. During operation, if CO2 conditions do not meet the required specifications, the pipeline isolation valve would automatically close and flow to the pipeline would be stopped. During compression and purification unit startup, shutdown, or other operating condition, when the pipeline isolation valve is shut and no CO2 delivery to the pipeline is occurring, CO2 must be discharged elsewhere until pipeline deliveries can resume. While the startup stack and normal compression and purification unit vent would accommodate many such conditions, additional backup discharge points may be required to facilitate practical compression and purification unit operation during upsets. Details regarding such backup discharge points would be finalized when design details become available and could include onsite CO2 storage or additional CO2 venting capability downstream of the compression and purification unit. Venting of CO2 would only occur within the constraints of the air permit. Air Emissions During normal operations, the flue gas, upon exiting the boiler, would enter the gas quality control system, which comprises numerous steps designed to remove pollutants, recover heat, and prepare the flue gas before entering the compression and purification unit. The gas quality control system would incorporate state-of-the-art processes to reduce criteria pollutants to low levels. Table 2-8 presents estimated pollutant emissions during normal operating conditions based on the original 200 MWe design assuming an 85 percent operating capacity. The Alliance has recently changed the energy center design such that the facility would now generate 168 MWe. Therefore, the anticipated emissions from the downsized energy center during normal operating conditions would be lower than those presented in this table. Emissions would be higher during startup, in the case of a compression and purification unit or pipeline shutdown, and during shutdown. However, these conditions are expected to be rare. Designers anticipate minimal hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) emissions during normal operations. See Section 3.1, Air Quality, and Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for further discussion on air emissions from the proposed project. 2.4.4.3 Health and Safety Policies and Programs Ameren’s existing Environmental Policy directs all persons and entities operating and maintaining company facilities on its behalf, including the Meredosia Energy Center, to act in a manner protective of human health, the environment, and property while complying with all applicable environmental laws and regulations. The Alliance intends to develop and implement a similar policy that would apply to the facilities and personnel associated with the project. The storage and handling of toxic or flammable materials would be conducted in compliance with USEPA and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations and the National Fire Protection Association’s “Guide on Hazardous Materials” (NFPA 2010). The Alliance would develop and maintain a Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures (SPCC) plan for the project in compliance with federal and state regulations. The worker safety programs developed and implemented by the Alliance and its partners would ensure that workers are aware and knowledgeable about spill containment procedures and related health and environmental protection policies. a. Emissions listed in this table are based on expected normal operating conditions for the original 200 MWe design with all emissions passing through the gas qualitycontrol systemand CPU,assuming an 85 percent operating capacity. b. The data in this table reflect a generating capacity of 200 MWe as presented in the February 2012 construction permit application (Ameren 2012), which was the original project design; however, the Alliance has recently changed the energy center design such that the facility would now generate 168 MWe. Therefore, the anticipated emissions from the downsized energycenterwould be lowerthan those presented in this table. c. Mercuryisa hazardous air pollutant typically emitted fromcoal combustion power plants. d. Net emissions of CO2 from oxy-combustion boiler stack, assuming at least 90 percent of the CO2 is captured by the CPU. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases,forfurther discussion of CO2emissions. CO = carbon monoxide; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; CPU = compression and purification unit; Hg = mercury; MWe = megawatt electrical; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM = particulate matter; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; VOCs = volatile organic compounds 2.4.4.4 Permit Requirements Chapter 5, Regulatory and Permit Requirements, includes Table 5-1 that summarizes the permits and activities that could be required for construction and operation of the proposed oxy-combustion facility, such as an Air Pollution Control Construction Permit, NPDES Construction Permit, and required modifications to the existing NPDES Operating Permit. 2.4.4.5 Power Purchase Agreement The Illinois Power Agency, in accordance with the Illinois Power Agency Act, facilitates procurement of electricity for the state's utilities (i.e., Commonwealth Edison and Ameren Illinois) and in some cases the Alternative Retail Electric Suppliers. The Illinois Power Agency’s responsibilities include administering the state’s Clean Coal Portfolio Standard and its “retrofit provision.” After receiving bids through an annual competitive procurement process, the Agency then makes a recommendation to the Illinois Commerce Commission, which is responsible for approving the contracts between the utilities and the energy suppliers. In accordance with the retrofit provision, the Alliance submitted to the Illinois Power Agency a draft power purchase agreement for the electricity to be produced by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Following the Illinois Power Agency’s review, the power purchase agreement was included in the agency’s annual electricity procurement plan. The procurement plan and power purchase agreement were subsequently reviewed and approved by the Illinois Commerce Commission. The estimated rate impact is less than the 2.015 percent statutory limit. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would have no rate impact on electricity customers receiving power fromrural electric cooperatives. 2.4.5 Decommissioning The planned life of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center is expected to be 20 years. However, if the energy center remains economically viable, it could be operated for additional years into the future. A closure plan would be developed prior to the time that the energy center would be permanently closed. The removal of the energy center from service, or decommissioning, may range from “mothballing” to the removal of all equipment and facilities, depending on conditions at the time. The closure plan would be provided to state and local authorities as required. 2.5 FUTUREGEN 2.0PIPELINE AND CO2STORAGE RESERVOIR The Alliance would transport the captured CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center in an underground pipeline to a permanent geologic storage reservoir in Morgan County (see Figure 2-15). At this site (i.e., the CO2 storage study area), the CO2 would be injected 4,000 to 4,500 feet below the earth’s surface into the Mt. Simon Formation. The Mt. Simon Formation, a deep saline formation, would be used as the permanent storage reservoir for the CO2. This technology, including the capture of CO2 from the oxycombustion facility, is known as CO2 capture and storage. Once the CO2 would be injected, it would be extensively and continuously monitored to ensure it is being safely and permanently stored. In addition, visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the ‘educational facilities’) are planned for the Jacksonville area. The following sections describe the siting, design, construction, and operation of these activities (Alliance 2012b). CO2 = carbon dioxide; Fm. = Formation; ft = feet; Ss. = sandstone; USDW = Underground Source of Drinking Water Figure 2-15. Project Concept 2.5.1 CO2 Pipeline The Alliance plans to site, design, construct, and operate a CO2 pipeline from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area. The CO2 would be received from the capture facilities at the energy center and transported through a new 12-inch diameter pipeline for injection and permanent storage in the Mt. Simon Formation. The CO2 pipeline from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area would be approximately 26 miles long. The CO2 stream from the Meredosia Energy Center would be at least 97 percent pure CO2.The remaining gas includes inert compounds, water vapor, and other trace constituents that meet regulatory standards. CO2 can exist in a gaseous, liquid, or solid state. At its critical point, which occurs at 1,070 pounds per square inch pressure (psig) and 87.8 degrees Fahrenheit (oF) temperature, CO2 gas goes into a liquid-like dense phase. CO2 transport in a dense phase is the method of choice adopted by all major CO2 pipeline companies. In this dense phase, the CO2 is non-corrosive and is safe to transport in the pipeline.  The transport of CO2 gas in dense phase is regulated by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) regulation entitled “Transportation of Hazardous Liquids in Pipelines” (49 CFR 195). The regulation provides all pertinent design requirements including safe distance from other structures, depth of cover, separation from other lateral assets, construction material selection, design calculation factors, pressure testing, and pipeline safety, among many other requirements that ensure long-term safe operation of the pipeline. The Alliance’s design for the CO2 pipeline would meet or exceed all of the requirements in 49 CFR 195. CO2 gas is heavier than air. When released it stays close to the ground, and if released in sufficient volumes can fill up low lying areas causing a potential safety hazard. The pipeline design provides safeguards to mitigate such risk. These safeguards include mainline block valves to isolate pipeline sections, a leak detection system to alert the operator, and a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) telecommunication system to communicate information and data about pipeline performance. In addition, pipeline monitoring and surveillance procedures would be implemented in the field on a daily basis. 2.5.1.1 Pipeline Corridor and Routes The Alliance has designated a 4-mile wide corridor extending from FutureGen 2.0 Pipeline Siting the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area through which the pipeline route would pass. Because the pipeline Pipeline Corridor - The 4-mile wide corridor initially identified by the Alliance as the area route has not yet been finalized, DOE uses the corridor to set the within which a CO2 pipeline would be sited. boundaries and general existing conditions of where the pipeline The corridor extends from the Meredosia would be located. Figure 2-16 illustrates the location of the Energy Center to the boundary of the CO2 pipeline corridor and the CO2 storage study area. The pipeline storage study area. corridor extends 26 miles from the eastern edge of the Illinois Pipeline Route - A specific pipeline route River to the western border of the CO2 storage study area. identified within the pipeline corridor. The Within the pipeline corridor, the Alliance has identified two pipeline route consists of the pipeline within a 50-foot wide operational right-of-way. Two possible pipeline routes from the energy center to the western pipeline routes, the southern route border of the CO2 storage study area in which the injection wells (preferred) and the northern route, are being would be located. These are referred to as the southern route and analyzed by DOE. northern route, as shown in Figure 2-17. Appendix C, Map Views of Pipeline3, contains detailed aerial maps of the potential routes. To the fullest extent possible, the final pipeline route would utilize existing ROWs and avoid sensitive environmental resources such as wetlands, cultural resources, forest land, and threatened or endangered species and their habitats. The Alliance’s preferred option is the southern route, which was developed based on field investigation and discussions with the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR), and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). Portions of the southern route would use existing highway ROWs.  3 The southern route has been recently updated from the one on which the analysis was conducted. As shown in Appendix C, Map Views of Pipeline, the changes are minor, slightly rerouting the last 2 miles of the southern route, west of the storage study area. The Final EIS will reflect the updated route. CO2 = carbon dioxide CO2 = carbon dioxide Figure 2-17. Southern and Northern CO2 Pipeline Route Options to CO2 Storage Study Area Preliminary route selections, as shown in Figure 2-17 were based on the following siting criteria, which represent good engineering practices generally accepted in the industry. In the event that the final pipeline route deviates from the route options specified in this EIS, the Alliance would similarly use these siting criteria:  Maintain a minimum safe distance from residential, commercial, and industrial buildings and structures in accordance with 49 CFR 195 requirements (federal regulations require a minimum distance of 50 feet from occupied dwellings; the Alliance has committed to maintaining a minimum distance of 150 feet to provide an additional buffer).4  Co-locate with existing features where acceptable.  Utilize existing timberland clearings where practical.  Cross roads, railroads, and waterbodies at a near right angle but no more than 10 degrees from right angle where possible for permitting approval. Exceptions would be reviewed on a case-bycase basis.  Perform constructability reviews. Avoid or minimize side hill slopes as much as possible. Identify water source and disposal sites for pipeline pressure testing due to the large quantity of water required for pressure testing.  Review ROW accessibility and logistics for construction materials and equipment.  Review environmental features and permitting requirements. The Alliance has not yet identified potential routes for the last few miles of the pipeline within the CO2 storage study area (i.e., the end-of-pipeline spurs) because the locations of injection wells have not yet been determined. Injection well locations would be determined through the underground injection control (UIC) permitting process. These end-of-pipeline spurs would be delineated based on the same siting criteria used to delineate the southern and northern pipeline routes described herein. See Chapter 3 for information on how DOE assessed potential impacts related to the injection wells and end-of-pipeline spurs, and Section 4.4, Incomplete and Unavailable Information, for additional discussion relating to incomplete and unavailable information. 2.5.1.2 Pipeline Design The CO2 pipeline would meet American Petroleum Institute standards for either double‐submerged, arc-welded or high‐frequency electric resistance welded pipe. It would be coated with a three-layer fusion-bonded epoxy to an average thickness of 16 thousandths of an inch. An abrasion-resistant coating of a minimum of 40 thousandths of an inch would be used for bored road and rail crossings and for horizontal directional drills. The pipe would be subject to charpy v-notch impact testing (a standardized high strain rate test that determines the amount of energy absorbed by a material during fracture) and drop weight tear testing during the manufacturing process. The objective is to use a material that displays high strength at low temperatures. All field welds would be radiographed. A 12-inch diameter pipeline was selected based on hydraulic models, such that it would eliminate the need for an intermediate pump station and reduce associated capital and operating costs. Although the pipeline itself would be buried, aboveground features would include meter stations and launcher/receivers (start and end of the pipeline). Other visual features of the pipeline system would include the following: 4 Note: It is possible that a shorter distance would be deemed necessary in order to avoid a sensitive environmental resource or at the request of an affected landowner, but the distance would not be less than the 50 feet required by federal regulations.  Pipeline markers at all crossings;  Mainline block valve shelters;  Cathodic protection station markers; and  Temporary zinc anode site markers. Mainline block valves would be located approximately every 10 miles to isolate and contain any line leak. In industrial, commercial, and residential areas, the spacing would be reduced to 7.5 miles to further reduce the potential volume of gas that could be released in the event of an accident. Mainline block valves would also be provided on either side of major river crossings, at other waterbody crossings of more than 100 feet (from high water mark to high water mark), and optionally at major road crossings. The conceptual design assumes there would be one mainline block valve at the beginning and one at the end of the pipeline and two in between. Mainline block valves would be equipped for remote operation. Based on electric power availability, valves would be operated by electric motor or gas (nitrogen)-overoil hydraulic actuators. The valves would also have a removable wheel to allow manual operation and would be specified with special trim suitable for CO2 dense phase service. The mainline block valves would be located on high ground, as practicable, to prevent hazard from valve leaks. The pipeline would be designed to assure passage of intelligent internal inspection devices (pigging operations) and have launch and receive facilities for the in-line inspection tools. Crack arrestors would be provided on the pipeline at appropriate spacing (current practice in the industry is 1,000 feet). The pipeline would be cathodically protected by means of impressed current system with deep anode ground beds. 2.5.1.3 Pipeline Construction Construction techniques for the pipeline may include excavated trenching, boring, tunneling, and horizontal directional drilling. DOE would use one of three primary methods to construct crossings of sensitive resources, roads, and railroads. Table 2-9 shows the major highway and road, railroad, waterbody, and wetland crossings that would be required for pipeline construction to the site. The method used to construct pipeline crossings would depend primarily upon the size of the feature being crossed. For stream crossings, the method used would also be dependent upon the presence or absence of water within the feature (e.g., seasonally dry ephemeral and intermittent stream channels). a. This quantitydoes not include intermittent or ephemeral waterbodies. U.S. = United States The three methods that would be used include horizontal directional drilling, jack and bore tunneling, and dry trenching. Horizontal directional drilling would be used to cross major waterbodies (i.e., crossings of perennial streams and ponds or lakes greater than 100 feet in width) and large roads (e.g., highways). Additional horizontal directional drilling may be required due to environmental, land, or constructability requirements. As necessary, geotechnical investigations would be performed prior to the construction of pipeline crossings using horizontal directional drilling to ensure that subsurface conditions can safely support drilling operations. Primary factors in selecting the pipeline crossing profile would include the type of soil and rock to be drilled and the depth of cover material. The minimum depth of cover for waterbodies requiring horizontal directional drilling would be 4 feet as required under 49 CFR 195.248(a). Contingency plans would be developed, as required, for completing waterbody crossings in the event of an unsuccessful horizontal directional drilling. Jack and bore tunneling (also known as pipe ramming) would be used for crossings of railways, roadways, and perennial streams and wetlands, as well as intermittent and ephemeral streams that contained water at the time of construction. The jack and bore tunneling method involves the use of a horizontal bore machine or auger to drill a hole, and a hydraulic jack to push a casing through the hole under the crossing. As the bore proceeds, a steel casing pipe would be jacked into the hole; then the pipeline installed in the casing. The casing would be jacked using a large hydraulic jack in a pit located at one end of the crossing. The jack pit would be excavated and shored.  Dry trenching would only be employed for crossing narrow intermittent and ephemeral stream channels that were devoid of water at the time of construction, such as when a stream feature is seasonally dry or is frozen to the bottom. A field assessment would be made prior to construction at each crossing to determine the presence of water, and weather forecasts would be monitored to evaluate the potential for precipitation events that could lead to temporary water flow within the stream channel. Dry trenching would consist of excavating a trench through the stream channel, laying the pipe down, then burying the pipe with the spoils removed during trench excavation. The pipeline crossing would be as nearly perpendicular to the stream channel as possible to minimize overall linear disturbance to the stream channel. After pipeline installation, the surface would be regraded to match pre-construction contours. The CO2 pipeline would be buried at least 4 feet underground, which is more stringent than required by 49 CFR 195. Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drainage ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least 5 feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture (IDOA) pipeline construction standards and policies. Topsoil would be removed first and stored separately along the pipeline trench segregated from other subsoil. Crossings of other types of pipelines and other underground utilities would require a minimum of 12 inches of separation. However, the minimum separation may be increased to 24 inches where considered prudent based on professional judgment. Existing pipelines would be under-crossed unless over-crossing is specifically permitted by the pipeline owner. All road and railroad crossings would be bored under the road or railroad (i.e., without casings) using heavy wall pipe with abrasion resistant coating. The construction ROW for the pipeline includes the area required to enable movement of construction equipment, staging of materials, and laydown of equipment during the construction period. Figure 2-18 shows recommended pipeline construction ROW cross sections. The construction ROW would be 80 feet wide, although a 100-foot construction ROW may be needed for special requirements such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable. Access to the construction ROW would be provided (as much as possible) from existing roads crossing the pipeline route. The operational ROW is the area that would permanently be maintained throughout the life of the project, which would be 50 feet in width and centered over the pipeline. Figure 2-18. Recommended Construction Right-of-Way Cross Section Tree clearing for ROW preparation would generate cut trunks, limbs, and brush (the amount would depend on width of ROW and extent of wooded areas). The Alliance signed an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the IDOA (IDOA 2012) that identifies mitigation measures that would be implemented during construction:  If trees are to be removed from the ROW, the Alliance would consult with the landowner to determine if there are trees of commercial or other value to the landowner.  If there are trees of commercial or other value to the landowner, the Alliance would allow the landowner the right to retain ownership of the trees with the disposition of the trees to be negotiated prior to the commencement of land clearing.  Unless otherwise restricted by federal, state, or local regulations, the Alliance would follow the landowner's desires regarding the removal and disposal of trees, brush, and stumps of no value to the landowner by burial, etc., or complete removal from any affected property. All construction-related debris and material that are not an integral part of the pipeline would be removed from the landowner's property. Such material to be removed would include litter generated by the construction crews. The estimated number of daily truckloads during construction for material and equipment deliveries, for waste removals, and for workers would be the following:  Material and Equipment Deliveries - 40 to 50 trips per day  Waste Disposal - 2 to 3 trips per day  Worker Traffic - 100 to 150 trips per day All construction work would be conducted in accordance with the conditions and stipulations of applicable federal, state, and local permits, authorizations, and clearances. All necessary approvals would be obtained before the activity in question is undertaken. The construction of the CO2 pipeline would require hydrostatic testing to certify the integrity of the pipeline before it can be put into operation. Hydrostatic testing would be performed in accordance with DOT pipeline safety regulations. Hydrostatic testing would be conducted continuously for a minimum of 8 hours, and include a leak test. Fabricated assemblies would be pre-tested for a minimum of 4 hours. These would be included in the overall pipeline hydrostatic test. If water is used, the pipeline would be filled with water and pressurized to check for any pressure loss that may indicate a leak. Approximately 31,000 gallons of water would be needed for each mile of 12-inch diameter pipe; water may be reused for multiple pipeline sections. Specific water sources for hydrostatic testing have not yet been selected, but the Alliance assumes that adequate sources are available regionally. Hydrostatic testing water would be discharged to local waterways in accordance with an NPDES permit obtained from the IEPA. The NPDES permit would be applied for, and received, from IEPA prior to the start of construction activities. The tested line would be dried using dry air to a dew point of -50oF, which would prevent any residual water in the pipeline from initiating localized corrosion in the pipe. An environmental compliance plan would be developed prior to construction, identifying on a mile-bymile and feature-by-feature basis how all applicable permits and their requirements would be implemented. Environmental inspectors would be deployed on a spread-by-spread basis to ensure adherence to all permit conditions by identifying and rectifying any non-compliance or potential noncompliance concerns as soon as they materialize. The Alliance estimates that construction of a pipeline from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area would take approximately 3 to 4 months with peak activity during the first 1 to 2 months. The Alliance estimates that 150 to 300 workers would be needed for the duration of pipeline construction, working 10 hours per day, 6 days per week. Pipeline contractors would hire from local county labor pools for services and maximize the use of local providers of materials as practicable. 2.5.1.4 Pipeline Operations The CO2 pipeline would transport dense-phase CO2 from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells for permanent geologic storage in the Mt. Simon Sandstone. Although the exact composition of CO2 that would be received from the energy center is not completely defined at this time, the pipeline design requires that at a minimum it must meet the specifications provided in Table 2-10. The Alliance would oversee the operation of the oxy-combustion and CO2 capture processes to ensure that these specifications would be met on a consistent basis other than during startup and shutdown conditions for maintenance. As previously mentioned in Section 2.4.4.2, if CO2 conditions do not meet the required specifications, the Alliance would determine whether the process upset can be accommodated or whether flow to the pipeline should be stopped. The gas would be vented through the stack in the event that the quality requirements could not be met. Venting of CO2 would only occur within the constraints of the air permit. The design flow rate would be 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year (57.3 million standard cubic feet per day). The CO2 would be dehydrated, processed for removal of contaminants, and compressed to 2,100 psig at the Meredosia Energy Center before entering the pipeline. The pipeline design would also include the following assumptions:  The Meredosia Energy Center would supply 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) per year of CO2 (equivalent to 57.3 million standard cubic feet per day flow rate) for transport.  SCADA remote control systemwould be installed.  There would be one metering station at the energy center and one at each injection well. Meter station data would be transmitted to the site control building through the SCADA network. Consistent with standard industry practice, the metering stations would be automated (not staffed). Two Coriolis flow meters would be provided in parallel at each metering station, one working and the other on stand‐by. Meter testing would be conducted ona monthly basis to verify Table 2-10. Proposed CO2 Acceptance Specifications Component Quantity Carbon Dioxide (CO2)   97 percent dry basis  Inert constituents 1 percent Trace constituents  2 percent   Oxygen (O2)  ≤ 20 ppm  Mercury (Hg)  ≤ 2 ppba  Water vapor  ≤ 1 ppm   Total sulfur  ≤ 25 ppm Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)  < 20 ppmb  a. Safe Drinking WaterAct standard. b. Standard specification for pipeline quality CO2. However, no detectible amounts of H2S are expected in the CO2 streamfromthe Meredosia EnergyCenter. CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; Hg = mercury; O2 = oxygen; ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million Note: The CO2 stream could contain other trace metals, which would not be known until additional design work is completed. the accuracy and performance of each liquid meter. Meter stations would be designed for open air service with an overhead shelter for protection against direct exposure to the elements.  The CO2 would be compressed to 2,100 psig before entering the pipeline. System controls would ensure that the pipeline pressure would not drop below 1,200 psig at any point along the route to prevent multiphase flow in the pipeline.  The system would be designed in accordance with American National Standards Institute 900 for valves, flanges, and fittings.  A pipeline leak detection system conforming to American Petroleum Institute standards (API 1130) would be installed.  The maximum ambient temperature of the CO2 would be 90oF with normal between 50 and 70oF, depending on the distance from the energy center (longer distance would result in lower temperature).  Gas analysis would be conducted at the pipeline inlet using a moisture meter and gas chromatograph. Online analysis would be provided for quality monitoring purposes.  A 6-hour uninterruptible power supply would be provided for critical instrumentation.  A programmable logic controller, remote terminal units, analyzers, gas chromatograph and other sensitive instrumentation would be housed in appropriately insulated climate-controlled buildings, fenced and accessible by all-weather roads.  The booster pump building would be totally enclosed with overhead crane and appropriate detectors.  Redundancy would be provided for electrical installations (such as transformers, etc.). Pipeline operations would be monitored on a continuous basis. The control and monitoring of pipeline operations would occur from a central control room located in the site control building at the primary injection well site. The central control room would send command and control signals remotely using the SCADA network to all pump and metering stations and the launcher/receivers in the system. It is assumed that all metering stations would be unmanned. The system would include subsystems for CO2 gas detection, hazardous gas detection, fire detection, flame detection, and smoke detection. In the event of detecting emergency conditions, the system would:    Initiate ventilation system in the localcontrol building, where applicable;  Shutdown running units;  Operate yard and unit valves as required by the level of the emergency;  Shut off (shunt trip) power to the pump building;  Activate audible and visual alarms in the pump and control buildings; and  Activate alarms in central control roomusing the SCADA system. A surveillance and security system would be provided for remote monitoring of the pipeline and the surface facilities fromthe central control room. The system would include the following:  Proximity alarms installed at the main vehicle entrance gate as well as individual building doors;  Security surveillance cameras; and  Microwave intrusion link sensors. A pipeline puncture or rupture resulting in a leak is unlikely based on historic CO2 pipeline data from the DOT’s Office of Pipeline Safety. To minimize this risk, the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 pipeline design includes a leak detection sensitivity system. If a leak is detected, the mainline block valves would shut automatically and virtually instantaneously, isolating the damaged pipeline segment and preventing the flow of CO2 from the energy center and backflow from the injection wells. The maximum amount of CO2 that could escape before the leak could be stopped would be limited to the amount of CO2 contained within the pipeline between the valves. Based on the conceptual design, the maximum distance between mainline block valves would be 10 miles; a 10-mile pipeline segment would contain 18 million standard cubic feet of CO2. Depending on the leak scenario, the volume released could be significantly lower. Pipeline operations would be managed at the primary CO2 injection well site (see Section 2.5.2.2). Operation of the pipeline would be performed in full compliance with applicable DOT rules and regulations and would require regular visual and in-line inspections to ensure safety and integrity. Pipeline patrolling would be by road, by foot, and byhelicopter, contracted to specialist companies. These visual surveys would be conducted every two weeks and would look for signs of leaks (e.g., discolored vegetation, disturbed soil) and potential infrastructure concerns (e.g., exposed pipe at stream crossings). Post-construction monitoring would be conducted (potentially for several years) to ensure that restoration of wetlands and agricultural lands would be undertaken in accordance with all permit and Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement requirements. 2.5.2 CO2 Storage Study Area As noted previously, the Alliance has identified a 5,300-acre site in Morgan County as the proposed CO2 storage study area. The exact locations of the proposed injection wells have not yet been identified; however, the Alliance intends to site them within the borders of the CO2 storage study area as shown in Figure 2-16. The Alliance has evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical and horizontal injection wells at one or two sites. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is currently proposing to construct and operate up to four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site for the annual injection of 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 20year period. The final design of the CO2 injection wells would be verified based on the results of data gathered from a stratigraphic well that was drilled at the CO2 storage study area, other characterization activities, and the results of modeling. The siting, design, construction, and operation of the injection wells and associated infrastructure are addressed below, along with the results of the preliminary CO2 plume modeling. Although the Alliance plans to move forward with a single injection well site consisting of up to four horizontal wells, the impact analysis in the EIS considers both a single injection well site scenario and a scenario with two injection well sites. 2.5.2.1 CO2 Storage Area Siting In its Request for Site Proposal issued on October 25, 2010 (amended November 10, 2010), the Alliance stated that offered sites must be able to meet several geologic storage criteria in order to be considered as a host for the CO2 injection wells (Alliance 2010). These qualifying criteria included the following:  The site must be located above the Mt. Simon Formation in Illinois with no foreseeable risk of subsurface migration of CO2 outside the state of Illinois.  Depth to the Mt. Simon Formation must be at least 3,500 feet below the surface.  There must be at least one primary seal (caprock) greater than 200 feet in thickness, and the primary seal must not be intersected by any known or seismically resolvable faults above the expected plume diameter from up to 43 million tons (39 million metric tons) of injected CO2.5  The site must have the capacity to store up to 43 million tons (39 million metric tons) of CO2 injected over 30 years.  There must be no natural gas storage facilities in the Mt. Simon Formation (or other injection formation) within 20 miles of the proposed site. The Alliance’s Request for Site Proposal also required that sites offered for the geologic storage location meet the following criteria:  Size – The surface area of the site must not be less than 25 contiguous acres based on the need to support one injection well and associated infrastructure, along with the area needed for the visitors, research, and training facilities.  Control – The proposed surface site must be available for use by theAlliance.  Seismic Stability – The proposed surface site musthave low risk from significant seismic events.  Floodplains – The entire proposed surface site must be above the 500-year floodplain to ensure low potential for flood damage to the injection well infrastructure.  Existing Site Hazards – The proposed surface site, whether a greenfield or brownfield site, must be free of hazardous or radioactive chemicals and materials and free of wastes requiring special handling, treatment, or disposal.  Zoning – The proposed surface site must be consistent with current zoning requirements or be capable of being rezoned to meet such requirements in a timeframe consistent with the FutureGen 2.0 schedule. 5 At the time of the Request for Proposal, the project design specified 43 million tons (39 million metric tons) of CO2; however, the current project design proposes injection of 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) over a 20year lifetime.  Environmental Conditions – At least 25 contiguous acres of the proposed surface site must be free of the following: o Wetlands; o Structures that are listed on, or eligible for listing on, the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and be free of known cultural or archeological resources, including Traditional Cultural Properties; and o Known federally-protected species and critical habitat for protected species (excluding migratory birds).  Proximity to Public Access Areas – The proposed surface site must be located outside of and not adjacent to the boundaries of any such area, unless the state or federal owner provides unequivocal permission for such use.  Proximity to Tribal Lands – A proposed surface site located on or adjacent to tribal lands must be supported bythe affected Native American tribe(s).  Access – The Alliance must have sufficient physical access to the land above the plume to implement a rigorous monitoring program. At least 60 percent of the land area above the anticipated CO2 plume must be physically accessible for installation and operation of surface and subsurface monitoring equipment. Access restrictions include, but are not limited to, lakes, rivers, or other bodies of water, public access areas, and infrastructure including roads, buildings, or other developed property.  Public Access Areas – The land area above the anticipated CO2 plume must not be on a public access area, unless the federal or state owner provides unequivocal permission for such use.  Major Bodies of Water – The land area above the anticipated CO2 plume must not intersect major surface bodies of water.  Sensitive Features – The land area above the anticipated CO2 plume must not intersect any sensitive feature. In addition, the Request for Site Proposal described other characteristics that would improve the ability to meet or lower the cost of meeting the objectives of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and explained that sites that had these characteristics would receive higher scores in the site evaluation. These scoring criteria included characteristics relating to orientation, permeability, and capacity of the injection formation; hydrogeological conditions that would decrease the lateral CO2 plume size; ability to meet injectivity targets with the fewest injection wells; penetrations of the primary seals; availability of secondary seals; and subsurface access for monitoring wells. Using these qualifying and scoring criteria, and taking into account other criteria, such as availability of data, stakeholder support, and the results of additional seismic testing, the CO2 storage study area in Morgan County was selected as the preferred location for the CO2 injection wells and the visitor, research, and training facilities. The Alliance initially identified sites in Christian and Douglas counties as alternative locations, though the confirmation of geologic suitability at the Morgan County CO2 storage study area based on stratigraphic well data made it impractical and cost-ineffective to continue to study the Christian County and Douglas County locations (see Section 2.3.4). The Alliance’s Request for Site Proposal and Siting Guidance to Prospective Offerors is provided on their website, which includes siting and scoring criteria (http://www.futuregenalliance.org/). In addition to meeting the qualifying criteria, the proposed CO2 storage study area in Morgan County was primarily selected based on: geologic suitability, surface and subsurface access, pipeline distance from the CO2 source, and stakeholder support. Geologic suitability was determined after performing surface seismic surveys and examining the geology of the site based on existing data. Access was determined by identifying what land was available for the injection wells and where subsurface rights to inject CO2 could be obtained. Stakeholder support was evaluated through a series of stakeholder meetings sponsored and held by the site proponents and the Alliance. The final location of injection wells at the CO2 storage study area would be determined based on results of data gathering performed in the stratigraphic well, other characterization activities, and the results of modeling of reservoir and seal performance. Drilling of the stratigraphic well took place from October 2011 to December 2011 at the site to characterize the geological profile and conditions, and to confirm the design parameters. Discussion of the stratigraphic well activities is provided in Sections 2.5.2.3 and 2.5.2.5. The Alliance is currently entering into agreements with property owners regarding the use of and appropriate compensation for surface land and subsurface pore space. 2.5.2.2 Surface Facilities The CO2 surface facilities are expected to be visited by scientists, engineers, tourists, and dignitaries from across the country and the world. The CO2 injection well site(s) would consist of surface facilities; the injection and monitoring wells; and monitoring, verification, and accounting (MVA) facilities. The site control building and, if needed, a booster pump building would be located at the primary injection well site, and a maintenance and monitoring system building would be required at both the primary and secondary injection well sites, if two sites are used. Surface Facilities Construction The area required for the CO2 injection wells and supporting facilities would occupy up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Up to 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining acreage would be used for access roads to the wells and supporting facilities. The buildings would be one-story tall to minimize site visual impacts, and surface components of the injection wells would be designed to blend in with the surrounding area. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) concepts would be incorporated into the site and building designs and the surface facilities would be LEED-certified. Figures 2-19 and 2-20 present conceptual site plans for the injection well surface facilities. The layout shown in Figure 2-19 represents the primary injection well site for the two-site scenario and also represents the layout for the single-site scenario. Figure 2-20 represents the layout for a secondary injection well site for the two-site scenario. As stated earlier, the Alliance is currently proposing to construct four horizontal injection wells on a single injection well site. If the Alliance moves forward with a single injection well site with multiple horizontal wells, then the secondary injection well site would not be required. Approximately 28 acres would be utilized and disturbed during the construction of the injection and monitoring wells and associated surface facilities. Up to 64 acres would be utilized and disturbed to support the construction of access roads. The footprint of land area disturbance for construction of the surface facilities would be approximately 30,620 square feet (0.7 acres) for the buildings, sidewalks, and parking lot. Aside from these structures, the area affected during construction of the surface facilities would include the construction of a stormwater retention and infiltration basin, a packaged wastewater treatment system, screening berms, and fencing; which would result in an estimated 182,600-square foot (4.2-acre) area of land disturbance during construction. To design and construct the surface facilities, laborneeds are anticipated to be the following:  Site Control Building – 10 employees for 38 weeks  Booster Pump Building – 10 employees for 15 weeks  Well Maintenance and Monitoring Buildings – 5 employees for 4 weeks (each) Figure 2-20. Secondary Injection Well Site Surface Features Conceptual Layout  Parking lot, sidewalks, grading, and landscaping – 8 employees for 5 weeks  Wastewater Treatment (packaged system) – 3 employees for 2 weeks The entrance road would be a 24-foot wide asphalt surface that would allow two cars to pass safely. The road would be designed to occasionally carry a heavy service truck of up to 80,000 pounds. The parking lot would be asphalt and sized for 15 employees with the potential for additional parking for up to 20 visitors plus bus parking with adequate turning radius. Overflow parking would be constructed with pervious pavement. The use of ground source heating for the entrance road, parking lot, and building entrance areas would be considered as an alternative to using road salt for cold weather maintenance. Site access would be restricted with a 6-foot high security fence enclosing roughly 5 acres. Depending on the monitoring layout, the Alliance may elect to fence the primary injection well site and use 10-foot by 10-foot fenced areas for the other monitoring points. If a secondary injection well site is required, it would be accessed by a gravel road and protectedwith a 6-foot fence around thewellhead pad. Since final design is not yet complete, the materials required for construction of the surface facilities are anticipated to be typical of building construction (i.e., concrete, rebar and steel, wood, dry wall, insulation, glass, and roofing material). Materials would be delivered by construction trucks, such as concrete trucks, semi-trucks for steel and building materials, and tandem trucks for asphalt. The estimated quantity of materials and truckloads are presented in Table 2-11. The quantities presented are for the two-site scenario, which would require more space than the single-site scenario and more construction materials. Table 2-11. Surface Facility Construction Materials and Truckloads for Primary and Secondary Injection Well Sites Material  Tons  Truckloads  Concrete  1,400  95  Other materials  35b  Gypsum drywall  100  Bricks  35  Total  5,505  315  Asphalt  2,700  180  Metals  35  5a   Wood  250  Asphalt roofing  50  Plastics  35  a. Metals such as structural steel. b. Other materials areestimated to requirea total of 35 truckloads. Site Control Building The site control building would be located at the primary injection well site approximately 150 feet from one injection well to allow for visitor observation of the well and the booster pump building. Because there is no technical requirement for this distance, local landowner preferences regarding location would be taken into account during final design. The total building footprint would be approximately 5,500 square feet. The site control building structure would be weather proofed for winter and summer. The structure would be constructed with metal stud frames with insulation and brick veneer, pre-stressed insulated concrete panels, or other similar materials, although the Alliance would seek local landowner viewpoints on the final exterior design. Low-height vegetated berms, made from the excess soils removed during site grading, would be used for landscaping to lessen the visual impact of the facility. Vegetation would be local prairie species that are drought-resistant. Deciduous trees would be provided primarily within the parking lot area to reduce heat islanding. The Alliance intends to seek LEED certification for the building. Booster Pump Building If additional pressure is required to facilitate the injection of the CO2 into the storage formation, a booster pump building may be required. If required, the booster pump building would measure approximately 3,120 square feet (78 feet by 40 feet). Although the conceptual design assumes that the booster pump building would be located at the primary injection well site adjacent to the injection well pad, the building could be located elsewhere along the pipeline as it approaches the injection well site(s). The final location of the building would be determined in consultation with local landowners. The building would be enclosed to minimize noise and visual impact on surrounding properties. A noise analysis of the site would be conducted to ensure that noise levels do not exceed noise regulatory standards. It would be weather-proofed for winter and summer and include an overhead crane for pump maintenance. Well Maintenance and Monitoring System Building A well maintenance and monitoring building would be required at each injection well site to supply the well with fluid for annulus pressure. The total area for the building would be 1,000 square feet. For the primary injection well site, the building would be attached to the site control building with a common wall. The well maintenance and monitoring building would be enclosed to minimize noise and visual impacts to surrounding property. Surface Facilities Operation The management and operational personnel are anticipated to include the following:  Area Manager (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Office Manager (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Administrative Assistant (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Engineer (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Safety and Public Awareness Specialist (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  One Call Center Operator (3 shifts/day, 7 days/week)  One Call Pipeliner (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Meter Technician (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Injection Pump Station Technician (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Cathodic Protection Technician (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Floater/Back-up Technician (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  Field Engineer (1 shift/day, 5 days/week)  “Inside” Control Room Operator (3 shifts/day, 7 days/week)  “Inside/Outside” Control Room Operator (3 shifts/day, 7 days/week)  “Floater/Back-up” Control Room Operator (1 shift/day, 5 days/week) An entrance gate would be controlled though use of a pass key for employees and a site operator controller for guests. Cameras would identify and record gate passes. Other gated openings in the fence would be located as desired to access monitoring and inspection points outside the primary fence. In the winter, snow removal and ice treatment for access roads and parking would be contracted. Yard light fixtures would be mounted on 25-foot poles that would be hinged to permit the fixtures to be lowered for maintenance. The yard lighting and building exterior lights would be turned on and off by photocell-controlled contactors located in the site control building. Safeguards would minimize risk of CO2 accumulation from small fugitive leaks (for example, at valve seals) and detect any levels of constituents that pose a risk to human health, safety, and welfare. For instance, all enclosed buildings at the CO2 injection well site(s) would be equipped with high CO2 concentration monitors, oxygen detectors, and flame and fire detection and suppression systems, which can be automatically actuated by local programmable logic controllers or manually activated from a local or central location. Site Control Building The site control building would house the major operational components of the pipeline and injection wells, including the instruments for monitoring and controlling the injection wells, pipeline operations, and site access. A maintenance area would house the equipment needed for routine maintenance of pump equipment, repair parts, and at least one site and pipeline monitoring vehicle. The maintenance area would be approximately 1,600 square feet (40 feet by 40 feet). The facility would also include a conference room, restrooms (handicapped accessible), and an office area for visiting scientists and personnel. Booster Pump Building The CO2 pipeline would enter the site underground and, if additional injection pressure is needed, would emerge at the booster pump building. From there, it would remain aboveground to the injection wells for easy access and visual observation. The building would house the well injection pumps and associated flow meters, flow control valves, and variable speed drive cabinets. It would include an overhead crane for pump maintenance. The injection pump stations would include the following:  The facility would house three 710 horsepower booster pumps that would boost the CO2 to the required injection pressure.  Two of the pumps would be for normal operations and one for backup. Each of the two normal operations pumps would provide the total pumping power required for all of the injection wells and would be designed to operate continuously under full load. The third pump would be sized to replace one of the normal operations pumps.  The pump controls and the remote terminal unit metering output would be housed inside the site control building. The pump operation would be designed for unmanned remote operation but with local override capability. This would include normal operation, shutdown, and re-start.  A variable frequency drive would be provided for each pump.  An emergency generator would be sized to power the pump station and the injection wells. The estimated power requirement for two 710 horsepower booster pumps is 1,111 kW, with continuous operation requiring approximately 799,920 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per month. The booster pump building would have constant, redundant CO2 monitoring, which would interface with a lockout security system and a high volume ventilation system. The lockout security system would not allow entrance into the building if high levels of CO2 are present. Well Maintenance and Monitoring System Building A well maintenance and monitoring building would be required at each injection well site and would have a programmable logic controller cabinet and an uninterruptible power supply cabinet. The well maintenance and monitoring building would contain facilities to supply the injection well(s) at that site with fluid to maintain annulus pressurization. Maintaining the annulus of the well at a higher pressure than the injection pressure ensures that there would be no leakage from the injection well. 2.5.2.3 Injection Wells The Alliance has evaluated several different injection well configurations using both horizontal and vertical wells at one or two injection well sites. After consideration of Vertical Injection Well – An injection site-specific data from the stratigraphic well and computer modeling, well drilled from the ground surface to the Alliance is currently proposing to construct four horizontal a specified depth in a straight (vertical) injection wells at a single injection well site. Figure 2-21 and Figure line. 2-22 show the conceptual design for a vertical and horizontal Horizonta Injection Well – An inject injection well, respectively. All four injection wells would originate l ion well drilled from the ground surface to from one drilling pad and would operate independently of each other. a specified depth and then curved to The Alliance currently plans to propose this configuration in the UIC proceed in a horizontal direction. permit applications (one permit application for each injection well) it intends to file with the USEPA. Pursuant to an Illinois Commerce Commission ruling on the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Alliance is proposing a 20-year injection period. The injection wells would be designed to inject 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year over the 20-year injection period for a total of up to 24 million tons (22 million metric tons).6 Under normal operating conditions for the currently proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal wells, 58 percent of the flow would be split equally between two of the wells while the remaining 42 percent would be split equally between the other two wells. The injection wells would be constructed to provide operational flexibility and backup capability, such that one well could be taken off line while the remaining injectionwell(s) receive 100 percent of the flow. The storage reservoir for CO2 injection and storage is the Mt. Simon Formation, a sandstone formation which is one of the Illinois Basin's major deep saline formations. Figure 2-21 and Figure 2-22 also present the geological stratigraphic column for the CO2 storage study area, showing the depth and thickness of the Mt. Simon Formation. The bottom of the Mt. Simon Formation at the CO2 storage study area has been measured to be 4,417 feet deep. The injection wells would be drilled to 4,000 to 4,500 feet bgs. If vertical injection wells are constructed, they would be over-drilled by approximately 150 feet to allow the casings to be cemented into the Precambrian granite below the Mt. Simon Formation. If horizontal wells are used, as is currently proposed, they would include a vertical section that extends through the Potosi Formation to an approximate depth of 3,150 feet and a 1,500-to 2,000-foot-long horizontal section in the Upper Mount Simon Formation at an approximate depth of 4,030 feet bgs. Under the Alliance’s proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal wells, each well would be oriented along a different azimuth that is approximately 90 degrees from the two nearest wells to facilitate efficient distribution of the CO2 and pore space use. 6 On December 10, 2010, the USEPA published a final rule, “Federal Requirements under the Underground Injection Control Program for Carbon Dioxide Geologic Sequestration Wells” (75 FR 77230) (the “Class VI rule”). Under this rule, the USEPA created a new category of injection wells (Class VI wells) with new federal requirements to allow for injection of CO2 for geologic sequestration to ensure the protection of underground sources of drinking water. In accordance with the Class VI rule, the Alliance would be required to obtain Class VI UIC permits from the USEPA for the FutureGen 2.0 injection wells. In accordance with the Class VI rule, the Alliance would implement a MVA program to monitor the injection and storage of CO2 within the storage reservoir to verify that it stays within the target formation (see Section 2.5.2.4). CO2 = carbon dioxide; ft = feet; in = inch; UIC = underground injection control; USDW = underground source of drinkingwater CO2 = carbon dioxide; ft = feet; in = inch; KCl = potassium chloride; MD = measured depth; TVD = true vertical depth; UIC = underground injection control; USDW = underground source of drinking water Figure 2-22. Proposed Horizontal Injection Well Construction Details The Mt. Simon Formation's positive characteristics for CO2 storage include its isolation from other strata, as well as its depth, lateral continuity, and relative permeability. The Mt. Simon Formation is bounded below by a Pre-Cambrian igneous rock and above by the Eau Claire Formation, which is a mixture of dense dolomite and siltstone layers with low permeability. The lower portion of the Eau Claire Formation (i.e., the Elmhurst Member) is comprised of sandstone and would be considered part of the storage reservoir, while the remainder would be considered caprock. The Franconia Dolomite would act as a secondary seal above the Eau Claire Formation. The Mt. Simon Formation contains a hypersaline aquifer with estimated total dissolved solids of approximately 48,000 parts per million. This high level of total dissolved solids exceeds safe drinking water standards; thus, this formation is not suitable to serve as a future drinking water source in Morgan County. The Mt. Simon Formation has several characteristics that are beneficial for CO2 storage; it is consistently deep (over 3,900 feet), laterally continuous, and a relatively permeable formation that is bounded by several impermeable layers. The total thickness of the injection zone (including both the Mt. Simon Formation and the Elmhurst Member) at the CO2 storage study area is 565 feet thick. The injection would likely focus on the upper third portion of the approximately 500-foot thick reservoir, which is thought to be the most permeable interval and may result in a more effective use of reservoir pore space. However, the perforated interval might also be extended over multiple permeable zones, or even the entire formation, to maximize the injection efficiency of the wells. Ongoing efforts to characterize the geology at the CO2 storage study area, including drilling of a stratigraphic well, hydrologic testing, wireline logging, and vertical seismic profiling, have been used to provide an improved geologic understanding of the site. The Alliance has conducted computer modeling using data from these efforts to simulate the currently proposed configuration of four horizontal injection wells to predict the areal extent and distribution of the CO2 plume within the storage reservoir. The results of this analysis are summarized in Appendix G, Geological Report. This report concludes that the CO2 plume would expand to encompass an area of nearly 4,000 acres over the 20-year injection period, as shown in Figure 2-23. The impact analysis in this EIS conservatively assumes that the plume would be 4,000 to 5,000 acres in size. Because the exact location of the injection wells has not been determined, the exact location of the CO2 plume has not been determined. Any well configuration proposed by the Alliance in its UIC permit applications would result in an underground CO2 plume of between 4,000 and 5,000 acres that would be located within the CO2 storage study area. Injection Well Construction During construction, up to 14 construction workers would work in either three 8-hour shifts or two 12-hour shifts. Staff would include a tool pusher and five to six other drill crew members, in addition to a mud logger, a geologist, and a safety person. There would be up to four Alliance representatives present at the site, including a drilling engineer and a site coordination superintendent. Construction duration is estimated to be 100 to 120 days of drilling per well. Once drilling is initiated, drilling would generally occur 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Figures 2-24 and 2-25 are pictures of typical drill rigs during daylight and nighttime hours. A drill pad would be constructed at each well site, which would initially measure approximately 350 feet by 350 feet for a single injection well; it would be reduced to a final 200-foot by 200-foot pad after drilling is completed (see Table 2-12). For well sites with multiple injection wells, such as that currently proposed by the Alliance, a larger well pad would be used, up to 640 feet by 500 feet that would accommodate all four horizontal injection wells. Larger gravel on a geotextile fabric would act as an underlayment with smaller gravel making up the top portion of the drilling pad. The removed gravel would be reused for the construction of access roads to groundwater and other monitoring points. The drill pad would be surrounded by a berm on three sides and would be designed with drainage and erosion controls to ensure that stormwater is properly managed. These controls would include covering the berms with topsoil and planting grass seed; placing erosion control blankets on slopes, berms, and ditches around the drilling pad; and seeding stockpiled soil. Lined earthen pits would contain any excess fluids generated during drilling, discarded water used in the cementing process, and spent drilling mud from mud change-outs. The pits, which would measure approximately 100 feet by 60 feet by 10 feet, would be constructed after the drilling pads are constructed. The earthen pits would be lined with 30-mil high-density polyethylene plastic sheeting with welded seams to prevent infiltration of fluids into the subsurface. CO2= carbon dioxide; yr = year Figure 2-23. Predicted Areal Extent of CO2 Plume After the drilling pad is constructed, drilling equipment and support facilities would be installed at the well site. Major drilling equipment components would include the drilling rig, a fuel tank, water tanks, pumps for circulating drilling mud, steel pits (tanks) for mud cleaning (i.e., solids settling) and mixing the drilling mud, pipe racks for holding drilling pipe, an electrical generator, and lights. In addition to the drilling rig equipment, the injection well site would include two temporary office trailers and two house trailers. Figure 2-24. Drill Rig during Daytime Operations Figure 2-25. Drill Rig during Nighttime Operations The injection wells would likely be drilled with a conventional drilling rig and mud system using the same methods and principles as those commonly used in the oil and gas well-drilling industry. Drilling would involve using a drilling fluid (mud) system. Mud lubricates the bit and drill string, removes drill cuttings from the wellbore, and assists with pressure control. A mudlogging trailer equipped with gas-monitoring instrumentation would be used while drilling all sections below the conductor casing to monitor for natural gas and oil, plot drilling penetration rates, and describe the cuttings in the drilling returns. During the drilling of the injection wells, the Alliance anticipates that the equipment onsite (in addition to the drill rig) would include generators, compressors, backhoes, forklifts, and bulldozers. Approximately 22 semi-trucks would be required to move the drill rig to the site. The largest load would be approximately 87 feet long. The average load would be 100,000 pounds, and the heaviest load would be approximately 160,000 pounds. Trucks would visit the site to deliver fuel, cement, and casing. Trucks would also visit the site during wireline logging, hydrogeologic testing, and coring activities. These activities would occur infrequently and an average of a single truck a day to support these activities is anticipated. Vehicles would also visit the site to service the portable toilets. At completion of the drilling operation, trucks would be used to dispose of cuttings. The temporary office trailers would be powered by a field generator and would have temporary sanitary services. Water would be provided to the trailers from an onsite water tank. The stratigraphic well required approximately 350,000 gallons of water for drilling fluids, another 840,000 gallons to account for zones of lost circulation, and an additional 72,000 to 80,000 gallons to prepare the cement. Thus, the total water demand for the stratigraphic well was approximately 1.27 million gallons (see Section 2.5.2.5). Since the injection wells would be a larger diameter pipe in comparison to the stratigraphic well, it is assumed that the injection well would require additional water (see Section 3.15, Utilities). The fresh water for the injection wells would be obtained from the North Morgan County Water Cooperative (Co-Op), as it was for the stratigraphic well drilling. Construction of the injection wells would generate up to 700 cubic yards of cuttings. In addition, the drilling fluids and fluid removed from the formation during development and testing would need disposal as a non-hazardous waste. These would be fluids with salinities in excess of 150,000 parts per million. The Alliance would implement BMPs during construction of the injection wells. These practices would include spill prevention and stormwater runoff management. For spill prevention, the drilling contractor would be required to use secondary containment for all fuel storage tanks to prevent leaked fuel from entering the environment. The preferred method for achieving secondary containment is to use double-walled tanks. If double-walled fuel tanks are not available, lined dikes with a capacity of 1.5 times the volume of the storage tank(s) would be used. Synthetic (plastic) sheeting (30 mil thick) would be laid down beneath all mud pits (steel tanks) and associated circulation equipment, including mud pumps to prevent releases of drilling fluids to the ground surface. The drilling contractor would also install a synthetic liner beneath the rig (rig underliner). The drilling contractor would maintain an inventory of absorbent materials (e.g., pads and booms) in order to respond to any release of engine oil, hydraulic oil, diesel fuel, gasoline, antifreeze, drilling fluids, or any other contaminants as a result of the driller’s activities. Any spills involving fuel or other liquid or dry chemicals would be cleaned up immediately, including any affected soil. All used spill cleanup materials as well as any affected soil would be contained and disposed of properly. In order to properly manage stormwater runoff during injection well installation, the Alliance would obtain a General NPDES Permit for Construction Site Activities from the IEPA. As noted above, the drilling pads would be constructed using stormwater and erosion control measures, including earthen berms around the drilling pads covered with topsoil and seeded with grass; erosion control blankets on slopes, berms, and ditches around the drilling pad; and seeding of stockpiled soil. Surface runoff originating upslope of the drilling pad would be routed beneath the pad through a standpipe with an inlet riser located upslope of the drilling pad connected to a 12-inch pipe buried beneath the drilling pad. The Alliance has examined the potential for encountering drilling hazards. The closest wells that penetrate the Mt. Simon Sandstone are in the Morgan County Waverly Field, approximately 12 miles southeast of the CO2 storage study area. However, there are several shallow oil and gas producing zones in the Morgan County area, as well as several zones of potential lost circulation. Small volumes of gas or oil are likely to be encountered in the Pennsylvanian section (see Figures 2-21 and 2-22) to a depth of about 350 feet. Hydrocarbons are expected to exist to a depth of about 1,200 feet. There are no records of over-pressured oil and natural gas reservoirs near the proposed site, but all proper safeguards would be used while drilling the well. A mud logging unit equipped with a gas detector and a gas chromatograph would be used to monitor the drill cuttings retrieved from below the conductor casing. Blowout preventers and choke manifolds would be used at all times when drilling below the conductor casing for well control in the event excessive gas is encountered. Pennsylvanian-aged coals and Mississippian-aged formations at the CO2 storage study area may contain traces of hydrogen sulfide. A hydrogen sulfide emergency action plan would be reviewed with all onsite workers and a written copy would be maintained in the mud logger’s trailer and in the field office trailer. When drilling through potential hydrogen sulfide-bearing zones, all drilling hands would be equipped with a personal monitor and would be instructed in proper safety response by a hydrogen sulfide safety consulting company representative. In the unlikely event hydrogen sulfide is encountered, the safety consulting company would determine the appropriate actions to be taken by the drilling crew and other onsite workers. Windsocks would be set up by the drilling contractor. Lost mud circulation, which occurs when the drilling fluid flows into a geological formation instead of returning up the annulus, may be encountered in at least three geological formations in the proposed well: the Potosi Dolomite, the Ironton Sandstone, and the Borden Formation (located within the zone labeled “Warsaw” shown in Figures 2-21 and 2-22). If circulation is lost in one of these or other zones, material would be added to thicken the drilling fluid. If circulation cannot be restored with such material alone, the zone(s) would be squeezed with a sodium silicate solution and/or cement until circulation is restored and drilling can resume. Injection Well Operations The operations phase, with active injection and monitoring, would begin in 2017 and end in 2022 with DOE funding; however, commercial operations would be expected to continue for 20 years. The Alliance would be financially responsible for post-injection monitoring of the underground CO2 for up to 50 years after injection ceases in accordance with the UIC permits. In addition to the 15 onsite staff managing and monitoring pipeline and injection well operations, the Alliance expects that two of the staff personnel (3 shifts per day, 7 days per week) would be onsite to continually monitor injection operations. Alternatively, the Alliance could acquire the services of a vendor that would remotely and continuously monitor the injection operations. Maintenance operations for CO2 injection wells may include swabbing; sand removal; replacing and repairing tubing, the packer, valves, and sensors; repairing corroded casing; and remedial cementing (USEPA 2011a). The typical wastes generated from such maintenance are brine fluids and sand. Acid may be employed to remove scaling, if scaling is present in the well hole, in which case acid and scaling residue would be generated. The rigs used for well maintenance are mobile units, which generate wastes such as hydraulic fluids, rig wash water, spent solvents, used lubricating oil, and filters. The frequency of maintenance operations would depend on data from well monitoring, but external mechanical integrity tests are planned at not less than 5-year intervals and maintenance activity would likely coincide with those activities. The truck traffic from the well maintenance would consist of approximately 20 vehicles associated with the maintenance rig. The solid waste generated from maintenance activities would be transported in dump trucks and would be properly disposed in landfills. The liquid waste from maintenance would be collected and transported in vacuumtanker trucks and hauled to a wastewater treatment plant. The volume of waste material generated during well maintenance would depend on pipe and equipment degradation. While the volume would vary greatly from well to well, it is expected that up to 40 tanker trucks with a capacity of 3,000 gallons each would be required for transporting liquid wastes and up to 20, 20-yard roll-off dumpsters would be required for transporting solid wastes for each maintenance operation. 2.5.2.4 Monitoring, Verification, and Accounting An extensive MVA program, including monitoring activities required by the Class VI UIC regulations, would be established in accordance with the Class VI UIC regulations to monitor the injection and storage of CO2 to verify that it stays within the storage reservoir. The MVA monitoring program would assess the potential for any migration that could adversely affect the shallow underground sources of drinking water (USDWs) or surface or near-surface ecological conditions. Early detection of any storage performance issues would allow for early action to address them through engineering or operational adjustments. The primary objectives of the monitoring program would be the following:  Track the lateral extent of dense phase CO2 within the storage reservoir.  Characterize any geochemical or geomechanical changes that occur within the reservoir and overlying caprock that may affect containment.  Determine whether the injected CO2 is effectively contained within the reservoir.  Verify that there are no negative environmental impacts. The MVA program would meet injection control permitting requirements and requirements that DOE may impose. Prior to the initiation of injection operations, the Alliance would design and implement the monitoring program to address all requirements of the Class VI UIC regulations and the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule. Under subpart RR of the UIC Class VI rule, facilities conducting geologic sequestration are required to report the amount of CO2 received, develop and implement a USEPA-approved MVA plan, and report the amount of CO2 sequestered using a mass balance approach. In addition, the Class VI rule requires operators of Class VI wells to develop, gain approval for, and implement five project-specific plans, including: an Area of Review (AoR) and Corrective Action Plan, a Testing and Monitoring Plan, an Injection Well Plugging Plan, a Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan, and an Emergency and Remedial Response Plan. These plans would outline the monitoring techniques that would be implemented in support of the project. Monitoring procedures may be added or removed, or the duration of monitoring activities may be changed depending on the characteristics of the CO2 plume. The Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan are implemented to ensure that the well owner/operator has approval from the UIC Program Director for the procedures to be followed after injection operations cease. The Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan would also help identify the appropriate types and amounts of data needed to verify that the CO2 plume and pressure front do not endanger USDWs, and it would support a determination of whether conditions warrant site closure and therefore an end to post-injection site care (i.e., there is no longer a risk of endangerment to USDWs). The plan would identify the types and duration of monitoring that would occur; the minimum post-injection site care duration is 50 years unless otherwise approved by the UIC Program Director. The Emergency and Remedial Response Plan would identify the actions that would be necessary in the unlikely event of an emergency at the site. The plan would ensure that site operators know which entities are to be notified and what actions would need to be taken to expeditiously mitigate any emergency situation and protect human health and safety and the environment. The specific actions that would need to be taken would depend on the initiating event and any resulting effects. As documented in the plans addressed above, the MVA program would include monitoring that starts before injection activities are initiated and continues throughout the project and after closure of the injection wells. As part of the MVA program, the Alliance would establish baseline measurements of natural CO2 at the site of the injection wells and in the soil, groundwater, vegetation, subsurface, and atmosphere. Soil gas monitoring would be used to evaluate baseline CO2 concentrations and would provide a means of assessing potential increases in CO2 concentration at the surface during operations. The Alliance identified preliminary locations for soil gas monitoring within the CO2 storage study area and screened these areas for the presence of cultural and biological resources. No cultural resources or threatened or endangered species were found at these locations (see Appendix B, Consultation Letters, and Appendix F, Cultural Surveys). Soil gas monitoring would involve the installation of a shallow probe up to 5 feet in depth, which would be used to conduct long-term monitoring of soil gas. Other planned monitoring may include 10 to 15 permanent surface monitoring stations for measuring injection-related ground surface deformation by interferometric synthetic aperture radar, gravity surveys, tilt meters, and differential global positioning systems. Locations for these monitoring stations have not yet been specified. Note that surface levels routinely change from agricultural practices, water well withdrawals, and gas well withdrawals. Surface changes from CO2 storage would be measured in millimeters and, if present, would not be visible to the human eye. The Alliance has characterized the injection and confining zones and designed the injection wells to minimize the potential of a CO2 release. If, however, an adverse event were to occur during construction or operation, the Alliance would deploy a variety of emergency or remedial responses, depending on the characteristics of the event (e.g., the location, type, and volume of a release). The immediate response would be to stop drilling or injection, in order to assess the situation. The Alliance would then conduct an investigation to determine the cause of the event by reviewing the monitoring records, checking the well casing, annulus seals and down-hole pressure, or performing geophysical surveys. Depending on the cause of the event, several remediation solutions could be implemented, including repairing the well casing, lowering the reservoir pressure by removing brine or CO2, increasing the upstream reservoir pressure (e.g., creating a hydraulic barrier), diverting the CO2 stream, or modifying the injection flow rate or quantity. In certain situations, an injection well could be sealed with cement, or USDW groundwater remediation could be implemented if necessary. The individual procedures, based on the event, would be described in detail in the MVA plan, which will be included with the UIC Class VI permit applications. In addition, the data collected from the MVA program would allow the Alliance to proactively manage the CO2 plume so that it remains beneath the CO2 storage study area. In the unlikely event that monitoring indicates that the plume has the potential to migrate off the study area, the Alliance could make adjustments to the injection rate or the duration of the injection period to prevent this from happening. Monitoring Wells The MVA monitoring program would require a network of monitoring wells that would be used for containment monitoring and CO2 plume tracking. The wells would be designed to confirm the ongoing integrity of the primary caprock seal and assess the potential for any identified migration that could adversely affect the quality of the shallow underground drinking water aquifers or surface or near-surface ecological conditions. The monitoring wells would be used to track the lateral extent of supercritical CO2 within the targeted reservoir, characterize any geochemical or geomechanical changes that occur within the reservoir and overlying caprock that may affect containment, and determine whether the injected CO2 is effectively contained within the reservoir. The monitoring wells would be located in accordance with the requirements of the USEPA’s Class VI UIC permits. Table 2-12 lists the injection and monitoring wells that the Alliance expects to construct and operate, and describes the land area that could be affected. Any monitoring wells extending into the storage reservoir would be designed with an effective, long-term seal through the overlying caprock. The conceptual monitoring network design is shown in Figure 2-26. It is anticipated that the monitoring well network would consist of the following wells, at a minimum:  Two single-level wells would be located near the predicted lateral extent of the 20-year CO2 plume.  One multi-level deep well would be located within the predicted lateral extent of the 3- to 5-year CO2 plume. This well would be designed to measure pressures and geochemistry at several different layers vertically above the caprock.  One above-confining-zone early detection monitoring well would be installed within the first permeable interval above the Eau Claire Siltstone/Shale Unit (likely in the Galesville Dolomite or Ironton Sandstone, if present). The well would be located within 100 to 200 feet of one of the injection wells.  Three vertical seismic profiling deep monitoring wells would be installed near the predicted lateral extent of the 5-year CO2 plume. The objectives of these wells are to monitor the extent of the CO2 reservoir during injection.  Three shallow wells (98 to 657 feet total depth) would be installed for microseismic monitoring.  Up to 10 nearby farm or residential wells would also be monitored.7 a Two wells denote an injection and monitoring well co-located within one pad. The monitoring well would be an above-confining zone early detection monitoring well. b This assumes that the stratigraphic well would act as aMt. Simon Formation multi-level monitoring well for the first injection well. Note: This table reflects estimates for two injection well sites, since it represents a more conservative scenario (i.e. larger surface area) for the purposes ofimpact analysis. Underthe single well site scenario,a larger well pad (up to 640 feet by500 feet)would be required. ft = feet; mi = miles Monitoring Well Construction Construction of the monitoring wells required for MVA activities would be conducted in a similar manner to that described for the injection wells. The footprint areas of disturbance are presented in Table 2-12. The water required and waste generated would also be similar to the injection wells, but in amounts proportional to their diameters and depths. Communications are intended to be wireless; however, new electrical lines may be constructed to reach each monitoring well site, in which case approximately 2 miles of new line would be installed. For low 7 The Alliance would monitor for major cations (aluminum, barium, calcium, iron, potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium, silicon); RCRA trace metals (antimony, arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, selenium, thallium); anions (chloride, bromide, fluoride, sulfate, nitrate, carbonate): gravimetric total dissolved solids; alkalinity; dissolved inorganic carbon; total organic carbon; stable isotopes ratios of deuterium/hydrogen, carbon 13/carbon 12, and oxygen 18/oxygen 16; perfluorocarbon, sulfonate tracers; pH; specific conductance; and temperature. voltage rural lines, pole spacing of 320 feet can be assumed. With 320-foot pole spacing, 33 wooden single poles would be placed. Pole placement would be along existing roads or new access roads. An alternative for supplying electricity to monitoring wells would be photovoltaic solar panels with batteries at each monitoring well location. This would decrease the total construction impact, although it would entail higher maintenance cost and activity over the life of the project. Note: Conceptual monitoring welllayout shown in this figure is based on the injection well configuration with two injection well sites. Figure 2-26. Monitoring Well Network Conceptual Layout Monitoring Well Operations Monitoring operations would be performed at the monitoring wells in accordance with the Class VI UIC permits. Monitoring would be performed throughout the project and during the post-injection monitoring period. The frequency and type of monitoring operations has not yet been determined, but would involve the types of MVA technologies addressed above. Stratigraphic Well (InterimAction) Under its cooperative agreement with DOE, the Alliance proposed to drill a stratigraphic well at the CO2 storage study area to obtain subsurface data regarding, among other things, the porosity and permeability of the Mt. Simon Formation at that specific location. DOE determined that the proposed activities were needed for the purposes of data collection and would be allowable under NEPA as interim actions, because they would not have an adverse environmental impact or limit the choices of reasonable alternatives for the project. The Alliance proposed to construct the stratigraphic well on 5 acres or less of privately owned land at the CO2 storage study area in Alexander, Illinois. In conjunction with the construction, the Alliance also proposed to make road improvements at the intersection of Beilschmidt Road and County Road 123, as well as along Beilschmidt Road, west of County Road 123, and on a privately owned farm road to allow access of heavy equipment to the stratigraphic well site on the property. All affected property owners agreed to allow the Alliance the use their properties for these purposes. DOE’s approval was based on the following factors considered in its environmental review:  The proposedstratigraphic well site is not within a floodplain.  Results from a field study confirmed that the proposed site is not located in a wetland (see Appendix D, Wetland Surveys [D3]). A non-jurisdictional strip of grassy vegetation is present along the west side of a stream more than 200 feet from the stratigraphic well pad area. The stream is a tributary of Indian Creek and is a jurisdictional wetland by definition. The grassy strip ranges in width from approximately 5 feet at its narrowest point to more than 10 feet at its widest points, and it serves as a buffer between agriculturally-disturbed soils on its west side and the stream on its east side.  Results from a survey confirmed that there are no federally-listed or state-listed plant or animal species or critical habitat located on or adjacent to the proposed site (see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E4]).  Although the site and surrounding acreage were assumed to be prime or unique farmland, topsoil would be stockpiled, and the area would be restored following the removal of the drilling equipment, except for a portion of the gravel pad and an access road needed for long-term monitoring.  There are no state or national parks, forests, conservation areas, or other areas of recreational, ecological, scenic, or aesthetic importance on or adjacent to the proposed site.  There are no wild and scenic rivers or other potentially sensitive resources (e.g., timber, range, minerals, fish, wildlife, waterbodies, or aquifers) on, below, or adjacent to the proposed site.  Based on the results of a field survey of the proposed site, the Illinois SHPO agreed that the property does not include any sites having historic, archaeological, or architectural significance (including sites on or eligible for the NRHP and the National Registry of Natural Landmarks).  There are no Native American tribes or traditional cultural properties located on or adjacent to the proposed well site. In accordance with the proposed activities approved by DOE, the Alliance initiated drilling of the stratigraphic well in October 2011 and completed the stratigraphic well in December 2011. The drilling of the stratigraphic well involved the following specific activities:  Minor improvements to approximately 1.2 miles of Beilschmidt Road, west of County Road 123. These improvements consisted of improvements to the intersection of County Road 123 and Beilschmidt Road, including construction of pullouts along Beilschmidt Road, and widening of 90-degree turns to accommodate truck traffic. At the landowners request, these improvements remained in place following completion of drilling.  Minor improvements to approximately 1 mile of a farm road to allow access to the property. The existing dirt road was compacted and surfaced with gravel for 12 feet in width.  Construction of approximately 1 mile of a water supply line from a connection on Beilschmidt Road to the stratigraphic well drill pad. This temporary, aboveground water line was located partially within the non-jurisdictional grassy strip. Impacts to this grassy strip were minimized by hand-delivering supplies during construction and using low pressure single-seat all-terrain vehicles as needed. All aboveground temporary piping was removed after drilling operations werecompleted.  Site preparation such as grading and construction of an in-ground reserve pit measuring approximately 100 feet long, 50 feet wide, and 12 feet deep. Topsoil was stockpiled in a berm for later site restoration and to provide a noise barrier for the benefit of nearby residents.  Removal of a disused and deteriorating shed at the request of the landowner. A debris material, such as steel, was recycled to the fullest extent possible; any remaining debris was trucked to a nearby landfill.  Construction of a compacted gravel drill pad approximately 350 feet by 350 feet in size. In addition to the well, the drill pad accommodated associated equipment and several trailers.  Transportation of equipment, materials, and workers to and from the proposed site. Truck traffic occurred during construction of road improvements, site preparation, construction of the drilling rig, removal of the drilling rig, and site restoration. During the construction of the road improvements and site preparation, truck traffic was limited to the hours between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. and occurred six daysa week. The increase in truck traffic was temporary.  Drilling of the stratigraphic well approximately 4,800 feet deep. The Alliance obtained a well-drilling permit from the IDNR, Division of Oil and Gas. A drill rig was onsite for approximately 150 days (a large rig was onsite for approximately 90 days and a smaller rig was onsite for an additional approximately 60 days). During that time, noise and vibrations were generated 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for a total of approximately 90 days. Site layouts were adjusted to mitigate potential noise impacts; this included placement of the stockpiled topsoil in a berm and placement of trailers to form noise barriers between the site and local residents. Affected landowners and residences were informed of the potential for temporary noise and vibration disturbances prior to the start of construction. The stratigraphic well was lined with steel pipe, which is readily available. All wastes generated were non-hazardous and were disposed of at local disposal facilities. There are at least two solid waste disposal facilities within 50 miles of the stratigraphic well site.  Removal of equipment and restoration of construction area after completion of the drilling. A small portion of the gravel pad surrounding the stratigraphic well and an access road remains for long-term access to the well for monitoring purposes. The remainder of the site would be restored to its original condition. Data from the stratigraphic well confirmed that the local geology is suitable for CO2 storage. This data will be included as part of the Class VI UIC permit applications to the USEPA which is currently being developed by the Alliance. 2.5.3 Visitor, Research, and Training Facilities The Alliance would construct and operate visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the educational facilities)at suitable locations in the Jacksonville area to support public outreach and communication, and to provide training and research opportunities associated with near-zero emissions power and CO2 capture and storage technologies. These facilities would:  Familiarize visitors with the inner workings of the oxy-combustion facility, the CO2 pipeline, and the CO2 storage project areas, as well as other local points of interest.  Provide research opportunities focused on monitoring processes and results, including improvements to monitoring system designs.  Educate and train trade workers, technicians, engineers, and scientists to manage and monitor CO2 sequestration operations and aboutnear zero emission power generation technologies. The conceptual design assumes that a single facility would house the visitor center and research functions and that a second facility would house the training function. The facilities may be co-located. The Alliance would work with local stakeholders to identify the location or locations that would be advantageous to the FutureGen 2.0 Project and to the local community. 2.5.3.1 Educational Facilities Construction The proposed site or sites for the educational facilities would be areas that have been previously disturbed, with utilities (e.g., electricity, telecommunications, water, and sewer) located on or immediately adjacent to the site or sites. These educational facilities could involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination of new construction and rehabilitation. However, for purposes of impact analyses in this EIS, DOE assumes a worst-case scenario involving all new building construction. The Alliance intends that the educational facilities would be LEED-certified. Design, construction, and maintenance would strive to integrate the principles of universal and sustainable design and advanced energy technology as appropriate and feasible. The materials would be typical for new building construction; concrete, steel, wood, dry wall, insulation, glass, and roofing material. Visitor and Research Center The Alliance assumes the visitor and research center would be a single story building (for a scenario with the largest surface area disturbance). This would include approximately 22,000 square feet for the building; 5,000 square feet for sidewalks; and 30,000 square feet for the parking lot. This results in a total land disturbance of 57,000 square feet or approximately 1.3 acres. The land area disturbed during construction would be approximately 85,000 square feet or 2.0 acres. The parking lot would include space for at least two buses and single spaces for 25 vehicles. The estimated labor to design and construct a new visitor and research center (as opposed to renovating an existing building), including the building, parking lot, site grading, and landscaping, would be 95,000 labor hours. The design is estimated to take 9 months and employ an average of 5 people. The construction is estimated to take 52 weeks and employ an average of 42 workers. There would be an estimated 400 truck trips needed during construction for material delivery. The debris generated during the construction of a 22,000 square-foot building is estimated to be 43 tons (3.89 pounds per square foot) (USEPA 1998). Training Facility The Alliance assumes that the training facility would be a single story building (for a scenario with the largest surface area disturbance). This would include approximately 20,000 square feet for the building; 5,000 square feet for sidewalks; and 20,000 square feet for the parking lot. This results in a total land disturbance of 45,000 square feet or approximately 1.0 acres. The land area disturbed during construction would be approximately 67,000 square feet or 1.5 acres. The parking lot would include space for at least one bus and single spaces for 35 vehicles. The estimated labor to design and construct a new training facility (as opposed to renovating an existing building), including the building, parking lot, site grading, and landscaping, is 79,000 labor hours. The design is estimated to take 7.5 months and employ an average of 5 people. The construction is estimated to take 52 weeks and employ an average of 35 workers. There would be an estimated 400 truck trips needed during construction for material delivery. The debris generated during the construction of a 20,000 square-foot building is estimated to be 39 tons (3.89 pounds per square foot) (USEPA 1998). 2.5.3.2 Educational Facilities Operations Visitor and Research Center The Alliance assumes that the visitor and research center would employ seven full-time employees as follows: a research center director, an operations director, an administrative assistant, a clerk, a receptionist/information desk, an information technology employee, and a maintenance employee. Approximately 10 outside researchers could be accommodated onsite at any one time. The visitor and research center would be open 6 days a week for 9 hours a day. An estimate of 10,000 to 20,000 annual visitors would be anticipated with a significant percentage of that number being from local students arriving in buses. The visitor and research center is expected to have a total annual energy use of less than 1,480,000 thousand British thermal units (Btu) or 435,000 kWh for the building, and use less than 8,000 therms of natural gas for space and water heating, where no geothermal heating was employed. The annual water use is projected as 270,000 gallons (assuming 15 gpd for each employee and researcher and 10 gallons per visitor) and annual wastewater generation is estimated as 270,000 gallons. Training Facility The Alliance assumes that the training facility would employ 15 full-time employees as follows: 10 training employees, an operations director, an administrative assistant, a clerk, an IT employee, and a maintenance employee. The training facility would be open 12 hours a day forsix days a week. The training facility is expected to have a total annual energy use of less than 1,350,000 thousand Btu or 400,000 kWh for the building, and use less than 2,000 therms of natural gas for space and water heating, where no geothermal heating was employed. The annual water use is projected as 215,000 gallons (assuming 15 gpd for each employee and researcher and 10 gallons per student) and annual wastewater generation is estimated as 215,000 gallons. 2.5.4 Decommissioning The project would be designed for 20 years of operation. The removal of the project facilities from service, or decommissioning, may range from “mothballing” to the removal of all equipment and facilities, depending on the conditions at the time. The process would involve decommissioning all surface facilities, including connections between the energy center and the injection wells. All exposed pipes, along with other surface facilities, would be decommissioned and may be removed during site closure. The UIC Class VI regulations require the Alliance to notify the UIC Program Director in writing at least 120 days prior to site closure and cessation of site core activities and provide any proposed changes to the Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan. The regulations also require the Alliance to submit a Site Closure Report within 90 days of authorization of site closure by the UIC Program Director. The purpose of the report is to document appropriate closure procedures, as well as information concerning injection well operation, which may be ofinterest to future land owners and planners. The Alliance would plug and abandon all injection wells in accordance with the Injection Well Plugging Plan approved by the UIC Program Director during the permitting process and updated as appropriate. In accordance with the UIC Class VI regulations, the Alliance would submit to the UIC Program Director an NOI to Plug 60 days prior to commencement of plugging. The Alliance would also submit a Plugging Report to the UIC Program Director 60 days after completion of plugging. The Alliance would conduct post-injection monitoring activities in accordance with the Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan approved by the UIC Program Director as discussed above under Injection Well Operations. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS This chapter describes the existing physical, biological, cultural, social, and economic conditions within the ROI for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. For each resource area, the chapter describes the ROI, the method of analysis and factors considered, and the potential direct and indirect impacts of the proposed action and the no action alternative in relation to the existing conditions (the baseline). The chapter addresses the potential environmental consequences of actions at the Meredosia Energy The Region of Influence (ROI) defines the extent of the areas where direct effects from construction and operation may be experienced, and it encompasses the areas where indirect effects from the proposed project would most likely occur. Center, the CO2 pipeline corridor, the CO2 storage study area, and the educational facilities, based on the project features described in Chapter 2, Proposed Action and Alternatives. The extent of the ROI varies by resource depending upon the scope of potential impacts on respective resources. For example, Air Quality would have a broader ROI, because air emissions travel many miles, while Physiography and Soils would have a more restrictive ROI, because impacts are more localized to the areas of physical disturbance.  This chapter is organized into subsections for 19 resource areas, as listed below:  Air Quality (Section 3.1)  Climate and Greenhouse Gases (Section 3.2)  Physiography and Soils (Section 3.3)  Geology (Section 3.4)  Groundwater (Section 3.5)  Surface Water (Section 3.6)  Wetlands and Floodplains (Section 3.7)  Biological Resources (Section 3.8)  Cultural Resources (Section 3.9)  Land Use (Section 3.10)  Aesthetics (Section 3.11)  Materials and Waste Management (Section 3.12)  Traffic and Transportation (Section 3.13)  Noise and Vibration (Section 3.14)  Utilities (Section 3.15)  Community Services (Section 3.16)  Human Health and Safety (Section 3.17)  Socioeconomics (Section 3.18)  Environmental Justice (Section 3.19) Characterization of Potential Impacts Effects of Evolving Project Design As noted at the beginning of Chapter 2, it is important to recognize that the FutureGen 2.0 Project has evolved since it was initially developed in 2011 and will continue to evolve as the Alliance works with local landowners and identifies cost-saving opportunities. Refinements in the final design are expected to affect assumptions relating to the analysis of impacts in this chapter. Examples of potential changes resulting from future refinements include:  The surface footprint for injection well facilities is expected to be smaller than analyzed in the EIS.  The construction of horizontal wells may enable the Alliance to use a single injection well site, or the two injection well sites may be located in closer proximity (although, the size of the subsurface CO2 plume is not expected to increase).  The final pipeline route may change slightly; however, the same sighting criteria would be employed and it would be sited within the pipeline corridor. Therefore, the preliminary design described in Chapter 2 and analyzed in this EIS is expected to reflect conservative, bounding parameters for critical features, which would not change substantially such that the impacts described in this chapter would be exceeded. Wherever possible, potential impacts associated with the proposed action and the no action alternative are quantified. Where it is not possible to quantify impacts, a qualitative assessment of potential impacts is presented. The following descriptors are used qualitatively to characterize impacts on respective resources:  Beneficial – Impacts would improve or enhance the resource.  Negligible – No apparent or measurable impacts would be expected; may also be described as “none” if appropriate.  Minor – The action would have a barely noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource.  Moderate – The action would have a noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource. This category could include potentially significant impacts that would be reduced to a lesser degree by the implementation of mitigation measures.  Substantial – The action would have obvious and extensive adverse effects that could result in potentially significant impacts on a resource despite mitigation measures. Additionally, impacts may consist of direct or indirect effects:  Direct impacts are defined as those caused by the action and occurring at the same time and place. Examples include habitat destruction, soil disturbance, air emissions, and water use.  Indirect impacts are defined as those caused by the action, but occurring later in time or farther removed in distance from the action. Examples include changes in surface water quality resulting from soil erosion, and alteration of wetlands resulting from changes in surface water quantity. Context and Intensity of Impacts Context and intensity are taken into consideration in determining a potential impact’s significance as defined in 40 CFR 1508.27. The context of an impact takes into account the ROI, the affected interests, and the locality. For example, a site-specific action is more likely to have a significant effect on the immediate environment or population within the ROI than on a wider geographic region. However, some aspects, such as GHG emissions, may have implications for a broader geographic area (e.g., global). The intensity of a potential impact refers to the severity of the impact and should consider:   Beneficial and adverse impacts;   Degree of effects on human health and safety;  Proximity of, and degree to which actions may adversely impact, protected features or unique characteristics of the geographic area (e.g., protected species and their habitats, cultural resources, wetlands, prime farmland, park lands, wild and scenic rivers);   Levels of public and scientific controversy associated with a project’s impacts;  The degree of uncertainty about project impacts or risks;   Whether the action establishes a precedent for future actions with significant effects;  Whether related or connected actions have been appropriately considered in the analysis of impacts; and  Whether the action threatens to violate federal, state, or local law, or requirements imposed for protection of the environment. Impact Area Definitions Impact areas in this chapter are generally described as either “permanent” or “temporary.” In addition, a subset of the temporary impact areas would include areas that would be disturbed intermittently for shorter periods of time during the construction phase. These impact areas are described as follows:  Permanent impact areas include the areas that would be permanently converted from their prior uses by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Existing habitat in permanent impact areas would be lost, and replanting as practicable would be consistent with the permanent uses designated for those areas. This would include areas upon which structures or access roads would be built, areas that would be fenced to restrict access, or areas that would be maintained with permanently altered vegetation (e.g., conversion from forest to grassland) after removal of natural vegetation. Locations on the Meredosia Energy Center property that would be altered for the construction of facilities associated with, or supporting, the oxy-combustion process would be permanent impact areas, as would the fenced areas, surface facilities, and access roads for the CO2 injection well site(s). The 50-foot wide operational ROW for the maintenance of the CO2 pipeline would include permanent impact areas where permanent conversion of vegetation and habitat (e.g., forest to grassland) would be necessary; but, agricultural uses could be restored with minimal restrictions.  Temporary impact areas include the areas that would be disturbed throughout the construction phase of the proposed project but subsequently restored to their original state with some potential modifications (e.g., planted trees instead of mature trees) at the end of the construction phase, which could be years after the areas are initially impacted. Uses for the temporary impact areas would include construction laydown areas, construction trailers, parking, and the barge unloading access road at the Meredosia Energy Center. The 80- to 100-foot wide construction ROW for the CO2 pipeline would encompass the 50-foot operational ROW and also include an additional 30- to 50-foot wide temporary impact area to facilitate movement of construction equipment and staging of supplies. Structures associated with temporary impact areas would include fences and construction trailers. Construction parking areas and equipment staging and laydown areas would be cleared, overlaid with a geosynthetic barrier, and surfaced with gravel. Any temporary impact area currently unfenced would be fenced. Temporary impact areas would be restored following completion of construction activities. Restoration would include removal of fencing, gravel, and geosynthetic barriers, as well as re-establishment of vegetation to the extent practicable.  Barge impact areas include the areas that are expected to be in operation only on the days that a barge would be unloaded. Impacts would be limited to the times when these areas would be utilized during the extended construction phase. CO2 Pipeline Routing Options The Alliance has identified two options for the CO2 pipeline route (southern and northern pipeline alignments) using the criteria listed in Section 2.5.1.1 and best available data. During final design for the project, the Alliance would conduct field studies along the ROW for the selected pipeline route. The data collected from the field studies would be used to support the final siting and design for the CO2 pipeline. Therefore, it is possible that the final route may deviate from the routes analyzed in this EIS; however, the pipeline would not be sited outside of the 4-mile wide corridor for the CO2 pipeline. In the event that the Alliance were to find it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the southern or northern alignment analyzed in this EIS, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this chapter, because the same siting criteria would be followed in the adjustment of the route. Injection Well Siting Options The exact locations of the proposed injection wells have not yet been identified; however, the Alliance intends to site them within the borders of the CO2 storage study area. The Alliance has evaluated several different injection well siting options using both horizontal and vertical wells at one or two injection well sites. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well and computer modeling, the Alliance is currently pursuing the option of constructing four horizontal injection wells at a single injection well site. Under this siting option, all four injection wells would originate from one drilling pad and would operate independently of each other. The Alliance’s current plan is to propose this configuration in the UIC permit applications it intends to file with the USEPA. One permit application would be submitted for each proposed injection well. The configuration of the injection wells will not be considered final until the UIC permits have been issued. The subsection for each resource addressing the CO2 storage study area details potential impacts from the construction and operation of the injection wells. The resource areas that examine impacts related to land disturbance analyze impacts for the scenario with two injection well sites, since this configuration would require more land disturbance and is considered the upper bound for land-based impacts analysis. These resource areas include soils, surface water, wetlands and floodplains, biological resources, and land use. Impacts for the other resources are analyzed based on which injection well configuration (one well site or two) represents the upper bound for the given resource area. Pipelines Connecting the Main CO2 Pipeline Route to the Injection Wells The subsection for each resource addressing the CO2 pipeline includes the impacts of the southern and northern pipeline routes ending at the western border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area would depend upon the final siting of the CO2 injection wells. Therefore, impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed in the CO2 storage study area subsection for each resource. Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the locations of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable alignment scenarios. In each of the scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well site(s) within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have lesser impacts to physical resources, and others would have greater impacts while still representing reasonable paths. The Alliance would site the injection wells using the siting criteria outlined in Section 2.5.2.1 such that they would avoid potential impacts to the extent practicable. 3.1 AIR QUALITY 3.1.1 Introduction This section provides an overview of the federal and regional air quality regulations, describes existing air quality and air emissions in the region, and presents potential direct and indirect air quality impacts from construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. 3.1.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for air quality includes the Meredosia Energy Center footprint and the West Central Illinois Intrastate Air Quality Control Region (AQCR) 75 as shown in Figure 3.1-1 (i.e., the airshed containing the FutureGen 2.0 Project and adjacent areas, as well as Morgan, Sangamon, Christian, and Macon counties). The Meredosia Energy Center is located near Meredosia, in Morgan County, Illinois, which is located in west central Illinois along the east side of the Illinois River. The ROI beyond the energy center’s footprint consists mainly of agricultural land used for growing row crops, scattered small communities, and the larger cities of Jacksonville, Springfield, Decatur, and Taylorville. 3.1.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE analyzed the potential for air quality impacts associated with the proposed construction and operation at the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities. DOE based its analysis of construction air quality impacts on calculations of pollutant emissions from construction equipment, trucks and passenger vehicles, and fugitive dust generated at the construction sites. DOE based its analysis of air quality impacts during operation of the project on estimated pollutant emissions, primarily from the combustion process at the oxy-combustion facility, with additional analysis of vehicular emissions, as well as fugitive dust generation related to the cooling towers and the conveyance and transfer of coal, ash, lime, and trona. The air quality analysis included modeling of emitted criteria air pollutants to determine potential changes to ambient air quality in relation to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) (USEPA 2012a). Available ambient air quality data were obtained from monitoring stations in the region and analyzed to derive average regional baseline air concentrations for pollutants of interest. DOE considered the following factors when characterizing existing air quality:  Proximity of monitoring stations to the project site;  Representativeness of monitoring locations relative to the project site;  Availability of specific pollutant data; and  Availability of the most recent data. DOE evaluated potential air quality impacts using current baseline conditions where the energy center is no longer in operation, as well as using historical baseline conditions prior to the 2011 suspension of operations at the energy center. DOE modeled estimated emissions using regional current data to determine whether projected emissions from operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would contribute to any regional NAAQS exceedances. DOE also evaluated air quality impacts in comparison to historical data to determine whether or not a Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) permit would be required. DOE assessed the potential for impacts to air quality based on whether the proposed project would:  Result in emissions of criteria pollutants or HAPs that would exceed relevant air quality or health standards;  Cause an adverse change in air quality related to the NAAQS or Illinois standards;  VViolate any fedderal or state permits;  AAffect visibilitty and regionaal haze in Claass I areas; or  CConflict with local or regional air quallity managemment plans to attain or maaintain complliance wwith the federaal and state aiir quality reguulations. Source: IEPA 2011a 3.1.1.3 Regulatory Framework The federal Clean Air Act (CAA) requires the USEPA to establish NAAQS to protect public health and the public welfare (42 USC 7409). Accordingly, USEPA developed primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for six criteria pollutants: sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, lead, and particulate matter. Two standards for particulate matter have been promulgated: one standard covers particulates with aerodynamic diameters of 10 micrometers or less (PM10), and the other standard covers particulates with aerodynamic diameters of 2.5 micrometers or less (PM2.5). The NAAQS [40 CFR 50] are expressed as concentrations of the criteria pollutants in the ambient air; that is, in the outdoor air to which the public has access. Primary standards are set to protect the public health, including the health of sensitive populations such as asthmatics, children, and the elderly. Secondary standards are set to protect public welfare, including protection against decreased visibility and damage to animals, crops, vegetation, and buildings. Both short- and long-term air quality standards (i.e., 1-, 8-, and 24-hour, and annual averages) have been established for pollutants that can contribute to both acute and chronic health effects. Table 3.1-1 lists the NAAQS. The CAA Section 110 requires states to develop federally-approved regulatory programs, called State Implementation Plans, which provide for the implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of the NAAQS throughout the state. Each state has the authority to adopt standards stricter than those established under the federal program. The intent of the CAA is for states to submit State Implementation Plans that, upon approval by the USEPA, allow the states to regulate air pollution within their borders. These plans must include enforceable emissions limitations, provide for monitoring, and prohibit emissions that would contribute to the nonattainment of a standard. The IEPA Bureau of Air is responsible for implementing the State Implementation Plan (USEPA 2011a), for improving and monitoring air quality in Illinois for each of the criteria pollutants, and for assessing compliance. Additionally, the IEPA Bureau of Air proposes appropriate regulations to the Illinois Pollution Control Board, which promulgates the rules governing ambient air quality in Illinois, under Title 35 Illinois Administrative Code (IAC), Subtitle B, 201 - 291. Federal regulations designate four categories for AQCRs or portions of AQCRs (generally by county):  Attainment: Attainment areas meet the NAAQS for a criteria pollutant. These areas are also referred to as being “in attainment” for that pollutant.  Nonattainment: Nonattainment areas are areas in which a criteria pollutant concentration exceeds the NAAQS.  Unclassifiable: Unclassifiable areas are areas in which insufficient data exist to determine attainment status. Typically these are areas that would not likely have air quality problems.  Maintenance: Maintenance areas were once designated as nonattainment areas but are now in attainment and are under a monitoring plan to maintain their attainment status. Morgan County, Illinois, the county within which the proposed project activities would occur, has been designated by the USEPA as in attainment or unclassifiable for all criteria pollutants (USEPA 2011b; 40 CFR 81). Clean Air Act Conformity The 1990 Amendments to the CAA require federal actions to show conformance with the State Implementation Plan. This requirement is known as the General Conformity Rule. Conformance with the State Implementation Plan means conformity to the approved plan’s purpose of eliminating or reducing the severity and number of violations of the NAAQS, and achieving expeditious attainment of such standards (40 CFR 93). The need to demonstrate conformity is applicable only to actions within nonattainment and maintenance areas. Because all components of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would occur in areas designated in attainment or unclassifiable for the NAAQS, the general conformity rules do not apply.  Sources: 40 CFR 50; USEPA 2012a; IEPA 2011a; 35 IAC 243  a. Not to be exceeded more than once per year. b. Not to be exceeded.  c. On February 9, 2010, the Federal Register (Volume 75, Number 6474) published a new primary, 1-hour standard for NO2 To attain this standard, the 3-year average of the 98th percentile of the daily maximum 1-hour average at each monitor within an area must not exceed 100 ppb. d. The 3-year average of the fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour average O3 concentrations measured at each monitor within an area over each year must not exceed 0.075 ppm. e. On January 15, 2013, the Federal Register (Volume 78, Number 10) published the final rule reducing the NAAQS primary standard for PM2.5 from 15.0 µg/m3 to 12.0 µg/m3 and maintained the secondary standard at 15.0 µg/m3. To attain this standard, the 3-year average of the weighted annual mean PM2.5 concentrations from single or multiple community-oriented monitors must not exceed the standard. f. The 3-year average of the 98th percentile of 24-hour concentrations at each population-oriented monitor within an area must not exceed 35 µg/m3. g. Not to be exceeded more than once per year on average over 3 years. h. Final rule signed June 2, 2010. To attain this standard, the 3-year average of the 99th percentile of the daily maximum 1-hour average at each monitor within an area must not exceed 0.075 ppm. The 1971 annual and 24-hour SO2 standards were revoked in the same rulemaking. These standards, however, remain in effect until one year after an area is designated for the 2010 standard, except in areas designated nonattainment for the 1971 standards, where the 1971 standards remain in effect until implementation plans to attain or maintain the 2010 standard are approved. CO = carbon monoxide; mg/m3 = milligram per cubic meter; NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Standards; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; O3 = ozone; Pb = lead; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; ppm = parts per million; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = microgram per cubic meter Illinois AAir Monitoring Networkk Illinois haas a network of air monittoring stationns strategicallyy placed throoughout the sstate, compossed of instrumenntation ownedd and operatedd by both the IEPA and byy cooperatingg local agenciees. This netwwork is designed to measure ammbient air quuality levels inn the variouss Illinois AQCCRs, using booth continuouus and intermitteent instruments. Figure 3.11-2 shows the location off the air monnitoring statioons in Illinoiss with respect to the location of the Meredoosia Energy CCenter and thee potential COO2 injection wwells. Sources: IEPA 22010a; IEPA 20111a Air Quallity Index Another mmeasure of aair quality utiilized by the USEPA andd the IEPA iss the Air Quality Index (AAQI), which is a human heaalth-based meeasure of oveerall air qualiity that takes into accountt all of the crriteria pollutants measured within an area. As shown in Table 3.1-2, an AQI value of 50 or less is considered “good” air quality; 51-100 is considered “moderate”; 101-150 is considered unhealthy for sensitive groups; and values of 151 or higher range from “unhealthy” to “very unhealthy” to “hazardous” (IEPA 2011a).  Table 3.1-2. Air Quality Index Descriptor Categories and Health Effects AQI Range Descriptor Category Health Effects Cautionary Statements 51-100 101-150 151-200  Unhealthy  201-300  Very Unhealthy  301 and above  Hazardous  Good Moderate Air pollution poses little to no risk. For some pollutants there may be a moderate health concern for a very small number of people. For example, people who are unusually sensitive to ozone may experience respiratory symptoms. Sources: IEPA 2011a (2010 Annual Air Quality Report); Airnow 2011 AQI = Air Quality Index 3.1.1.4 Permitting Requirements  Air permitting is required for industries and facilities that emit regulated pollutants, although certain exemptions are established by statute. Based on the size of the emissions units and type of pollutants emitted (criteria pollutants or HAPs), the IEPA sets permit rules and standards for emissions sources. Construction Permits The air quality permitting process begins with the application for a construction permit. For attainment areas, there are two types of construction permits available through the IEPA for the construction and temporary operation of new emissions sources, including the following:  PSD new source review permits, which are required for major new sources or major sources making modifications; and  Minor new source review construction permits, which are required for new minor sources.  Sources subject to PSD are typically required to complete best available control technology review for criteria pollutants, predictive modeling of emissions from proposed and existing sources, and public involvement activities.  PSD preconstruction review and permitting applies on a pollutant by pollutant basis to construction of new “major sources” and to modifications at existing major sources. Major sources are defined under PSD as sources listed in any of 28 named source categories whose potential to emit is greater than 100 tons per year of any regulated pollutant; or if not in a listed source category, a source whose potential to emit any regulated pollutant is greater than 250 tons per year. Fossil fuel-fired steam electric plants with greater than 250 million Btu per hour of heat input are a named source category under PSD. Modifications at existing major sources are subject to PSD if the increase in air emissions from the modification exceeds any of the significant increase thresholds in Table 3.1-3 and the “net emissions increase” also exceeds any of the significant increase thresholds. Net emissions increases are determined by summing all increases and decreases resulting from a project with all contemporaneous emissions increases and decreases at the source.  Minor source permitting applies to any construction of a new source or modification at an existing source where PSD permitting does not apply. Minor source permitting is required under state regulation and does not require sources to determine and implement best available control technologies or other PSD requirements.  Table 3.1-3. Thresholds for Determination of Major Modification to Existing Source Threshold for Major Modification Pollutant to an Existing Source (tpy)a, b, c, d 100 40 25 10 15 40 40 Source: 40 CFR 52 a. PSD review and permitting is required for sources emitting 100 tpy of any regulated pollutant for fossil fuel-fired steam electric plants of more than 250 MMBtu/hr heat input. b. Additional thresholds exist for pollutants not expected to be emitted from this project (e.g. hydrogen sulfide, fluorides, and lead). c. Major modification threshold for ozone is 40 tpy of VOCs or NOx. d. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for discussion of CO2-eq. CO = carbon monoxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; MMBtu/hr = million British thermal units per hour; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM = particulate matter; PM2.5 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or less; PSD = Prevention of Significant Deterioration; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; VOCs = volatile organic compounds The goal of the PSD program (40 CFR 52) is to prevent the degradation of air quality in attainment or unclassified areas, while at the same time allowing for economic growth. Deterioration of existing air quality levels is limited by the amount of additional pollutant concentration that is allowed to increase above a baseline concentration. The allowable increased concentration for each pollutant and the averaging period are referred to as the allowable PSD increments. The allowable air emissions increment limits are dependent on the land-use classification of the area. There are three area classifications. Each classification differs in terms of the amount of growth it would permit before significant air quality deterioration would be deemed to occur. Class I areas have the smallest increments and thus allow only a small degree of air quality deterioration. Class II areas can accommodate normal well-managed industrial growth. Class III areas have the largest increments and thereby provide for a larger amount of development than either Class I or Class II areas. Congress established certain areas (e.g., wilderness areas and national parks) as mandatory Class I areas (40 CFR 51.166(e); NPS 2011). Table 3.1-4 presents the maximum allowable increase in pollutant concentration above a baseline concentration for each of the Class area designations. 24-hour  8  30  60  PM10  Annual  4  17  34  Source: 40 CFR 51.166 NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; PM2.5 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter The closest PSD Class I areas to the energy center are the Mingo Wilderness Area in Missouri and the Mammoth Cave National Park in Kentucky. Both are located more than 180 miles from the Meredosia Energy Center, which exceeds the distance within which USEPA typically requires Class I area protection provisions (i.e., a distance of 62 miles [100 kilometers]). Because of this distance, air quality impacts to Class I areas are not expected from the FutureGen 2.0 Project; therefore, effects to Class I areas are not discussed further in this air quality analysis. All air regions within the ROI of the FutureGen 2.0 Project are designated Class II areas, with moderate pollution increases allowed. Operating Permits Under state and federal Title V (CAA Permit Program) regulations, a Title V Significant Permit Modification is required for facilities whose increase in emissions exceeds the thresholds outlined in Table 3.1-3. In addition, a Significant Permit Modification would be required if it became necessary to establish federally-enforceable limitations to reduce potential emissions below the thresholds. A minor permit modification would be required if emissions were below the thresholds and a federally-enforceable limit was not necessary. Submission of an application for these permit modifications would be required within one year of the first operation of a new emissions source.  The Title V permit ensures that a plant’s emissions are in compliance with all federal CAA and state regulations. When the state issues a Title V permit, it assures that the permit includes sufficient monitoring, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements such that compliance with all relevant air quality standards and regulations can be determined, and thus satisfies the Illinois State Implementation Plan. The Meredosia Energy Center Title V Operating Permit (called a CAA Permit Program permit in Illinois) was originally issued in September 2005 but was appealed to the Illinois Pollution Control Board by Ameren. As a result of the appeal, Ameren was granted a stay of the permit and the permit never took effect. Ameren is currently in negotiation with the IEPA to resolve the issues identified in the appeal of the permit so that a Title V Operating Permit can be put into effect. Until the appeal is resolved and the stay is lifted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board, IEPA cannot modify the Title V Operating Permit.   Also under the CAA Permit Program, the facility would be required to meet the requirements of Title IV, the Acid Rain Permit Program (40 CFR 72) that establishes limitations on sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides emissions, and requirements for permitting, monitoring, reporting, and compliance. Other Requirements In addition to the permitting requirements to construct and operate new or modified emissions sources, New Source Performance Standards (40 CFR 60) and National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAPs) (40 CFR 63) set emissions and control standards for categories of stationary emissions sources of both criteria pollutants (i.e., New Source Performance Standards) and HAPs (i.e., NESHAPS). New Source Performance Standards are promulgated by USEPA for criteria pollutant emissions from new, modified, and reconstructed sources in certain source categories. NESHAPs are emissions standards for HAPs from both existing and new sources from certain source categories. This program sets uniform emissions limitations for many industrial sources such as boilers and stand-by generators. On February 16, 2012, USEPA issued a NESHAP and New Source Performance Standard applicable to coal-fired electric utility steam generating units. Parts of these rules related to startup and shutdown, and monitoring provisions were stayed until USEPA completes a reconsideration review of these rules.1 Other relevant requirements of the CAA include the Chemical Accident Prevention Act (40 CFR 68) that requires development of a risk management plan for stationary sources having more than threshold quantities of regulated toxic and flammable chemicals; and the Compliance Assurance Monitoring Rule (40 CFR 64) that requires monitoring and reporting of operation and maintenance of emissions control devices to assure compliance with emissions standards. See Chapter 5, Regulatory and Permit Requirements, for further descriptions of these provisions. 3.1.2 Affected Environment 3.1.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center Existing Air Quality for Morgan County The Meredosia Energy Center is located in Morgan County, Illinois, in the west central part of the state, approximately 48 miles west of Springfield. The majority of Morgan County consists of agricultural land used for growing row crops, scattered small communities such as Meredosia, and the larger town of Jacksonville. There are a total of seven major or synthetic minor sources permitted in Morgan County, including: Ach Food Company Inc., AGI North America LLC, Ameren Energy Generating Company, Celanese, Jacksonville Developmental Center, Panhandle Easter Pipeline Company, and United Gilsonite Laboratories (USEPA 2011c). Other potential sources of air pollution would include sources in neighboring counties as well as activities, including vehicular traffic, in nearby towns of Jacksonville and Springfield. The IEPA Bureau of Air operates monitoring sites throughout the state that are used to monitor ambient air quality and determine whether areas or regions comply with all of the NAAQS. No ambient air monitoring stations are maintained by USEPA or IEPA in Morgan County. The ambient air quality monitoring stations within an approximate 50-mile radius are located in Adams, Jersey, Macoupin, and Sangamon counties, all within the West Central Illinois Intrastate AQCR 75. The pollutants measured by these monitoring stations include ozone, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, lead, PM10, and PM2.5. No ambient monitoring stations for nitrogen dioxide exist within AQCR 75. DOE performed a review of monitoring stations for each pollutant to determine average existing air quality data for the project region. Based on their location within the same AQCR and their relative proximity to the energy center, the Quincy (Adams County), Jerseyville (Jersey County), Nilwood 1 This rule is also known as the Utility Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT) rule. (Macoupin County), and Springfield (Sangamon County) monitors were determined to be most appropriate for use in setting the background concentrations for all pollutants except nitrogen dioxide. For nitrogen dioxide, the St. Genevieve County, Missouri, location was chosen based upon its representativeness to the site as compared to the nitrogen dioxide monitoring locations in Illinois, which are located in the major metropolitan areas of Cook County (metropolitan Chicago) and East St. Louis. Table 3.1-5 presents a listing of these stations and Figure 3.1-2 shows their locations. Table 3.1-6 presents average regional monitoring data for each criteria pollutant. Concentrations are presented for the closest monitoring station(s) that measures that particular pollutant. If multiple monitoring stations are nearly equidistant from the Meredosia Energy Center, the concentrations from these monitoring stations are averaged. Because localized ambient air quality depends on many factors, such as location and types of source emissions and air mixing patterns, these average regional data shown in Table 3.1-6 may not be truly reflective of actual air quality in and around the Meredosia Energy Center. These estimates serve to represent general regional air quality and were not used in the emissions modeling discussed in Section 3.1.3.2. Ameren obtained background concentrations from IEPA for permit-related emissions modeling. All measured pollutant levels for the Morgan County region are currently (2010) below the NAAQS primary standards. Sources: IEPA 2011a; MDNR 2012  CO = carbon monoxide; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; O3 = ozone; Pb = lead; PM2.5 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide Air Quality Index The closest location to the Meredosia Energy Center, and to Morgan County, for which the AQI was measured is the Springfield metropolitan area, located approximately 48 miles to the east of Meredosia. In 2010, Springfield recorded 75.3 percent of the days with a good AQI and 24.7 percent of the days with a moderate AQI (see Table 3.1-2). There were no recorded days with an unhealthy AQI (IEPA 2011a). However, it must be noted that this AQI for metropolitan Springfield is not necessarily representative for the ROI around the rural region of Meredosia.  Existing Operations, Emissions, and Air Permits for Meredosia Energy Center  The Meredosia Energy Center began operation in 1948, with equipment and configuration changes in the succeeding years. As discussed in Section 2.4.1, energy center operations were suspended at the end of 2011; therefore, the information and data presented in this section are based on configuration and operations before the energy center suspended operation. The energy center includes four generating units (Units 1 through 4), which were supplied with steam from six boilers. When they were operational, Boilers 1 through 5 were coal-fired; Boiler 6 was oil-fired. Boiler 6 was the only boiler located outside and not enclosed within a building. Units 1 and 2 (Boilers 1, 2, 3, and 4) were removed from service on November 9, 2009. Unit 3 (Boiler 5) and Unit 4 (Boiler 6) were removed from service on January 1, 2012. The air permits for all these sources are currently active. Unit 3 has a nominal-rated generating capacity of 229 MWe (203 MWe net). Unit 4 was placed in service in 1975 and has a generating capacity of 210 MWe (166 MWe net). The six boilers are served by three emissions stacks. A combined stack serving Boilers 1, 2, 3 and 4 (Units 1 and 2) is the tallest at 526 feet; the stack serving Unit 3 is 301 feet tall; and the stack serving Unit 4 is 184 feet tall. Averaging Average Concentrations for Yearb Pollutant Stationa Period 2008 2009 2010 Sources: IEPA 2011a; IEPA 2010a; IEPA 2009; MDNR 2012; USEPA 2011d a. Concentrations are presented for the closest monitoring station(s) that measures that particular pollutant. If multiple monitoring stations are nearly equidistant from the Meredosia Energy Center, the concentrations from these monitoring stations are averaged. b. Reported values in this table represent averages of highest sample concentrations measured for the year. These concentrations do not necessarily correspond directly to the values used as representative background in modeling analysis. c. The only monitoring stations in Illinois for NO2 are located in metropolitan areas around Chicago and St. Louis; therefore, the St. Genevieve County, Missouri, location was chosen. Additionally, the 2010 NO2 data is through the third quarter since the instrument shutdown in September 2010. d. For a representative concentration, O3 (3-year average of the fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour average concentration) is reported as an average of measurements from Quincy, Jerseyville, Nilwood, and Springfield monitoring stations. The 1-hour O3 standard was revoked effective June 15, 2005, for all areas in Illinois (40 CFR 81.314). e. USEPA determines compliance with the NAAQS for PM2.5 by the 3-year average of the annual 98th percentile concentrations. The 98th percentile 24-hour concentrations are shown. f. For a representative concentration, 24-hour PM2.5 (98th percentile values of highest samples) and annual mean are reported as averages from Quincy, Jerseyville, and Springfield monitoring stations. g. For a representative concentration, 1-hour SO2 (3-year average of the 99th percentile of the daily maximum 1-hour average) and 3-hour SO2 (highest sample) are reported as an average of measurements from Nilwood and Springfield monitoring stations. CO = carbon monoxide; NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Standards; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; O3 = ozone; Pb = lead; PM2.5 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or less; ppm = parts per million; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Table 3.1-7 presents the reported stack emissions for 4 years of operation (2007 through 2010) prior to the suspension of operations at the energy center at the end of 2011. The energy center also generated indirect emissions due to mobile sources, including onsite coal and ash handling equipment; trucks, train locomotives, and tugboats used to deliver and remove materials and waste from the property; as well as privately-owned vehicles used by workers. CO = carbon monoxide; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM = particulate matter; PM2.5 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Existing Cooling Tower Emissions Cooling towers are heat exchangers used to cool liquids in industrial processes by evaporating water and thereby transferring the heat to the air passing through the cooling tower and releasing the heat to the atmosphere. Some of the liquid water evaporates, and some becomes entrained in the air stream and is carried out of the tower as “drift” droplets. Since water droplets generally contain the same dissolved solids as the water circulating in the tower, these solids can be carried out of the tower in the drift. When the drift droplets evaporate before being deposited, they produce particulate matter emissions (USEPA 1995a). Historical operations of the Meredosia Energy Center used a cooling tower to cool the water used in the electrical generation process in Unit 4. Mechanical draft cooling towers can produce some adverse environmental effects due to the liquid water plume coming directly from the tower (drift), as well as from the secondary liquid water formation caused by the condensation of water vapor (“fogging”). These adverse effects include: fogging at ground level and ice build-up, deposition of dissolved salt particles, and local shading of the sun due to a visible plume (Holzman 2010). In 2010, the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) evaluated proposed alternative alignments for Illinois Route 104 over the Illinois River in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center. As part of their environmental assessment, IDOT analyzed the impacts of cooling tower emissions from the Meredosia Energy Center. One of the alternatives (Alternative #9) in this study involved constructing a new bridge across the Illinois River landing approximately 700 feet north of the Unit 4 cooling tower at the Meredosia Energy Center (IDOT 2011). As part of the impact analysis, IDOT evaluated the potential for fogging, icing, and other impacts to the proposed bridge resulting from operations of the existing cooling tower. IDOT conducted dispersion modeling analysis using the Seasonal/Annual Cooling Tower Impact (SACTI) model (Version 11-01-90) to evaluate the following impacts (Holzman 2010):  Frequency of occurrence of cooling tower plume heights, plume lengths, and plume radii;  Frequency of occurrence and special distribution of ground-level fogging and rime ice deposition;  Special distribution and rate of salt deposition; and  Frequency and extent of plume shadowing effects. Although the cooling tower at the Meredosia Energy Center did not operate during winter months (since Unit 4 was only used as a summer peaking unit), the SACTI model analysis assumed the cooling tower operated 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, 365 days per year. The IDOT assessment concluded that continuous operation of the cooling tower at the Meredosia Energy Center would have generated fog and rime icing impacts predominantly downwind to the southeast of the tower. The maximum hours of fogging in any one location were estimated by SACTI to be 15.4 hours per year on average, with the maximum occurring at 200 meters, extending to a maximum distance of approximately 900 meters to the southeast. SACTI predicted less than 1 hour of fogging per year to the northwest. The maximum hours of rime icing were estimated to be 6 hours per year on average, with the maximum occurring 200 meters downwind to the southeast of the tower. At 700 feet north of the Unit 4 cooling tower (proposed bridge location), fog and rime ice were projected to occur only 1 hour over a 5-year period, and salt and water deposition could occur when the cooling tower was operating. Plume shadowing and related solar energy loss were not shown to be significant (Holzman 2010).  3.1.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities The existing ambient air quality for Morgan County is discussed under Section 3.1.2.1. The region around and within the pipeline corridor from the energy center to the CO2 storage study area consists mainly of agricultural land used for growing row crops, scattered small communities, and the larger town of Jacksonville. The area within the CO2 storage study area is also predominantly agricultural. The croplands in these regions are not highly susceptible to wind erosion and, most of the time, would not present a source of wind-blown particulates or dust. However, cultivation and tilling of the soil may cause some dust suspension or render the soil more susceptible to wind erosion for short periods of time. The educational facilities are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville. 3.1.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.1.3.1 Construction Impacts DOE estimated potential emissions associated with construction of the oxy-combustion facility, the CO2 pipeline, the injection wells, and the educational facilities by considering the likely construction equipment and operating schedules, estimated area and duration of land disturbance, estimated number of construction worker vehicle trips, and truck trips for material deliveries and waste removal. DOE estimated the construction emissions using USEPA models and methods:  Construction Equipment Emissions: estimated tailpipe emissions from the variety of internal combustion equipment using USEPA’s NONROAD model (USEPA 2008a, USEPA 2010a) based on the equipment type (horsepower) and hours of operation.  Vehicle Emissions: estimated tailpipe emissions from worker vehicles and delivery trucks traveling to and from the sites using USEPA’s Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator (MOVES) model (USEPA 2012b) based on the vehicle types and miles traveled.  Fugitive Dust Emissions: estimated fugitive dust emissions resulting from excavation, soil storage and handling, traffic over unpaved onsite roads, and earthwork, using standard USEPA methods (USEPA 1995a; USEPA 2005a; USEPA 2005b). The construction emissions for each of the various project components (energy center, pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities) are presented separately below, followed by a collective tabulation and discussion of total construction emissions and their impacts. Emissions of CO2 during construction are presented and discussed in Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases. Meredosia Energy Center The FutureGen 2.0 Project would involve the construction of an advanced oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center. The construction would include installation of new energy center components, new access roads, as well as improvements to the existing coal handling, process water and wastewater, and electrical and control systems, as described in Section 2.4. Conventional construction methods would be used. The construction of the oxy-combustion facility would take place over approximately 42 months beginning in early 2014 and extending through the middle of 2017, with the peak in number of construction workers occurring between June through December of 2015. The last 12 months of construction would overlap with a 1-year commissioning and startup effort. The Alliance developed a list of estimated construction equipment required, and hours of operation of each, along with the anticipated amount of gasoline or diesel that each piece would consume. Based on these assumptions, DOE calculated the total criteria pollutant emissions resulting from construction activities at the Meredosia Energy Center. DOE also calculated the tailpipe emissions from the worker vehicles and delivery and waste trucks that would be associated with project construction (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for discussion of vehicle traffic). Table 3.1-8 presents these estimated emissions resulting from construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center. Fugitive Dust NA NA 531 40 NA NA Emissionsd 53161 0 0 2 Total 104 108 541 48 3 11 a. Based on estimated construction equipment list, hours of use, and amount of gasoline and diesel used per type of equipment. b. Emissions factors derived for construction equipment using NONROAD USEPA emissions model, assuming average values across Morgan County (USEPA 2008a) and load factors (USEPA 2010a). c. PM2.5 is assumed to be 0.97 of PM10 for exhaust (USEPA 2010b). d. Fugitive dust emissions estimates based on 164 acres of land disturbance, during an average disturbance of 6 months. Total suspended particles = 1.2 tons/acre/month (USEPA 2012c AP-42, 13.2.3.3). PM10 is 0.45 of total suspended particles (USAF 2003, USEPA 2012c AP-42 13.2.2.2). PM2.5 = PM10*0.15(1 - capture fraction) (USEPA 2005b). Capture fraction for agricultural areas is 0.25 (USEPA 2005a). While the impacted area could reach 164 acres, it is not expected that land disturbance would cover the entire area, and the 6-month duration of disturbance at any one location is a conservative average estimate, as some areas would be disturbed for shorter durations and others for longer durations. e. Vehicle emissions calculated using the USEPA MOVES model, version 2010b (USEPA 2012b). Assumed that energy center workers would travel primarily on local roads while trucks would travel primarily on highways. Note that vehicle tire wear and brake wear emissions are also included under PM10 and PM2.5. See Total Construction Emissions for further discussion of impacts from diesel exhaust. CO = carbon monoxide; NA = not applicable; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds CO2 Pipeline The CO2 pipeline route would begin at the Meredosia Energy Center and extend to the CO2 injection wells. Construction of the pipeline and ROW would be accomplished with typical construction methods, within a construction easement of 80 to 100 feet wide depending on the terrain. Construction would involve clearing and grading, trenching, pipe stringing, welding and coating pipe, lowering pipe into trench and backfilling, testing, and land restoration. Some of the pipeline corridor would be within existing utility or highway ROWs, such that clearing and grading would not be necessary. However, for the purposes of impact analysis, DOE took a conservative approach in estimating construction emissions by assuming that any particular section of the ROW would be disturbed for approximately 2 months total, as the construction progressed along the pipeline length. Additionally, DOE assumed that all portions of pipeline construction would involve clearing and grading. DOE estimates that construction of the pipeline from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells would take approximately 3 to 4 months. Pipeline construction would require up to approximately 300 workers throughout the whole construction project, with varying schedules and locations. DOE calculated tailpipe emissions originating from the construction equipment, as well as fugitive dust emissions generated from mechanical disturbance of the surface and excavated material. DOE also calculated the tailpipe emissions from the worker vehicles and the delivery and waste trucks that would be associated with the project construction (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for discussion of vehicle traffic). Table 3.1-9 summarizes the calculated estimated emissions for construction of the CO2 pipeline to the injection wells. Fugitive Dust NA NA 302 34 NA NA Emissionsd 7 181 1 0 1 Total 20 4530637 1 4 a. Based on estimated construction equipment list and durations of use. Assumes equipment would be operated 6 days per week for 4 months. b. Emissions factors derived for construction equipment using NONROAD USEPA emissions model, assuming average values across Morgan County (USEPA 2008a) and load factors (USEPA 2010a). c. NONROAD total PM calculation is PM10 value. PM2.5 is assumed to be 0.97 of PM10 for exhaust (USEPA 2010b). d. Fugitive dust emissions estimates based on an approximate 280 acres of land disturbance occurring in an 80-foot construction ROW (assuming longest estimated route), during an average disturbance of 2 months per portion of pipeline. Total suspended particles = 1.2 tons/acre/month (USEPA 2012c AP-42, 13.2.3.3). PM10 is 0.45 of total suspended particles (USAF 2003; USEPA 1995a). PM2.5 = PM10*0.15(1 - capture fraction) (USEPA 2005b). Capture fraction for agricultural areas is 0.25 (USEPA 2005a). e. Vehicle emissions calculated using the USEPA MOVES model, version 2010b (USEPA 2012b). Assumed that energy center workers would travel primarily on local roads while trucks would travel primarily on highways. Note that vehicle tire wear and brake wear emissions are also included under PM10 and PM2.5. See Total Construction Emissions for further discussion of impacts from diesel exhaust. CO = carbon monoxide; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator; NA = not applicable; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 injection well site(s) would consist of the wells, associated buildings, roads, and other components as described in Section 2.5.2. DOE calculated exhaust emissions originating from the construction and drilling equipment, as well as the fugitive dust emissions generated in the construction area. DOE calculated the potential emissions assuming deep injection (and monitoring) wells would require drilling operations 24 hours a day, 7 days a week for 100 days; and shallow monitoring wells would require drilling operations 24 hours a day for 10 days. Other equipment used in construction of the injection well site(s) would include tractors, excavators, bulldozers, pumps, diesel generators, service vehicles, and delivery vehicles. DOE calculated tailpipe emissions originating from the construction equipment, as well as fugitive dust emissions generated from mechanical disturbance of the surface and excavated material. DOE also calculated the tailpipe emissions from the worker vehicles and the delivery and waste trucks that would be associated with the project construction (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for discussion of vehicle traffic). Table 3.1-10 summarizes the calculated emissions for construction of the injection wells and associated site buildings and access roads.  Fugitive Dust Emissionsd NA NA 160 18 NA NA 8 171 1 0 1 Total 67 263 178 35 14 20 a. Construction equipment estimates include type and hours of operation used during construction of all injection and monitoring wells and also construction of access roads and drilling pads. Assumptions account for two deep injection wells, seven deep monitoring wells (drilling 24 hours a day for 100 days), and three shallow wells (drilling for 24 hours a day for 10 days).  b. Equipment estimates for construction of site control building, two well maintenance buildings, a booster pump building, a parking lot, and access roads. c. Emissions factors derived for construction equipment using NONROAD 2008a, USEPA emissions model, assuming average values for Morgan County (USEPA 2008a), and load factors (fraction of available power) from USEPA 2010a. NONROAD total PM calculation is PM10 value. PM2.5 is assumed to be 0.97 of PM10 for exhaust (USEPA 2010b). d. Fugitive dust emissions estimates based on total approximate land disturbance of 90 acres for injection and monitoring wells and associated facilities including access roads, during an average disturbance of 3.3 months (100 days). Total suspended particles = 1.2 tons/acre/month (USEPA 2012c AP-42, 13.2.3.3). PM10 is 0.45 of total suspended particles (USAF 2003; USEPA 1995a). PM2.5 = PM10*0.15(1 - capture fraction) (USEPA 2005b). Capture fraction for agricultural areas is 0.25 (USEPA 2005a). e. Vehicle emissions calculated using the USEPA MOVES model, version 2010b (USEPA 2012b). Assumed that energy center workers would travel primarily on local roads while trucks would travel primarily on highways. Note that vehicle tire wear and brake wear emissions are also included under PM10 and PM2.5. See Total Construction Emissions for further discussion of impacts from diesel exhaust. Note: Emissions calculations for the end-of-pipeline spurs within the storage study area are included in the total pipeline calculations presented in Table 3.1-9. CO = carbon monoxide; CO2 = carbon dioxide; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator; NA = not applicable; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Educational Facilities The project would include construction of visitor, research, and training facilities that are proposed to be located near Jacksonville. These facilities could involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination. Because the location and configuration of these buildings is currently unknown, DOE estimated emissions based on the most conservative scenario, which would be construction of new facilities.  DOE calculated tailpipe emissions originating from the construction equipment, emissions from worker and delivery vehicles, as well as fugitive dust emissions generated from mechanical disturbance of the surface and excavated material. Table 3.1-11 summarizes the calculated emissions for construction of the educational facilities. a. Tailpipe emissions based on 52 weeks to construct. b. Emissions factors derived for construction equipment using NONROAD 2008a, USEPA emissions model, assuming average values for Morgan County (USEPA 2008a), and load factors (fraction of available power) from USEPA 2010a. c. NONROAD total PM calculation is PM10 value. PM2.5 is assumed to be 0.97 of PM10 for exhaust (USEPA 2010b). d. Fugitive dust emissions estimates based on 3.5 acres of land disturbance, during an average disturbance of 3 months. Total suspended particles = 1.2 tons/acre/month (USEPA 2012c AP-42, 13.2.3.3). PM10 is 0.45 of total suspended particles (USAF 2003; USEPA 1995a). PM2.5 = PM10*0.15(1 - capture fraction) (USEPA 2005b). Capture fraction for agricultural areas is 0.25 (USEPA 2005a). e. Vehicle emissions calculated using the USEPA MOVES model, version 2010b (USEPA 2012b). Assumed that energy center workers would travel primarily on local roads while trucks would travel primarily on highways. Note that vehicle tire wear and brake wear emissions are also included under PM10 and PM2.5.  CO = carbon monoxide; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator; NA = not applicable; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Total Construction Emissions Table 3.1-12 presents the total estimated construction emissions for the proposed project based on the preliminary project design and conservative assumptions regarding activity levels and duration. DOE believes that these calculated total emissions represent conservative overestimates of actual potential emissions. Because Morgan County is in attainment for all criteria pollutants, CAA conformity requirements are not applicable, and thus there are no construction emissions thresholds that pertain to the construction phase of this project. Emissions from construction activities would be short term in nature, and would be expected to have only a minor impact on local air quality. These emissions would be concentrated at the construction sites and would steadily decrease with distance. Fugitive dust emissions consisting of larger particulates would be greatest during land-disturbance activities and would generally deposit within several hundred feet of the construction areas.  Construction equipment and vehicles that operate on diesel fuel produce exhaust that has been associated with several health-related concerns, particularly from emissions of particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, and HAPs. Diesel exhaust is a complex mixture of hundreds of constituents in either a gas or particle form resulting from the complete and incomplete combustion of fuel and small amounts of engine oil. Pollutant concentrations from diesel emissions during construction of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be concentrated at the construction sites and would decrease with distance. DOE anticipates the resultant adverse impacts would be minor, as the construction duration is short term, and the sites are not in direct proximity to sensitive populations or at locations with severe existing pollutant concentrations such that the project would contribute to a cumulative impact. Construction-related emissions would be further reduced with the implementation of industry standard BMPs, including control of vehicle speeds, minimizing or stabilizing exposed areas to reduce wind erosion, wetting of exposed areas and roads with water or appropriate surfactants, reducing or eliminating equipment idling time, and using properly maintained equipment. a. Total emissions include equipment tailpipe, fugitive dust, and vehicle tailpipe emissions. b. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for discussion of CO2-eq. CO = carbon monoxide; CO2 = carbon dioxide ; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; VOCs = volatile organic compounds 3.1.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center As described in Section 2.4, the FutureGen 2.0 Project intends to repower the energy center utilizing and modifying various existing equipment as well as implementing new equipment and processes. The purpose of the proposed project would be to establish a coal-fired electrical generating facility that uses oxy-combustion technology and state-of-the-art flue gas scrubbing technology to minimize criteria pollutants, as well as capture at least 90 percent of the GHGs that would otherwise be emitted. Emissions Analysis This section describes the emissions calculations and analysis using current baseline conditions with the energy center no longer in operation, as well as using historical baseline conditions prior to the 2011 suspension of operations of the energy center. In addition to emissions from the oxy-combustion boiler and compression and purification unit, emissions would also be generated by the auxiliary boiler, the emergency diesel generator, as well as fugitive emissions from conveyance and transfer of the process materials and waste (coal, ash, lime, and trona), cooling towers, and truck traffic on the haul roads. Table 3.1-13 lists the units associated with the project and whether these units are new or existing. The FutureGen 2.0 designers have calculated emissions for the oxy-combustion facility based on projected operating characteristics for the original configuration of the proposed energy center operating at 200 MWe. These estimated emissions were reported in the construction permit application to the IEPA in February 2012. The estimated emissions were based on the conservative assumption that the energy center would operate 8,760 hours per year and with worst-case emissions rates. These conservative assumptions include the scenarios whereby the oxy-combustion boiler would operate at maximum load when the compression and purification unit is processing flue gas, at a minimum of 50 percent of the time. When the compression and purification unit is not processing flue gas (e.g., startup and compression and purification unit downtime), a 45-percent load was assumed, with associated emissions rates. Table 3.1-13. Meredosia Energy Center Proposed Emissions Units Emissions Unit New or Existing New New New New New New New Existing Existing The emissions presented in Table 3.1-14 reflect a gross generating capacity of 200 MWe as reflected in the February 2012 construction permit application. The FutureGen 2.0 designers have since lowered the oxy-combustion facility to a capacity of 168 MWe. The reduced project design would result in lower emissions than those reported in Table 3.1-14, which will be reflected in a revised permit application. Table 3.1-14. Project Emissions Summary during Proposed Operations Emissions (tpy) Emissions Unit SO2 NOx CO PM10 PM2.5 VOCs 1.7 62.0 1,265.0 0.0 0.0 30.2 289.7 1,417.0 --- 21.0 21.0 --- 0.1 3.0 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.1 --- --- --- 74.7 6.1 --- --- --- --- 0.3 0.1 --- --- --- --- 0.4 0.1 --- --- --- --- 0.1 0.0 --- --- --- --- 0.0 0.0 --- --- --- --- 6.5 6.5 --- --- --- --- 0.7 0.2 --- Total Operational Project 292 1,482 1,266 105 35 30.3 Emissionsa, b, c Source: Ameren 2012 a. The data in this table reflect a generating capacity of 200 MWe as presented in the February 2012 construction permit application (Ameren 2012); however, the Alliance has recently changed the energy center design such that the facility would now generate 168 MWe. Therefore, the anticipated emissions from the downsized energy center would be lower than those presented in this table. b. The emissions data presented in this table represent scenarios presented in the construction permit application (Ameren 2012). Project emissions are based on continuous operation (8,760 hours per year) and conservatively high hourly emissions rates. c. These emissions are for stationary source emissions. CO = carbon monoxide; CPU = Compression and Purification Unit; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Also, it is important to note that the emissions levels presented in Table 3.1-14 are based on very conservative assumptions. As described above, the analysis presented in the construction permit application, and thus reflected in this EIS, assumes that the facility would be operating at normal conditions (i.e., capturing and treating flue gas) only 50 percent of the time, when in reality, the energy center is expected to capture and treat the flue gas approximately 85 percent of the time. Further, the data is based on the auxiliary boiler operating 876 hours per year during startup, when in reality, the design document assumes only 200 hours of operation annually. During normal operations (as described in Section 2.4.2.1), the flue-gas, upon exiting the boiler, would enter the gas quality control system, which comprises numerous steps designed to remove pollutants, recover heat, and prepare the flue gas before entering the compression and purification unit. The gas quality control system would incorporate state-of-the-art processes to reduce criteria pollutants to low levels. Table 3.1-15 presents select pollutant emissions during normal operating conditions based on the original 200 MWe design assuming an 85 percent operating capacity. Note that actual projected emissions are anticipated to be lower than those presented due to the fact that project designers have recently reduced the generating capacity of the oxy-combustion system to 168 MWe, which will be reflected in the revised construction permit application (under development) and the Final EIS; however, for consistency purposes in this Air Quality impacts discussion, the original configuration for 200 MWe is used. Emissions would be higher during startup, in the case of a compression and purification unit or pipeline malfunction, and during shutdown. However, these conditions are expected to be rare. Designers anticipate minimal HAPs emissions during normal operations. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for further discussion on CO2 and other GHG air emissions from the proposed project. a. Emissions listed in the table are based on expected annual operating conditions for the original 200 MWe design and hourly emissions rates from the air permit application. Expected annual operating conditions assumes the CPU (processing flue gas from the oxy-combustion boiler) operating at a maximum capacity for 7,446 hours per year; the oxy-combustion boiler operating in air-fire mode without the CPU for 200 hours per year; and two startup and shutdown cycles annually. Estimates include emissions from the oxy-combustion boiler, the CPU, the auxiliary boiler, and the various material-handling units that support these operations. b. The data in this table reflect a generating capacity of 200 MWe as presented in the February 2012 construction permit application (Ameren 2012), which was the original project design; however, the Alliance has recently changed the energy center design such that the facility would now generate 168 MWe. Therefore, the anticipated emissions from the downsized energy center would be lower than those presented in this table. c. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for discussion of CO2-eq. CO = carbon monoxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; CPU = compression and purification unit; Hg = mercury; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM = particulate matter; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Emissions Impact Summary in Relation to Current Baseline Conditions The new boiler for the oxy-combustion facility, Boiler 7, would have its own emissions stack, and thus not use any of the existing stacks at the energy center. Emissions from the new stack would have different plume velocity and buoyancy characteristics and thus its resultant air pollution dispersion characteristics would be different from those generated by the Meredosia Energy Center prior to suspension of operations at the end of 2011. Air dispersion modeling, using USEPA’s model AERMOD, was performed to assess the potential air quality impacts of the proposed project and demonstrate compliance with the NAAQS (Ameren 2012). The emissions modeling was based on the 200 MWe design of the oxy-combustion boiler and assumed that all existing boilers would be decommissioned and that the new auxiliary boiler would be utilized only for startup operations. Modeling included three distinct operating conditions:  Model Condition 1: Normal full-load oxy-combustion operation of the new boiler.  Model Condition 2: An intermediate phase of startup in which the new boiler transitions from air combustion to oxy-combustion.  Model Condition 3: The phase of startup in which the new boiler operates using ambient air for combustion, and the energy center requires the use of an auxiliary boiler for steam. The first step in the modeling exercise was to determine whether the project required a cumulative air quality assessment. This determination was made by modeling emissions from proposed project components and comparing their highest ambient air quality impacts to the significant impact limits (SILs) established by the USEPA, as shown in Table 3.1-16. Air quality impacts at or below the SIL are considered de minimis in nature. Table 3.1-17 lists the highest modeled concentrations for these model conditions, and whether they cause a significant impact. If the ambient air quality impacts associated with the project emissions were found to be greater than the SILs for any pollutant, a cumulative impacts assessment was performed for those pollutants and model conditions. SO2  1-hour3-hour24-hourannual  7.9  25  5.0  1.0   2,000 500  PM10 24-hour 5.0 CO = carbon monoxide; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SIL = significant impact limit; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter Highest Concentration Significant Model Condition Pollutant Averaging Period (µg/m3) Impact? Table 3.1-17. FutureGen 2.0 Significant Impact Analysis Results Model Condition 1  NO2  1-hour annual  7.4 0.1  No No  SO2  1-hour 3-hour 24-hour annual  0.3 0.2 0.1 0.003  No No No No  CO  1-hour 8-hour  156.5 56.6  No No  PM10  24-hour  0.1  No  1-hour  129.7  Yes  NO2  annual  2.0  Yes  1-hour 0.1 No 3-hour 0.1 No SO2 Model Condition 2 24-hour 0.02 No annual  0.002  No  1-hour  223.3  No  CO  8-hour  42.4  No  PM10  24-hour  1.2  No  Model Condition 3  NO2  1-hour annual  111.6 2.5  Yes Yes  SO2  1-hour 3-hour 24-hour annual  16.7 12.0 3.6 0.2  Yes No No No  CO  1-hour 8-hour  73.2 37.9  No No  PM10  24-hour  4.9  No  CO = carbon monoxide; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter Since Model Condition 2 and Model Condition 3 resulted in significant impacts for some pollutants and averaging periods, a cumulative impact assessment was performed for those cases. This assessment included modeling emissions from the proposed project combined with other significant sources and background concentrations provided by IEPA (Ameren 2012) to provide a cumulative ambient air impact concentration. If the cumulative concentration exceeds the NAAQS, the project’s contribution to the exceedance would be compared to the SIL. Contributions below the SIL are considered de minimis, and indicate that the proposed project would not significantly contribute to a violation of the NAAQS. The analysis showed that modeled cumulative concentrations of certain pollutants exceeded the 1-hour NAAQS. Table 3.1-18 lists the highest cumulative impacts and NAAQS for each modeled pollutant. Table 3.1-18. Cumulative Impact Analysis Maximum Cumulative Model Condition Pollutant Averaging Period NAAQS (µg/m3) Impact (µg/m3) Model Condition 3  NO2  1-hourAnnual  379.4  38.9  188.1 100  SO2  1-hour  228.9  196.3  NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Standards; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter To determine if the FutureGen 2.0 Project would contribute to the NAAQS exceedances, DOE performed a significant contribution analysis. The analysis showed that the FutureGen 2.0 Project would not significantly contribute to any of the modeled exceedances because none of the FutureGen 2.0 Project contributions were above the SILs when a NAAQS exceedance occurred. Table 3.1-19 shows the FutureGen 2.0 Project’s maximum contribution to any modeled exceedances for each model condition and pollutant. Therefore, operations of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be unlikely to significantly contribute to any modeled NAAQS exceedance (Ameren 2012). Table 3.1-19. FutureGen 2.0 Significant Contribution Analysis Results Averaging Maximum Contribution SIL Model Condition Pollutant Period (µg/m3) (µg/m3) NO2 1-hour 3.3 7.5 Model Condition 3 SO2 1-hour 4.2 7.9 NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; SIL = significant impact limit; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter Emissions Impact Summary in Relation to Historical Baseline Conditions Air permitting requirements allow for consideration of historical emissions levels. In its air permit application with the state of Illinois, the Meredosia Energy Center would be taking credit for contemporaneous emissions decreases resulting from the shutdown of all boilers at the energy center that were historically operational prior to 2012. Overall, the net emissions of the Meredosia Energy Center would decrease in comparison to historical emissions rates. PSD permits are required if net emissions from a project exceed the threshold limits. Net emissions increase is defined in 40 CFR 52.21(b)(3)(i) as “… the amount by which the sum of the following exceeds zero: (a) The increase in emissions from a particular physical change or change in the method of operation at a stationary source … and (b) Any other increases and decreases in actual emissions at the major stationary source that are contemporaneous with the particular change and are otherwise creditable…” Net emissions were calculated in comparison to Contemporaneous emissions are used to “contemporaneous” operations of the energy center, which determine if a PSD permit is required. used two years of emissions levels within a five-year period Contemporaneous changes in emissions are any prior to the start of construction for the proposed project. Based increases or decreases in emissions that occur on the projected start of construction for the FutureGen 2.0 during any 2-year (24-month) period within the 5 years prior to the start of construction. Project, the emissions sources at the Meredosia Energy Center that would have contemporaneous emissions changes include the installation of an emergency diesel generator in November 2008 under IEPA Permit No. 08100029, the shutdown of the six existing boilers, and the proposed demolition of the existing Unit 4 cooling tower. Boilers 1 through 4 were removed from service on November 9, 2009. Boilers 5 and 6 were removed from service on January 1, 2012. Table 3.1-20 presents the total projected energy center emissions, the decrease in emissions due to the 2011 suspension of operations at the energy center, and the net change in emissions from pre-suspension historical conditions. As shown, the project would not result in net emissions greater than the PSD significance threshold (per 40 CFR 52.21(b)(23)(i)) and, therefore, the project would not be subject to the PSD regulations. However, because the project would include the construction of new emissions units, a state construction permit would be required.  As discussed above, these emissions changes are based on the conservative assumptions used in the construction permit application, whereby normal operations would only occur approximately 50 percent of the time (with the remaining periods consisting of startup, compression and purification unit or pipeline malfunctions, or shutdown scenarios, when the oxy-combustion and optimal flue-gas scrubbing would not be occurring). During normal operations, the system is designed for near-zero emissions levels as shown in Table 3.1-15. Furthermore, the emissions data presented in this EIS reflect a gross generating capacity of 200 MWe, which is conservative as the energy center design has since been changed to a 168 MWe generating capacity. The reduced generating capacity would result in reduced emissions rates and minor changes in dispersion characteristics, as parameters such as stack height and exit velocity may change. DOE would confirm its conclusions of no significant impacts when the 168 MWe design is ready for modeling. Decrease in Emissions due to (-9,541) (-2,781) (-1,330) (-312) (-189) (-370) Shutdown of Boilers 1-6e (-9,250) (-1,229) (-64) (-207) (-154) (-345) Source: Ameren 2012 a. Refer to Table 3.1-14 for a detailed breakdown of emissions units during energy center operations. b. The data in this table reflect a generating capacity of 200 MWe as presented in the February 2012 construction permit application (Ameren 2012); however, the Alliance has recently changed the energy center design such that the facility would now generate 168 MWe. Therefore, the anticipated emissions from the downsized energy center would be lower than those presented in this table. c. Emissions data presented in this table assumes worst-case scenarios as presented in the construction permit application (Ameren 2012). This data reflects the conservative assumption that normal operations occur at a minimum of 50 percent of the time. Further, the data assumes the auxiliary boiler operates 876 hours per year during startup, when in contrast, the design document assumes 200 hours annually. d. Project emissions only include stationary source emissions. e. These values reflect the contemporaneous decrease in emissions due to cessation of Boilers 1-6 operations. Baseline emissions rates are based on rolling 24-month periods beginning January 2006 through September 2009, per Table 6 in the construction permit application. For emissions of pollutants that are not monitored (CO, PM, and VOCs), emissions factors were developed based on stack test data when available or USEPA emissions factor data (AP-42) (Ameren 2012). f. Project emissions minus contemporaneous emissions decreases. g. Significance threshold for PSD regulations per 40 CFR 52.21(a)(2)(iv)(b). h. A PSD permit is required if net emissions exceed the threshold limits. CO = carbon monoxide; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; PSD = Prevention of Significant Deterioration; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Cooling Tower Impacts The oxy-combustion facility would have three separate cooling water loops and associated cooling towers. These are the main cooling tower, the cooling tower for both the air separation unit and compression and purification unit, and the cooling tower for the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber. In order to assess the potential for impacts of vapor plumes from the proposed cooling towers, DOE used the 2010 IDOT environmental assessment of the Alternative #9 bridge location (see Section 3.1.2.1) as an analog for the analysis. This IDOT study reflects potential impacts of the historical cooling tower operations at the Meredosia Energy Center (assuming the cooling tower operated continuously year-round) on a potential bridge location approximately 700 feet upstream of the energy center (IDOT 2011). Table 3.1-21 presents the comparison between the existing cooling tower under historical design levels and the new cooling towers proposed for the oxy-combustion facility. As shown in the table, the new Unit 4 main cooling tower would be similar in size and water flow rate (85,000 gpm) to the historical main cooling tower (85,500 gpm). The combined water flow rate of all three proposed cooling towers would be an estimated 116,700 gpm, or approximately 36 percent higher than the historical cooling tower flow rate. However, the two smaller cooling towers would be physically separated from the new main cooling tower by more than 700 feet to the southeast. Vapor plumes generated from these towers would be expected to be substantially smaller than the plume generated by the main cooling tower, and would not be expected to contribute to any offsite impacts. DOE expects that the vapor plume generated by the proposed new main cooling tower would be similar to the historical plume estimated by the SACTI model in the IDOT study (described in Section 3.1.2.1), whereby there may be fog and ice impacts for approximately 15.4 hours and 6 hours per year, respectively, to the southeast of the energy center (Holzman 2010). The IDOT study concluded that potential impacts from the historical vapor plume to the Alternative #9 bridge alignment would not be significant, and would be even less significant on the Alternative #3 bridge location that IDOT ultimately chose (located one third of a mile farther north from the Meredosia Energy Center). Thus, since the new main cooling tower is similar in size to the historical cooling tower, potential vapor plume impacts to the proposed bridge are not expected to occur as a result of the proposed project.  a. The historical scenario reflects operations prior to the suspension of the Meredosia Energy Center at the end of 2011. b. The proposed scenario reflects the water flow-through rates for the new cooling towers proposed for the oxy-combustion facility. ASU/CPU = air separation unit/compression and purification unit; DCCPS = direct contact cooler polishing scrubber; gpm = gallons per minute CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities The Alliance expects that there would be no new stationary emissions during operations of the pipeline or the educational facilities. During operations at the injection well site(s), the CO2 would be pumped down the injection wells via two continuously operating 710 horsepower booster pumps. These pumps would be powered by the electrical utility collectively using approximately 800 MWh per month (see Section 3.15, Utilities). The projected demand on the electrical utility would not generate localized direct air emissions at the injection well site(s), though it would contribute to the overall indirect project emissions due to increased usage of electricity likely generated from a combustion process that produces emissions of criteria pollutants. The injection well site(s) would, however, have an emergency diesel generator to power the pump station and injection wells if the electricity were to fail. The generator would only be used upon emergency situations and would therefore have only a minor impact on regional air quality. There would be no other stationary emissions sources during operations of the injection well site(s). Table 3.1-22 shows the estimated emissions associated with the emergency generator, which are well below the PSD significance thresholds (shown in Tables 3.1-3 and 3.1-16). Table 3.1-22. Generator Emissions at Injection Well Site(s) during Operations Emissions (tpy)a, b SO2 NOx CO PM10 PM2.5 VOCs a. Emergency diesel generator emissions are based on USEPA default assumption of 500 hours as an appropriate estimate of the number of operational hours for an emergency generator during worst-case conditions (USEPA 1995b). b. These emissions do not include mobile source emissions. CO = carbon monoxide; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Diesel Exhaust Emissions during Operations Diesel exhaust from equipment and vehicles that run on diesel fuel (including the auxiliary boiler and emergency generators) has been associated with several health-related concerns, particularly from emissions of particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, and HAPs. Diesel exhaust is a complex mixture of hundreds of constituents in either a gas or particle form resulting from the complete and incomplete combustion of fuel and, depending on the type of equipment, sometimes small amounts of engine oil. Pollutant concentrations from diesel emissions during operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be concentrated at the project sites and would decrease with distance. DOE anticipates the resultant adverse impacts would be minor, as the sites are not in direct proximity to sensitive populations or at locations with severe existing pollutant concentrations such that the project would contribute to a cumulative impact. The auxiliary boiler and emergency generators would be located over 1,000 feet away from any receptor, and are for short-term or emergency usage only and would not be permitted for continual usage. Mobile Source Emissions during Operations During operations, the project would indirectly generate exhaust emissions from worker vehicles and delivery and waste trucks associated with operations of the energy center, injection wells, educational facilities, and from periodic inspections of the pipeline (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for discussion of vehicle traffic). Table 3.1-23 presents these estimated mobile source emissions. Mobile source emissions would be reduced by limiting speeds on roads, reducing vehicle idle time, and maintaining engines according to manufacturer’s specifications. See Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, for discussion of mobile source emissions of CO2 and other GHGs. a. Vehicle emissions calculated using the USEPA MOVES model, version 2010b (USEPA 2012b). Assumed that energy center workers would travel primarily on local roads while trucks would travel primarily on highways. Note that vehicle tire wear and brake wear emissions are also included under PM10 and PM2.5.  CO = carbon monoxide; CO2 = carbon dioxide; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator; NOx = nitrogen oxides; PM2.5 = particulate matter of diameter 2.5 microns or less; PM10 = particulate matter of diameter 10 microns or less; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; tpy = tons per year; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; VOCs = volatile organic compounds Total Operations Emissions In summary, criteria pollutant or HAP emissions generated by operations of the proposed project would not exceed relevant air quality or health standards when analyzed as an isolated project or when cumulatively combined with applicable regional sources. The project would not result in degradation of air quality greater than the PSD increments; nor would it jeopardize the attainment status of the region for any criteria pollutant; nor would the project impact the air quality or visibility at any Class I areas. 3.1.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be further reduction in air emissions with the suspension of all air emissions sources at the Meredosia Energy Center. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.2 CLIMATE AND GREENHOUSE GASES 3.2.1 Introduction This section provides information on the climate in the region of the Meredosia Energy Center and the proposed CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities. In addition, this section provides background information on GHGs—what they are, how they are produced, and why they are of concern—and on regional and federal regulations and initiatives to limit GHG emissions. Current emissions levels are then presented, along with estimates of GHG emissions that could potentially occur as a result of the construction and operation of this project. The contributions of these emissions to regional and national levels are discussed, including potential direct and indirect project benefits from reductions in GHG emissions. A further discussion of GHG emissions from the project, as they relate to the potential for global climate change, is provided in Section 4.3, Potential Cumulative Impacts. 3.2.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for climate is the regional area of the project location in Morgan County, Illinois. The ROI for GHG emissions is broadly discussed in regional (the state of Illinois), national (the United States), and global terms. Potential impacts of GHGs on climate change are generally viewed from a global cumulative perspective. 3.2.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered Meteorology and climate data were obtained primarily from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) data sources, as well as monitoring stations within Central Illinois. Weather data for Morgan County was obtained from a weather station in Jacksonville, Illinois, which has the most extensive and readily available information for the area. The Jacksonville weather station is approximately 20 miles southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center and approximately 8 miles southwest of the center of the CO2 storage study area. GHG data were obtained from a variety of sources including the USEPA, the Energy Information Administration, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the World Resources Institute, and the U.S. Global Change Research Program, formerly the U.S. Climate Change Science Program. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the project would:  Cause an increase or decrease in GHG emissions of at least 75,000 tons per year (68,250 metric tons per year) CO2-eq; or  Threaten to violate federal, state, or local laws or requirements regarding GHG emissions. Consistent with CEQ’s draft guidance on climate change and NEPA analysis (CEQ 2010a), DOE used emissions rates as a surrogate for impact severity. Although there is currently no consensus on NEPA significance thresholds for GHG emissions, EPA’s GHG Tailoring Rule (see discussion under Table 3.2-1 below) limits applicability of GHG emissions standards under the CAA to new and modified stationary facilities emitting greater than 75,000 tons per year (68,250 metric tons per year) CO2-eq of GHGs. DOE considered this to be a reasonable significance threshold for the purposes of analysis under this EIS.  3.2.1.3 Regulatory Framework Concerns regarding the relationship between GHG emissions from anthropogenic (related to human activities) sources and changes to climate have led to a variety of federal, regional, and state initiatives and programs aimed at reducing or controlling GHG emissions from human activities. In addition to federal actions, regional organizations and numerous states have also taken action to address GHG concerns. In 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Massachusetts v. EPA that CO2 and other GHGs met the definition of an air pollutant under the CAA and therefore, the USEPA had a duty to regulate GHGs if it was determined that GHGs posed a threat to public welfare. The court also ruled that USEPA could choose not to regulate GHGs, but that decision would have to be grounded in the requirements of the CAA; the USEPA could no longer take the position that GHG regulation was best left to Congress as a national policy decision. This ruling became the impetus for the federal government to initiate various actions to address GHG-related concerns. Table 3.2-1 summarizes the key federal actions to date. In recent years, Illinois and various Midwestern regional organizations have initiated actions to address GHG concerns. Table 3.2-2 summarizes these actions. Court Decisions U.S. Supreme Court decision (Massachusetts v. EPA, April 2007) that U.S. Supreme Court Decision CO2 and other GHGs met the CAA definition of an air pollutant. The decision concluded that USEPA has authority to regulate GHGs (Massachusetts v. EPA). Other Federal Actions Executive Order 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy and Economic Performance USEPA GHG Endangerment Finding USEPA and DOT GHG Emissions and CAFE Standards  Executive Order (issued October 2009) to make reduction of GHG emissions a priority for federal agencies (EO 13514). In October 2010, the CEQ finalized guidance establishing government-wide requirements for federal agencies in calculating and reporting GHG emissions associated with agency operations as required by EO 13514 (CEQ 2010b). USEPA and DOT’s National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration promulgated (April 2010) standards for model year 2012 to 2016 light duty vehicles to reduce GHG emissions under the CAA, and new CAFE standards to improve fuel economy. Rulemaking (August 2012) was also completed to set standards for light-duty vehicles of model years 2017-2025 and to draft efficiency rules for medium- and heavy-duty engines and vehicles (EIA 2011; USEPA 2011f). Proposed Carbon Pollution Standard for Future Power Plants On March 27, 2012, the USEPA proposed the first CAA standard for CO2 emissions from future power plants. If the proposed rule is finalized, it would not apply to plants currently in operation or new permitted plants that begin construction 12 months from March 2012. The proposed rule will require any new power plants to emit no more than 1,000 pounds of CO2 per megawatt hour of electricity produced. The rule is intended to promote the next generation of power plants equipped with modern technologies to help minimize GHG emissions (40 CFR 60; 77 FR 22392). FutureGen Initiative FutureGen 2.0 FutureGen 2.0 is the successor to the original FutureGen Initiative. It is a public-private partnership formed by DOE for the purpose of developing the first large-scale oxy-combustion repowering project in the world that would use carbon capture and storage technology. The coal-powered, oxy-combustion facility would capture at least 90 percent of its CO2 emissions and reduce other pollutant emissions to near zero. The captured CO2 would be transported through a 30-mile pipeline to injection wells where it would be injected into a deep geologic formation for permanent storage. The project would be designed to capture, transport, and inject approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 annually, up to a total of 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) over approximately 20 years. CAA = Clean Air Act; CAFE = Corporate Average Fuel Economy; CEQ = Council on Environmental Quality; CFR = Code of Federal Regulations; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; DOT = U.S. Department of Transportation; EO = Executive Order; EOR = enhanced oil recovery; FR = Federal Register; GHGs = greenhouse gases; IGCC = integrated gasification combined cycle; PSD = Prevention of Significant Deterioration; U.S. = United States; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Action or Initiative Description Clean Coal Portfolio Standard Law (20 ILCS 3855/1-5) Illinois’ Clean Coal Portfolio Standard Law (January 2009) established carbon sequestration targets for new coal-fueled power plants. New coal-fueled power plants that begin operations (1) before or during 2015 must capture and store 50 percent, (2) between 2016-2017 must capture and store 70 percent, and (3) after 2017 must capture and store 90 percent of the carbon emissions the facility would otherwise emit (ILGA 2009; Pew Center 2011). The law also requires large utilities serving Illinois to enter into long-term, cost-based contracts to purchase up to 5 percent of their electricity from clean coal facilities that capture at least 50 percent of their GHG emissions (ILGA 2009; Pew Center 2011). Midwestern Governors Association Illinois Executive Order 2006-11 Illinois State Executive Order issued (October 2006) to initiate a long-term strategy by the state to combat global climate change, and build on the steps the state has already taken to reduce GHG emissions (Illinois EO 2006-11). The order created the ICCAG to consider a full range of policies and strategies to reduce GHG emissions in Illinois and make recommendations to the Governor (IEPA 2011b). CCS = Carbon Capture and Storage; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; GHGs = greenhouse gases; ICCAG = Illinois Climate Change Advisory Group; ILCS = Illinois Compiled Statutes; MGA = Midwestern Governors Association; MGSC = Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium 3.2.2 Affected Environment 3.2.2.1 Regional and Local Climate General Conditions The FutureGen 2.0 Project would be located in a region of Illinois with a humid, continental climate consistent with Kppen Climate Classification “Dfa.” The Kppen Climate Classification System recognizes five major climate types based on annual and monthly temperature and precipitation averages. Each major type is designated by a capital letter A through E. The letter “D” refers to continental climates found in the interior regions of large land masses. Further subgroups are designated by a second, lowercase letter that distinguishes seasonal temperature and precipitation characteristics. The letter “f” refers to moist climates with adequate precipitation in all months and no dry season. A third letter is used to further denote climate variations. The letter “a” refers to hot summers where the warmest month is over 72°F (Kottek et al. 2011; Blueplanet 2011). Central Illinois has cold winters with average daily temperatures around 29°F and warm summers with average daily temperatures around 73°F. Atmospheric relative humidity varies diurnally and seasonally, with annual averages ranging from 83 percent in the mornings and 64 percent in the afternoons (NCDC 2011a). Maximum precipitation occurs in the spring and minimum precipitation occurs in the winter (NCDC 2013). The central plains region of Illinois historically experiences a full spectrum of weather phenomena, including extreme heat and cold, ice storms and blizzards, high winds, heavy rainfall, thunderstorms, tornadoes, and localized floods. The proposed project site is located hundreds of miles inland from the Atlantic Coast and the Gulf Coast, such that coastal hurricanes do not occur within the region. Meredosia Energy Center and Morgan County The proposed oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would be located in Morgan County in the west central region of Illinois. The CO2 pipeline would travel approximately 30 miles east from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells. In Morgan County, average high and low temperatures in January range from approximately 35°F to 17°F, respectively. On average, temperatures fall below 0°F on 7 days per year. In mid-summer, temperatures range from average highs of 86°F to average lows of 63°F. Summer high temperatures frequently reach 90°F or above. Average annual precipitation is approximately 39 inches and measurable precipitation occurs approximately 109 days per year. Peak monthly precipitation occurs in May, with an average of 4.8 inches. Average winter snowfall totals 17 inches with maximum average monthly snowfall of 5.2 inches in January (NCDC 2013). Table 3.2-3 presents additional seasonal weather data for Morgan County. Relevant severe weather events in Morgan County, Illinois, include frozen precipitation (hail, snow, and ice), tornadoes, floods, and drought (NCDC 2011b). Table 3.2-4 characterizes and quantifies historical severe weather events in Morgan County. Sources: 1981-2010 data (NCDC 2013); 2010 data (ISWS 2013) a. DOE used temperature and precipitation data from the Jacksonville weather station because of its proximity to the proposed project, in order to reflect the general climate of the area; however, air modeling data (see Section 3.1, Air Quality) was assessed independently from this EIS and was not based on the Jacksonville weather station because it is not a first order National Weather Service meteorological station. b. Spring = March, April, May; Summer = June, July, August; Fall = September, October, November; Winter = December, January, February. c. 2010 winter data was calculated using monthly totals for December 2009, January 2010, and February 2010. DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; °F = degrees Fahrenheit Morgan County had 70 severe thunderstorm events with winds over 55 mph, which Thunderstorms included 20 in Jacksonville and 3 in Meredosia.  Source: NCDC 2011b a. The National Climatic Data Center database provides historical storm events from 1950 through 2012. Availability of data for each severe weather event varies as follows: hail, snow, ice (1963-2012); thunderstorms (1955-2011); tornadoes (1957-2009); floods (1995-2011); and droughts (1996-2012). b. The Fujita Scale is a standard qualitative metric to characterize tornado intensity based on the wind speed and the damage caused. This scale ranges from F0 (weak) to F5 (violent). c. Heavy rains can cause localized flash flooding of waterways, and flooding of low-lying areas, particularly of roads. As discussed in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, the energy center and CO2 injection well site(s) would not be in the 100-year or 500-year floodplains; however, certain portions of the pipeline corridor would traverse floodplains. d. Droughts are typically defined as extended periods of time, usually over 3 months, when a region receives consistently below average precipitation and notes a deficiency in its water supply. mph = miles per hour Typical surface wind speed and direction for the project area are illustrated by a wind rose that displays the percentage of time over a given period that the wind blows from a particular direction. The nearest available wind rose was generated using data from the Springfield, Illinois Airport, located approximately 48 miles to the east from the Meredosia Energy Center. Figure 3.2-1 presents this wind rose displaying annual average wind characteristics generated using meteorological data from 2005 to 2009. The predominant surface wind direction for the region is from the south. The average wind speed is 9.4 miles per hour (4.23 meters per second). The region has calm winds 2.1 percent of the time. 3.2.2.2 Greenhouse Gases Background Information GHGs in the earth’s atmosphere help regulate the temperature of the planet. A part of the incoming solar radiation (sunlight) that reaches the earth’s surface is absorbed and then re-emitted as infrared radiation. GHGs in the atmosphere, in turn, absorb some of that infrared radiation and cause the atmosphere’s temperature to rise. This process, known as the greenhouse effect, essentially traps some of the sun’s heat in the atmosphere. Without atmospheric GHGs, the earth’s temperature would be approximately 60°F colder than at present and would not support life as we know it (USEPA 2009b). Since the Industrial Revolution (onset circa 1750), anthropogenic emissions of GHGs have increased, resulting in current concerns about the potential for global climate change. GHGs include water vapor, CO2, ozone, methane, nitrous oxide, and several classes of halogenated substances that contain fluorine, chlorine, or bromine (including chlorofluorocarbons). After water vapor, CO2 is the most abundant GHG but, unlike water vapor, CO2 remains in the atmosphere for long periods of time and tends to mix quickly and evenly throughout the lower levels of the global atmosphere. There are also several gases that do not have a direct global warming effect, but indirectly affect terrestrial or m/s = meeters per second; %% = percent solar radiation absorption by influencing the destruction or formation of GHGs like ozone. These gases include carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and non-methane volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Extremely small particles, such as sulfur dioxide or elemental carbon emissions, can also affect the absorptive characteristics of the atmosphere and therefore influence the greenhouse effect. Although several GHGs occur naturally in the atmosphere, human activities from all sectors of the CO2-equivalent is a measure used to compare GHGs economy also release these gases into the atmosphere. based on their global warming potential, using the Notably, industrial and agricultural activities release functionally equivalent amount or concentration of CO2 GHGs including CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, and as the reference. The CO2-equivalent for a gas is derived chlorofluorocarbons to the atmosphere, where they can by multiplying the amount of the gas by its global warming potential; this potential is a function of the gas’s remain for long periods of time. Since GHG impacts are ability to absorb infrared radiation and its persistence in often assessed on a global (international) scale, GHGs are the atmosphere after it is released. typically measured in metric units, specifically, metric tons. GHGs are often reported as CO2-eq, which is a measurement that puts all GHGs in terms relative to CO2 (the predominant GHG), based on their global warming potential. For a given mixture of GHGs, the CO2-eq is the amount of CO2 that would have the same global warming effect as the mixture of GHGs. Global warming potential is a measure of how much a given mass of a GHG is estimated to contribute to global warming in comparison to an equivalent mass of CO2. To calculate CO2-eq quantities, the mass of each GHG is multiplied by its global warming potential and summed (IPCC 2007). A list of global warming potential values can be found at 40 CFR 98 (Subpart A, Table A-1).  In the pre-industrial era (before 1750 AD), the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere appears to have been approximately 280 parts per million (IPCC 2007). Data indicates that from the 1700s to the present day, global atmospheric concentrations of CO2 have risen approximately 36 percent (USEPA 2009b). In 1958, C.D. Keeling and others began measuring the concentration of atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa in Hawaii. Measurements by Keeling’s team and others document that the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has been steadily increasing from approximately 316 parts per million in 1959 to 391.76 parts per million in February 2011 (NOAA 2011). The average annual CO2 concentration growth rate during the last decade as measured at Mauna Loa (2001-2010 average: 2.04 parts per million per year) has been significantly higher than the average CO2 growth rate during the previous decade (1991-2000 average: 1.55 parts per million per year) or the last 50 years (1961-2010 average: 1.47 parts per million per year) (NOAA 2011). Much of the increase in global concentrations of CO2 can be attributed to GHG emissions resulting from human activities such as the use of fossil fuels and changes in land use. Figure 3.2-2 depicts the changes in global CO2 concentrations and CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use over the past 250 years. Current Emissions Global anthropogenic emissions of CO2 (and other GHGs) have been rising since the 1800s, but the rate of emissions has increased sharply since the middle of the 20th century. Much of this rise in emissions is due to the use of fossil fuels in electricity generation, transportation, and industry. In 2004, emissions of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion (30,000 million tons; 27,264 million metric tons) accounted for approximately 57 percent of global anthropogenic GHG emissions from all sources; by 2008, annual CO2 emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels equaled 34,000 million tons (30,421 million metric tons), an increase of approximately 12 percent (Boden et al. 2012; IPCC 2007). CO2 is also released as a result of deforestation and other changes in land use. Other important GHGs include:   Methane, released from waste management and agricultural activities; and   Nitrous oxide, released from agricultural soil and animal manure management, sewage treatment, combustion of fossil fuels, and industrial activities.  40000 Atmospheric CO2 Concentration (ppmv) 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 35000 30000 25000 20000 15000 10000 5000 0 Fossil Fuel CO2 Emissions (million metric tons) 2020 2010 20002000 1990 1980 1970 1960 1960 1950 1940 1930 1920 1910 1900 1890 1880 1870 1860 1850 1840 18301830 1820 1810 1800 17901790 1780 1770 1760 1750 Sources: DDeveloped from Booden et al. 2012; EEtheridge et al. 19996, 2006; NOAA 22012. CO2 = carbbon dioxide; ppmvv = parts per millioon by volume Figuure 3.2-2. Historical Trendds in Global AAtmosphericc CO2 Conceentrations annd Emissionss Figure 3.22-3 shows thhe contributioon to global eemissions byy different ecoonomic sectoors and by tyype of GHGs. Source: IPCCC 2007 All ratios arre expressed in terms of CO2-eq. CO2 = carboon dioxide; CO2-eq = CO2 equivalennts; CH4 = methanne; N2O = nitrous ooxide; % = percentt Within the United States, overall anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2010 totaled approximately 7,504 million tons CO2-eq (6,822 million metric tons CO2-eq), of which approximately 79 percent was composed of CO2 (USEPA 2012d). There was a 3.2 percent increase in anthropogenic GHG emissions from 2009 (7,234 million tons CO2-eq; 6,576 million metric tons CO2-eq) to 2010. Table 3.2-5 shows that as of 2010, CO2 emissions from United States electricity generation had increased by 24 percent since 1990, while total GHG emissions (from all reported sources) grew by 10.5 percent over the same period. In 2010, electric power generation contributed 40 percent of all CO2 emissions in the United States (and 33 percent of all GHG emissions), of which 81 percent was attributable to the use of coal.  Table 3.2-5. United States CO2 Emissions from Electric Power Sector Energy Consumption  CO2 Emissions, million tons (million metric tons)  Fuel  1990  2005 2006 2007 2008 2009  2010    Total CO2 Emissions from 5,394 6,526 6,424 6,531 6,331 5,908 6,114 All Energy-Related Sectorsc (4,904) (5,933) (5,840) (5,937) (5,755) (5,371) (5,558) Source: USEPA 2012d a. Emissions from nonbiogenic sources, including fuels derived from recycled tires. b.  From pollution control equipment installed at electricity generation facilities. c. Includes residential, commercial, industrial, and transportation end-use sectors. Note: Totals may not equal sum of components due to independent rounding. CO2 = carbon dioxide Figure 3.2-4 shows long-term projections in United States CO2 emissions (in million metric tons CO2-eq) by sector and source for the year 2030 compared to current rates, after considering higher but uncertain world oil prices, growing concern about GHG emissions, increasing use of renewable fuels, increasing shift to use of more efficient vehicles, improved end-use appliance efficiency, and general trends in production and usage of various fuel types (EIA 2009). Over the next two decades, the largest share of United States CO2 emissions will continue to come from electricity generation, followed closely by transportation. However, while electricity generation is projected to increase by 0.9 percent per year, CO2 emissions from electricity generation would increase by only 0.5 percent per year. This projected slower rate of increase in emissions is in part due to an expected increase in renewable energy sources from 8 percent in 2007 to 14 percent in 2030, as well as efficiency improvements in technologies that emit less CO2 and the commercial availability of CO2 mitigation techniques. More rapid improvements in technologies, mitigation techniques, and more rapid adoption of voluntary and mandatory CO2 emissions reduction programs could result in even lower CO2 emissions levels than those projected (EIA 2009). Within the state of Illinois, GHG emissions from all sources equaled 317 million tons CO2-eq (288 million metric tons CO2-eq) in 2007, or approximately 4.3 percent of total U.S GHG emissions in that year (WRI 2012). Emissions of CO2 from all energy-related activities in Illinois totaled 267 million tons CO2-eq (243 million metric tons CO2-eq), with 104 million tons CO2-eq (95 million metric tons CO2-eq) resulting from electric power generation. Total GHG emissions for the state of Illinois are projected to increase to approximately 358 million tons CO2-eq (325 million metric tons CO2-eq) by 2020. Note that these are conservative projections, based only on increases in energy-related GHG emissions, and assume that emissions from industrial activity, agriculture, and waste management will remain constant at 2003 levels (WRI 2007). Source: Developed from 2007 and projected 2030 data presented in EIA 2009 (Report No. DOE/EIA-0383 [2009]) Figure 3.2-4. United States CO2 Emissions by Sector 3.2.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.2.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Construction of the project would generate GHG emissions from the use of construction equipment, delivery trucks, and construction worker vehicles. DOE calculated GHG emissions using the NONROAD and the MOVES models described in Section 3.1, Air Quality, based on estimates of the types and numbers of construction equipment and vehicles needed for construction of the project and the duration of their use. Table 3.2-6 presents the estimated GHG emissions that would be generated by the construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the injection well site(s), and the educational facilities. The total calculated emissions are based on the preliminary project design and conservative assumptions regarding activity levels and duration and are expected to be overestimates of actual emissions. DOE estimates that GHG emissions from construction of the project would equal approximately 44,408 tons CO2-eq (40,411 metric tons CO2-eq). Over the three-year construction period for the project (assumed to be mid-2014 through mid-2017 for this analysis), GHG emissions for the state of Illinois are projected to be approximately 1,024 million tons CO2-eq (931 million metric tons CO2-eq) (WRI 2007). Construction-related impacts resulting from tailpipe emissions of GHGs would be minimized by the use of appropriate BMPs, such as maintaining engines according to manufacturers’ specifications, minimizing idling of equipment while not in use, and using electricity from the grid if available to reduce the use of diesel or gasoline generators for operating construction equipment.  Table 3.2-6. Estimated Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Construction Activities tons CO2-eq (metric tons CO2-eq) Project Area Direct Emissionsa Indirect Emissionsb Total Emissions 13,435 (12,225) 5,696 (5,183) 19,131 (17,409) CO2 Pipeline 4,315 (3,926) 2,984 (2,715) 7,299 (6,642) 14,243 (12,962) 2,893 (2,633) 17,136 (15,594) Educational 194 (176) 648 (590) 842 (766) Facilities a. Direct emissions of methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and other greenhouse gases would be negligible and are not included in these estimates. b. Vehicle tailpipe emissions from worker, materials, and waste transport. Calculated using MOVES 2010b; results include methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions. CO2 = carbon dioxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; MOVES = Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator 3.2.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities The FutureGen 2.0 Project comprises two major components—the operation of a 168 MWe steam turbine generator at the Meredosia Energy Center with oxy-combustion and carbon capture technologies, and the subsequent transport of the captured CO2 from the energy center via pipeline to CO2 injection well site(s) where it would be injected and stored in a deep geologic formation. At the energy center, operation of the proposed plant would generate direct GHG emissions from the oxycombustion boiler and the compression and purification unit, the auxiliary boiler, and the diesel emergency generator, as well as indirect emissions of GHGs as a result of transportation-related exhaust from employee vehicles and truck transport of materials and wastes. At the injection well site(s), operations would generate direct GHG emissions from operation of the diesel emergency generator (which is expected to be infrequent), and indirect GHG emissions from transportation-related exhaust. Table 3.2-7 presents the direct and indirect GHG emissions generated by the proposed project. The estimated CO2 emissions assume that the compression and purification unit is fully functioning and producing dense phase CO2, which is being pumped to the injection wells (Ameren 2012). See Section 3.1, Air Quality, for a discussion of the assumptions made and methodology used to calculate the emissions resulting from project operations. Table 3.2-8 presents the estimated emissions of individual GHGs from project operations, and illustrates the calculation of CO2-eq emissions for the GHG’s using global warming potentials. As discussed under Section 3.2.2.2, CO2-eq quantities are derived by multiplying each GHG’s emissions by its global warming potential. These CO2-eq quantities can then be summed to obtain total CO2-eq emissions. At the energy center, the oxy-combustion process would capture approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 annually. Annual GHG emissions would be approximately 134,438 tons CO2-eq (122,217 metric tons CO2-eq) from the oxy-combustion boiler alone; after taking all project components into account, annual emissions would be 150,316 tons CO2-eq (136,661 metric tons CO2-eq). Operational impacts resulting from tailpipe emissions of GHGs would be minimized by the use of appropriate BMPs such as maintaining engines according to manufacturers’ specifications, minimizing idling of equipment while not in use. Injection Well Site(s) Diesel emergency generator 170 (154) Total Direct Emissions 139,824 (127,113) a. The data in this table reflect a generating capacity of the 168 MWe oxy-combustion boiler design using 60 percent Illinois coal and 40 percent Power River Basin coal. The calculations assume 876 hours per year of operation of the fuel-oil fired auxiliary boiler (typically during startup); and 100 hours per year of operation for each of the diesel emergency generators (energy center and injection wells).  b. Assuming a conservative CO2 capture efficiency of 90%, and that only CO2 is captured by the CPU; other GHGs (including methane and nitrous oxide) are vented through the oxy-combustion boiler stack. c. The CPU would capture between 1,122,612 and 1,196,900 tons (1,020,556 to 1,088,091 metric tons) of CO2 per year. The low end of that range has been used in these calculations, to yield conservative (higher) estimates of GHG emissions during project operation. d. Vehicle tailpipe emissions from worker, materials, and waste transport. Calculated using MOVES 2010b. CO2 = carbon dioxide; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; CPU = compression and purification unit; GHG = greenhouse gas; MWe = megawatt electrical; % = percent Total  150,316 (136,661) a. Source: 40 CFR 98 Subpart A, Table A-1. b. Totals reflect rounding in calculations. CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent; GHG = greenhouse gas The project is expected to begin operations in 2017. In that year, GHG emissions for the state of Illinois are projected to be approximately 345 million tons CO2-eq (315 million metric tons CO2-eq) (WRI 2007). By utilizing advanced oxy-combustion technology and capturing and storing CO2, the project would reduce GHG emissions from the generation of 168 MWe of electricity by at least 90 percent compared to a conventional coal-fueled plant, or by at least 70 percent compared to a natural gas-fueled plant (see Table 3.2-9), and would thus have a beneficial impact on regional GHG emissions during operations. On a broader scale, successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread acceptance and deployment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage of CO2, thus fostering a long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States. 1,600,498  Conventional Coal-fired Power Planta (1,454,998) Source: 40 CFR 98 Subpart A, Table A-1. a. Fuel use quantities given in Table 2-4. Powder River Basin coal is sub-bituminous; Illinois No. 6 coal is bituminous. b. Estimated based on 8,000 hours of operation per year at 100 percent capacity and a heat rate of 6,719 Btu/kWh, assuming the power plant would utilize advanced natural gas combined cycle technology. Fuel use during startup or shutdown not included. Btu/kWh = British thermal units per kilowatt hour; CO2-eq = carbon dioxide equivalent During operation, the project would comply with all GHG-related federal and state rules. The PSD and Title V GHG Tailoring Rule requires an existing source that increases GHG emissions by more than 75,000 tons (CO2-eq) per year (68,250 metric tons CO2-eq per year) to comply with PSD permitting requirements. It also requires existing sources that emit more than 100,000 tons (CO2-eq) per year (91,000 metric tons CO2-eq per year) of GHGs to comply with Title V operating permit requirements. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would comply with all GHG-related requirements in the proposed plant’s CAA operating (Title V) permit. As an emitter of more than 27,500 tons (CO2-eq) per year (25,000 metric tons CO2-eq per year) of GHGs, the project would also be required to comply with the federal Mandatory Reporting Rule, and would submit annual GHG inventories to USEPA. Finally, Illinois’ Clean Coal Portfolio Standard Law requires that any new coal-fired power plants that begin operations in 2016-2017 capture and store 70 percent of their GHG emissions, and plants beginning operations after 2017 capture and store 90 percent of their emissions. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would capture at least 90 percent of its emissions and would therefore be in compliance with the Illinois law.  On April 13, 2012, USEPA proposed a new rule that would require new power plants with a capacity greater than 25 MWe to emit no more than 1,000 pounds of CO2 per MWh (77 FR 22392). If this rule were to come into effect, existing coal-based power plants would need to reduce their GHG emissions by approximately 50 percent, on average. To meet this goal, the oxy-combustion facility would be required to capture 5 percent of the CO2 otherwise emitted; however, this project has been designed to exceed this requirement by capturing and storing at least 90 percent of its GHG emissions. Current scientific methods do not enable an evaluation of the relationship of reductions or increases in GHG emissions from a specific source to a particular change in either local or global climate. Therefore, the potential contribution or removal of anthropogenic GHGs attributable to this project, and its impact on global climate change, is discussed within the context of cumulative impacts. Section 4.3, Potential Cumulative Impacts, presents a discussion of the potential cumulative impacts related to GHG emissions in this context. This project’s reduction in potential CO2 emissions, compared to the emissions from a conventional coal- or natural gas-fueled power plant generating the same amount of electricity, would potentially generate beneficial impacts in terms of cumulative effects on climate change.  3.2.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no demonstration of technologies that could change GHG emissions.  Under the no action alternative, equivalent electrical generation by a conventional coal-fueled or natural gas-fired power plant in the absence of the proposed project could result in higher emissions of GHGs with an associated greater contribution to global climate change (see Table 3.2-9). Furthermore, the potential future benefits to GHG emissions reduction that may be achieved nationally and internationally through the retrofit of existing coal-fueled power plants using oxy-combustion technology plus CO2 capture and geologic storage might not be realized without successful commercial demonstration of these technologies. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.3 PHYSIOGRAPHY AND SOILS 3.3.1 Introduction This section describes the physiography (i.e., the earth’s surface and exterior physical features) and soils that could be directly or indirectly affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. This section also analyzes the potential effects of this project on these resources.  3.3.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for physiography and soils includes the areas potentially affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, which consists of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the injection wells, and the educational facilities. The ROI defines the extent of the areas where direct effects from construction and operation may be experienced, and encompasses the areas where indirect effects from the proposed project would most likely occur.  3.3.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE evaluated the potential effects of the construction and operation of the proposed project on soils within the ROI, primarily focused on their ability to support agriculture and their potential for erosion hazards. DOE used several data sources to support this analysis, including U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps, U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil surveys, and consultation with the IDOA. DOE analyzed the potential impacts to physiography and soils by overlaying the areas of proposed construction on soil survey maps. DOE calculated quantitative estimates of the potential for loss of soil resources using geographic information systems (GIS) and existing land cover data. DOE made qualitative assessments for the potential effects on physiography and soils based on properties of soils that could be impacted and the expected attributes of the project. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed project components would:  Result in permanent or temporary soil removal;  Cause the permanent loss of prime farmland soil or farmland of statewide importance (through conversion to nonagricultural uses);  Result in significant soil erosion;  Cause soil contamination due to spills of hazardous materials; or  Change soil characteristics and composition. 3.3.1.3 Regulatory Framework The Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act (Public Law 97-98; 7 USC 4201 et seq.) seeks to minimize the extent to which federal programs contribute to the unnecessary and irreversible conversion of farmland soils (prime farmland) to nonagricultural uses. The supply of high quality farmlands is limited; therefore, the USDA encourages the preservation of soils classified as “prime farmland,” “prime farmland if drained,” or “farmland of statewide importance.” The definition of prime farmland, as per NRCS Handbook, part 622.04 (USDA 2011), is included below. Prime farmland is land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops and that is available for these uses. It has the combination of soil properties, growing season, and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields of crops in an economic manner if it is treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods. In general, prime farmland has an adequate and dependable water supply from precipitation or irrigation, a favorable temperature and growing season, an acceptable level of acidity or alkalinity, an acceptable content of salt or sodium, and few or no rocks. Its soils are permeable to water and air. Prime farmland is not excessively eroded or saturated with water for long periods of time, and it either does not flood frequently during the growing season or is protected from flooding. Most of the native soils in Illinois are considered prime farmland. Prime farmland soils in Illinois are identified in NRCS soil surveys by soil association. The IDOA is tasked with reviewing all federal and state projects for their potential impact to prime farmland by considering project data, soil surveys, and land use by completing Form AD-1006, the Farmland Conversion Impact Rating. Soil erosion prevention and control, particularly during construction activities, associated with stormwater discharges are regulated by the IEPA under Sections 401 and 402 of the Clean Water Act (CWA) (permitting requirements) through the NPDES permit program (see Chapter 5, Regulatory and Permit Requirements). The state’s NPDES program is modeled on the federal NPDES program, which requires soil erosion control measures during construction. The CWA also regulates the handling and storage of petroleum products, which could contaminate soils from an unintended release. 3.3.2 Affected Environment 3.3.2.1 Physiography The project study area is located within the Lower Illinois River Basin. The majority of the basin is extremely flat with less than 20 feet of relief, although the Illinois River dissects the flat topography of the basin in central Illinois. The area of greatest topographic relief occurs along the Illinois River valley, where elevations can vary by as much as 200 to 400 feet (USGS 2000a). Lands within the basin range from 600 to 800 feet above sea level. The Lower Illinois River Basin is located within the Central Lowland physiographic province (USGS 2011a). The Central Lowland province is characterized by low relief and gently rolling hills. The major landforms for the province are glacial in origin. Much of this lowland is a glacial till plain that is presently covered by loess (wind-driven), lacustrine (lake-related), and alluvial (river-related) deposits. More specifically, 99.5 percent of the basin is in the Till Plains Section of the Central Lowland physiographic province (see Figure 3.3-1). The Till Plains Section is further divided into four subsections: the Bloomington Ridged Plain (38 percent), the Galesburg Plain (26 percent), the Springfield Plain (35 percent), and the Kankakee Plain (1 percent) (USGS 2000b). The FutureGen 2.0 Project lies entirely within the Springfield Plain subsection. The Springfield Plain is covered by glacial drift deposits from the Illinoian stage and is mostly flat, with very localized variations in topography. Section 3.4, Geology, discusses the sequence of glacial deposition in the Lower Illinois River Basin. 3.3.2.2 Soils The evaluation of soils potentially impacted by the proposed project is based on the mapped NRCS soil units. A mapped soil unit is a collection of areas defined and named the same in terms of their soil components. The NRCS uses the chemical and physical characteristics of the soil to organize similar soils into groups. Soil map units are defined by a series of properties that are important to soil use, such as surface texture and slope, and are typically used in displaying localized changes. Each map unit differs in some respect from all others in a survey area and is uniquely identified on a soil map. Soil units made up of two or more major soil types in a complex pattern or in a very small area (where each soil type cannot be identified separately) are considered soil complexes.  The soils in the Lower Illinois River Basin formed mostly in thick loess. Loess consists of fine-grained material, typically silt-sized particles, deposited by wind. Loess represents one of the dominant mechanisms for soil formation across the region. Historically, some loess deposits have been observed in thicknesses greater than 60 inches (USGS 2011a).   Soource: ISGS 2012aa COO2 = carbon dioxidde; Mt. = Mount Approxximate location of MMeredosia Energyy Center Approoximate location oof CO2 storage stuudy area Soils formed in sandy to clayey alluvial sediments are found near major streams. Several soil properties are relevant to characterizing the environment or determining the potential for adverse effects to soils:  Soil erodibility is a characteristic based on the potential for soil detachment by runoff and raindrop impact. Sedimentation in lakes and the Illinois River is one of the most important water- quality problems in the Lower Illinois River Basin (USGS 2011a) (see Section 3.6, Surface Water). Soil erosion also reduces the amount of vertical buffer soil between pipelines and deep tillage implements (IDOA 2012). The basin is particularly susceptible to erosion and sedimentation for three reasons: (1) the soils' parent materials (loess) tend to erode easily; (2) under conventional tillage practices for corn and soybeans, bare earth is present for the majority of the year; and (3) Illinois experiences higher rainfall during the spring, a period which tends to have lower vegetative cover on cropland (USGS 2011a). The NRCS soil erosion factor for water is based on physical tests and calculations of the grain size, amount of organic material, structure classes, and permeability of the soil (Rmkens et al. 1996). Each of these factors contributes to a soil being more susceptible to erosion when disturbed.  The NRCS soil survey designates the hazard associated with soil erosion for each map unit, when disturbed, as either slight (low), moderate, or severe, as described below (Soil Survey Division Staff 1993): o Slight. Presents, at most, minor problems associated with erosion. The soil gives satisfactory performance with little or no modification required. Modifications or operations dictated by the use are simple and relatively inexpensive. With normal maintenance, performance should be satisfactory for a period of time generally considered acceptable with respect to erosion. o Moderate. Does not require exceptional risk or cost associated with erosion, but the soil does have certain undesirable properties or features. Some modification of the soil itself, special design, or maintenance is required for satisfactory performance over an acceptable period of time. The needed measures usually increase the cost of establishing or maintaining the use, but the added cost is generally not prohibitive. o Severe. Requires unacceptable risk to use the soil if not appreciably modified. Special design, a significant increase in construction cost, or an appreciably higher maintenance cost is required for satisfactory performance over an acceptable period of time. A limitation that requires removal and replacement of the soil would be rated severe. The rating does not imply that the soil cannot be adapted to a particular use, but rather that the cost of overcoming the limitation would be high.  Slope gradient influences the retention and movement of water, the potential for increased soil erosion, the amount and ease of construction machinery movement, and engineering uses of the soil (USDA 2012). Construction on larger or steeper slopes may require additional cut and fill, and steeper slopes can increase the potential for soil erosion. Typically, soils with the steepest gradient are rated as severe erosion hazard but are usually well drained.  Prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance is a NRCS designation of a soil series based on the characteristics described in Section 3.3.1.3. Prime farmland soils may occur in a variety of parent materials, geomorphic locations, and climates. Most of the native soils in Illinois are considered prime farmland. Soils that contain water near or at the surface may also be considered “prime farmland, if drained.” Drain tiles and manmade ditches are often used by farmers to drain the excess water in these soils. Some soils that are not considered prime farmland, but may have properties that are recognized by the state as highly productive, are classified as “farmland of statewide importance.” The presence of hydric soils within the ROI was also examined. Hydric is a USDA/NRCS classification that is primarily based on the wetness of the soil, which can produce anaerobic conditions in the upper layers (USDA 2011). Not all poorly drained soils are considered hydric, as other factors, such as the depth and duration of the water table, and iron oxidation in the soil column are also taken into consideration. Hydric soils are used, in addition to vegetation types present and other attributes, to delineate wetlands. Impacts to hydric soils, specifically those located in state- or federally-regulated wetlands, were not analyzed within this section. Refer to Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, for a discussion of wetlands and impacts to wetlands within the ROI. Tables 3.3-1 through 3.3-3 identify the soil map units coincident with the project components. The tables include the soil map unit code, texture, the potential for erosion, drainage class, range of slopes, and the farmland status for each of the soil types. Most of the soils are considered prime farmland, although some retain enough water to require draining to support crops. The entire project is located within Morgan County, Illinois. Agricultural land use has increased in Morgan County during the last decade. In 1997, Morgan County contained a total area of 305,585 acres of farmland, representing approximately 83 percent of the county land area (USDA 1999). In 2007, Morgan County had increased the total farmland to 320,512 acres, with an average size of 433 acres (USDA 2009). The primary crops in Morgan County are corn, soybeans, and wheat. 3.3.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center The area around the existing Meredosia Energy Center is relatively flat, with an average elevation of approximately 446 feet above sea level. Natural and man-made variations in the topography cause an average relief of up to 6 feet. The elevation at the proposed location for the oxy-combustion facility is approximately 450 feet above sea level, which is the highest elevation onsite and where all of the existing structures associated with the Meredosia Energy Center are located. As discussed in Section 3.3.2.1, the Meredosia Energy Center is located within the Lower Illinois River Basin. The Meredosia Energy Center is located in an area with high soil permeability. Therefore, the aquifer is vulnerable to contamination (Berg et al. 1984) (see Section 3.5, Groundwater). Most of the soils in the Meredosia area have characteristics that are well suited for agriculture and farmland use. On the Meredosia Energy Center property, the soil survey of Morgan and Scott counties identified soils with beneficial agricultural production properties (Soil Survey Staff 2011a). As shown in Figure 3.3-2, the majority of the soils at the Meredosia Energy Center are identified as Plainfield soils, which are characterized as farmland soils of statewide importance. Urban soils are also depicted on portions of the energy center property. Urban soils are formed from previously disturbed soil series and typically are covered by impervious structures and pavement; in this case, by the existing Meredosia Energy Center facilities. Since the last soil survey review at the Meredosia Energy Center, additional structures and facilities have been built (e.g., coal piles, detention basins, roads), which have disturbed the Plainfield soils and modified the positive soil characteristics for farmland. In addition, the soils onsite have not been farmed in at least several decades, and the majority of land surrounding the energy center has been developed for industrial use, both of which are factors which decrease the overall farmland value of the soils at the Meredosia Energy Center. Table 3.3-1 identifies and describes the soil map units present within the proposed construction footprint at the Meredosia Energy Center, as seen in Figure 3.3-2. These soils have a slight or moderate potential for erosion. Slopes at the site range from nearly flat to 15 percent. Plainfield soils, the predominant onsite soil type, form in sandy drift and are typically found on outwash plains, glacial lake basins, stream terraces, moraines, and other upland places. Plainfield soils are further identified as being excessively drained, having rapid to very rapid permeability, and having a negligible to medium potential for surface runoff (National Cooperative Soil Survey 2006). Although the Plainfield loamy sand is described as excessively drained, it contains a component that may be identified as hydric (i.e., those soils typically Sourcee: USDA/NRCS 2006 found in wetlands) when found along depressions and stream terraces. Two small areas of jurisdictional wetlands exist onsite, which are discussed in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains.  As stated earlier, a majority of the mapped soil types at the Meredosia Energy Center are generally classified as farmland of statewide importance and account for 86 percent of the project area. However, the Meredosia Energy Center property has been extensively developed for decades and some of the underlying surface soils have been significantly disturbed. The site is currently used solely for industrial purposes and does not contain any agricultural production. Therefore, although the soil types onsite are associated with farmlands of statewide importance, today these soils would likely not meet the necessary criteria to support this classification.  Plainfield loamy 54B sand Slight Excessively drained No Yesa 2-7 533 Urban land Not rated Not applicable No No Sources: USDA/NRCS 2006; Soil Survey Staff 2011a; Soil Survey Staff 2011b a. The Meredosia Energy Center site is an industrial site, and many of the underlying soils have been disturbed since the soil survey was initially performed. Therefore, although soils on the property are categorized as farmland of statewide importance, today these soils would likely not meet the necessary criteria to support this classification. 3.3.2.4 CO2 Pipeline The CO2 pipeline would be located entirely within the Springfield Plain, a physiographic subsection of the Till Plains Section (see Figure 3.3-1). Table 3.3-2 identifies the soil types that are located within the ROI for the southern and northern CO2 pipeline routes. Table 3.3-2 also describes the primary properties of these soils, their potential for erosion, and their status as prime farmland soils. Most of the soils are identified as Rozetta silt loam, Ipava silt loam, Sable silty clay loam, and Tama silt loam. A majority of the soils are considered prime farmland, although some retain enough water to require draining to support crops. Farmers use drain tiles beneath their fields and man-made ditches to remove water from those soils classified as “prime farmland, if drained.” As shown in Table 3.3-2, a variety of soils map units are located along the CO2 pipeline corridor, although many are found in patches that are one acre or less. Table 3.3-2. Soil Map Units Along the Southern and Northern CO2 Pipeline Routes Farmland of Soil Unit Erosion Prime Slope Soil Unit Name Drainage Class Statewide Symbol Hazard Farmland (percent) Importance Southern Route Sylvan silty clay 19D3 Severe Well drained No Yes 10-15 loam Severe Well drained No No 15-30 Moderately well 36B Tama silt loam Moderate Yes Yes 2-5 drained Northern Route Sources: USDA/NRCS 2006 a. If drained. b. If protected from flooding or not frequently flooded during the growing season. c. If drained and either protected from flooding or not frequently flooded during the growing season. CO2 = carbon dioxide 3.3.2.5 CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 storage study area is located within the Lower Illinois River Basin in the Springfield Plain subsection of the Till Plains Section of the Central Lowland physiographic province (see Figure 3.3-1). Table 3.3-3 identifies the soil types that are located within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. Table 3.3-3 also describes the primary properties of these soils, their potential for erosion, and their status as prime farmland soils. Almost all of the soils within the CO2 storage study area are considered well suited for agriculture and farmland use. Within the CO2 storage study area, most of the soils are identified as Rozetta silt loam, Ipava silt loam, and Elco silt loam. A majority of the soils are considered prime farmland, although some retain enough water to require draining to support crops. 333 Wakeland silt loam Slight Yesb Yes 0-2 drained Sources: USDA/NRCS 2006 a. If drained. b. If drained and either protected from flooding or not frequently flooded during the growing season. CO2 = carbon dioxide 3.3.2.6 Educational Facilities The proposed educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville, which is the closest urban area to the CO2 storage study area. Although a specific site has not yet been identified, the proposed site or sites for the educational facilities would be areas that have been previously disturbed, with utilities (e.g., electricity, telecommunications, water, and sewer) located on or immediately adjacent to the site or sites. These educational facilities could involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination of new construction and rehabilitation. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve these functions. Whether in or near Jacksonville, the educational facilities would be located within the Lower Illinois River Basin in the Springfield Plan subsection of the Till Plains Section of the Central Lowland physiographic province (see Figure 3.3-1). The majority of the soils in Jacksonville are classified as Tama urban land complex, found on 2 to 5 percent slopes, and Ipava urban land complex, found on 0 to 3 percent slopes. The Tama urban land complex is a gently sloping, moderately well drained soil intermingled with areas of Urban land. Water and air move through the Tama soil at a moderate rate. Surface runoff is medium on the Tama soil and rapid on the Urban land. The Ipava urban land complex is a somewhat poorly drained soil intermingled with areas of Urban land. Water and air move through the Ipava soil at a moderately slow rate. Surface runoff is slow on the Ipava soil and rapid on the Urban land. Ipava and Tama soils are both considered prime farmland; however, when they are intermingled with Urban land, as with the complexes found around Jacksonville, the soil complex is not classified as prime farmland.  3.3.3 Impacts of Proposed Action This section describes the potential impacts on physiography and soils from the construction and operation of the proposed project. 3.3.3.1 Construction Impacts Direct impacts to soils would occur from the construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and the educational facilities. Construction activities that could affect soils for each of these project components include clearing vegetation, grading, and basic earthmoving. The CO2 pipeline would also require trenching. Brush clearing would be required at and around the Meredosia Energy Center, although most construction would occur on already developed portions of the property. These construction activities for the FutureGen 2.0 Project would increase the potential for soil erosion, as well as permanent topsoil loss. Conversion of prime farmland could occur at the injection well site(s). Potential soil contamination due to spills of hazardous materials during construction could also occur. Soil Erosion The Meredosia Energy Center has an existing NPDES permit, which would be updated to include the oxy-combustion facility. For construction along the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s), the Alliance would develop and implement a project-specific SWPPP to address erosion prevention measures, sediment control measures, permanent stormwater management, dewatering, environmental inspection and maintenance, and final stabilization, in accordance with the NPDES stormwater construction permit requirements. The SWPPP would include erosion and sedimentation control measures recommended by the IEPA, and include suggestions by IDOA and the Illinois Urban Manual such as the following:  Silt fences, sand bags, straw bales, trench plugs, and interceptor dikes during construction to minimize soil erosion; and  Stabilization of soils through post-construction revegetation and mulching of temporarily disturbed areas. Soil erosion BMPs implemented as part of the project-specific SWPPP, including stockpiling and covering topsoil for replacement after construction, installing silt and wind fences, and reseeding temporarily disturbed areas, would minimize soil erosion impacts from construction. The SWPPP would ensure proper treatment of highly erodible soils during construction. The Alliance would also use topsoil conservation procedures to minimize topsoil loss in areas disturbed by construction. These would include identifying, stripping, and storing the topsoil away from subsoil materials and replacing the topsoil in temporarily disturbed areas following construction for reseeding. The topsoil displaced by construction would be stockpiled separately and re-used for revegetation of disturbed areas. The Alliance would either quickly revegetate exposed soils after construction, in compliance with the SWPPP, or return farmland to the landowner’s preference (e.g., bare soil vs. vegetation) within the IDOA guidelines. As such, erosion impacts and loss of topsoil in disturbed areas during construction would be short term and minor. Prime Farmland Construction of the project components would disturb up to 364 acres of soils classified as prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance, and soils that could be prime farmland if they were protected from flooding or if they were adequately drained. Of these soils, all but approximately 25 acres would be returned to their native state or agricultural production. The permanent soil conversions (25 acres) would only occur at the injection well site(s) and access roads to the injection well site(s), as these soils would be removed from agricultural production for the duration of the project. Although 79 acres of soils at the Meredosia Energy Center have been classified as soils of statewide importance within the permanent impact areas, these soils were already disturbed by industrial construction, have not been used for agricultural production for decades, and have not been included in the overall calculation.  Soils identified as prime farmland require special consideration during construction. DOE is working with IDOA and the Illinois NRCS state office to complete the Farmland Conversion Impact Rating Form AD-1006. Form AD-10061 compares the amount of farmland soils that would be permanently converted to nonagricultural use to those present in a region to determine the significance of the conversion. Once additional site-specific (location) data for all of the proposed project components is known, the Illinois NRCS office would finalize the form and produce a farmland impact rating. The farmland impact rating would indicate the value of the affected soils for agricultural production, and may guide mitigation measures if high value soils are converted. Based on the nature of the proposed project and the mitigation that would be taken to reduce impacts, impacts to prime farmland are not expected to be significant. During construction of the proposed CO2 pipeline, topsoil would be segregated and returned to mirror the pre-construction soil profile. The proposed CO2 pipeline ROW would also be returned to agricultural use following construction. Mitigation actions have been specified in construction standards and policies set forth in an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement that the Alliance has entered into with the IDOA.   Through the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement, the Alliance would adopt the IDOA-developed construction procedures that are designed to conserve topsoil and farmland during the construction of pipelines and ensure that no permanent damage occurs to the drainage patterns of the adjacent fields (IDOA 2012). The Alliance would use these standards to guide construction practices so that the impacts to soils and farmland are minimized. For example, surface disturbance impacts from construction of the CO2 pipeline would be limited to the CO2 pipeline ROW and minimized through the implementation of standard BMPs, including efforts to minimize rutting and compaction of soils from vehicle and heavy equipment use. The pipeline installation process would involve clearing the vegetation from the surface, stripping and stockpiling the topsoil, segregating the topsoil from the subsoil materials, digging and preparing pipeline trenches, and laying the pipeline. During the process, workers would document the location of irrigation systems, drainage tiles, sensitive soils, and the groundwater table. The pipeline would be placed deep enough so that it is below drain tiles to ensure that the pipeline would not be encountered or exposed by farming methods or excessive erosion.  The CO2 pipeline would be buried at least 4 feet underground, which is deeper than required by 49 CFR 195. An additional depth of cover would be provided at stream and road crossings, beneath drainage ditches, and beneath irrigation tiles. In agricultural lands, the CO2 pipeline would be buried at least 5 feet deep in accordance with IDOA pipeline construction standards and policies in the Agricultural Impact 1 For the Site Assessment Criteria Form AD-1006, IDOA uses a statewide process to determine the construction that would cause the least harm to agriculture and its environment. The Land Evaluation and Site Assessment System is used by IDOA for the Site Assessment Criteria to assist the NRCS with making land use decisions in Illinois. The Land Evaluation and Site Assessment form uses soil surveys to assess the quality of the soils that would be disturbed by the project, and then compares the property location to the surrounding area. Projects that disturb high-quality soils in agricultural areas would need to use more stringent erosion control and mitigation measures to ensure that the project would not significantly reduce the overall quality of farmland in those areas. Mitigation Agreement. Drain tile BMPs, including marking where tiles are connected, keeping a 1-foot buffer between the drain tiles and pipeline, and conducting timely repairs would ensure that the drain tiles would not be permanently impacted by construction. Following pipeline installation, the subsoil would be placed on top of the pipeline, then capped by the reserved topsoil, and re-contoured and re-vegetated with vegetation appropriate to the area in order to restore the lands to their previous conditions. Construction debris and large rocks would be removed from the trenches prior to topsoil replacement. To minimize soil erosion, workers would implement BMPs, including covering the soil stockpiles, installing silt and wind fences, and re-vegetating the exposed soil (IDOA 2012). The Alliance would implement a monitoring and remediation period of no less than two years immediately following initial operation of the pipeline or the completion of initial ROW restoration, whichever occurs last. The two-year period would allow for the effects of climate cycles, trench settling, crop growth, drainage, soil erosion, etc. to be identified through monitoring and addressed through restoration activities. Essentially, this period would be used to identify any remaining impacts associated with the pipeline construction that would require correction and follow-up restoration, and would allow time for the Alliance to conduct necessary restoration (IDOA 2012). Spills and Potential Soil Contamination To minimize the potential for soil contamination during construction, the Alliance would update the existing SPCC plan at the Meredosia Energy Center to accommodate the additional elements of the project. The implementation of the revised plan would help to prevent, control, and respond to releases of petroleum products that could potentially contaminate soils per the Oil Pollution Prevention regulations under the CWA. Meredosia Energy Center The construction laydown areas, oxy-combustion facility, coal-handling system, electrical and control systems, access roads, and water and wastewater systems would be included within the Meredosia Energy Center property, which encompasses 263 acres. A temporary barge unloading facility would be constructed at an existing boat ramp area just north of the Meredosia Energy Center property boundary. An existing gravel road that connects the boat ramps to the main facilities at the site would be improved to handle the transport of the large equipment from the unloading area to the Meredosia Energy Center. Direct impacts that could be caused during construction of the oxy-combustion facility and its associated elements include removal of soil; soil erosion from wind, water, or construction equipment action; soil compaction; and change in soil composition. Soil removal disrupts soil properties such as permeability and horizon structure, and removes stabilizing vegetation. Soil blowing could cause the movement of topsoil, making it unstable as well as unsuitable for vegetation growth. Soil compaction could cause changes in soil characteristics such as permeability, surface runoff, root penetration, and water capacity. Impacts to soils could result in soil erosion due to runoff and wind, potential decline in nearby surface water quality due to increased sedimentation (see Section 3.6, Surface Water), potential soil contamination due to spills, and a decrease in biodiversity due to changing soil characteristics (see Section 3.8, Biological Resources). Construction of the oxy-combustion facility and its associated elements at the Meredosia Energy Center could directly disturb up to 164 acres of soil. Of this amount, approximately 146 acres of soils are classified by the NRCS as farmland of statewide importance; however, as stated earlier, these soils have not been in agricultural use for decades. Most of these soils have been disturbed by previous construction and operational activities at the energy center and have not retained the characteristics of prime farmland soils. As a result, these soils would most likely not be classified as farmland of statewide importance if they were assessed today. Of the 18 acres that are not classified as prime farmland, approximately 2 acres are classified as hydric, and the remainder are considered Urban soils. Urban soils are likely covered by impermeable surfaces or existing structures at the energy center (see Figure 3.3-2). All of the soils at the energy center are classified as having erosion hazards of slight or moderate; none are characterized as severe erosion hazards.  Table 3.3-4 lists the soils that could be disturbed during construction at the Meredosia Energy Center. At the energy center, temporary impact areas are those that would be disturbed during the construction effort resulting in a temporary change in use before being restored to their original state. The permanent impact areas are those that would be either covered with impermeable surfaces (e.g., lined settling basin, roads, new structures), or permanently changed from their prior use (e.g., forest to field) but remain permeable. Because the exact location of the impermeable structures within the permanent impact areas are not known, the total permanent impact area is used for the soils impact analysis. The total amount of soils that are permanently affected could be smaller once construction is complete, but it would not be larger. Figure 2-14 summarizes the temporary and permanent impact areas at the Meredosia Energy Center. Permanent impact 96 2 15 79 0 areas Source: USDA/NRCS 2006 a. Impervious areas and previously disturbed soils. Not prime farmland. b. The Meredosia Energy Center site is an industrial site, and many of the underlying soils have been disturbed since the soil survey was initially performed. Therefore, although soils on the property are categorized as Farmland of Statewide Importance, today these soils would likely not meet the necessary criteria to support this classification. Of the approximate 164 acres of soil that would be disturbed during construction, 68 acres could be temporarily disturbed and up to 96 acres could be permanently disturbed. Because the temporary and permanent impact areas on the property would be cleared at the beginning of the construction process, there would be increased potential for topsoil erosion. As described above, implementation of a project-specific SWPPP would further ensure this impact is minor. Topsoil erosion would be prevented by using geosynthetic barriers, silt fencing, and layers of gravel. Potential impacts from spills during construction would also be minor because the existing SPCC plan would be updated to address spill prevention and response procedures for all oils that are stored onsite. The construction employees would be trained in spill prevention and cleanup to prevent any potential soil contamination. The Meredosia Energy Center property is an industrial site, and soils within the existing site boundary have been previously disturbed from construction and operations of the facility. Of the approximate 96 acres of permanent soil disturbance, 79 acres of soils are classified as farmland of statewide importance, although most of these soils no longer exhibit the characteristics of prime farmland soils. As such, impacts to prime farmland soils at the Meredosia Energy Center would be negligible. CO2 Pipeline The construction of the CO2 pipeline would disturb the area within the construction ROW for the pipeline. The construction ROW would be up to 80 feet in width in most areas, but could be expanded to 100 feet in wooded or hilly terrain to accommodate construction equipment. During construction, temporary impacts to soils from surface disturbance caused by moving equipment, topsoil storage, and other activities would occur within the construction ROW (see Figure 2-18). Pipeline installation would require trenching and trenchless drilling that would occur near the center of the construction ROW. Table 3.3-5 provides the number of acres of prime farmland soils and soils characterized as having a severe erosion hazard within the construction ROW for the southern and northern CO2 pipeline routes based on the criteria in Section 3.3.1.2. Source: USDA/NRCS 2006 a. Consists of an 80-foot wide construction ROW. b. Impervious areas and previously disturbed soils. Not prime farmland. c. Includes prime farmland, if drained, or not frequently flooded, and farmland of statewide importance. CO2 = carbon dioxide The majority of the soils within the southern (238 acres) and northern (221 acres) CO2 pipeline routes are considered to be either prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance, which represents 94 percent and 88 percent, respectively, of the total construction ROW for each pipeline route (assuming an 80-foot wide ROW along the entire length). The proposed southern route traverses 10 soil map units that are classified as having a severe soil erosion hazard, totaling 21 acres of the construction ROW. The proposed northern route crosses 14 soil map units that have a soil erosion hazard rating of severe, amounting to 47 acres of the construction ROW.  In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the southern or northern pipeline routes analyzed in this EIS, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed. Any impacts resulting from surface disturbance to soil resources which occur during pipeline installation would be reduced by implementing the erosion BMPs described in this section. In addition, impacts to prime farmland soils and agricultural uses would be minimized through compliance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (IDOA 2012), the NPDES permitting requirements, and implementing the SPCC plan, as described above, resulting in a minor impact. As identified above, the Alliance and IDOA have established an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (IDOA 2012) that identifies mitigation measures that would be implemented during pipeline construction to preserve prime farmland soils, including the following:  Topsoil would be identified, stripped and stored along the pipeline route, and kept separate from the subsoil.  Stockpiled subsoil would be used to backfill the trench prior to replacing the topsoil.  Topsoil would be replaced so that after settling occurs, the topsoil’s original depth and contour would be restored. The Alliance has not finalized the location of the proposed injection wells at the CO2 storage study area. As a result, the route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area has not been determined, since it would depend upon the final siting of the injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed in the next section, CO2 Storage Study Area. CO2 Storage Study Area The proposed injection wells and associated surface facilities would be located within the CO2 storage study area in the northeastern portion of Morgan County (see Figure 2-16). The majority of soils (95 percent) within the CO2 storage study area are considered either prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance (see Table 3.3-6). In addition, seven soil types, totaling approximately 587 acres (11 percent) of the CO2 storage study area are characterized as presenting a severe hazard for soil erosion. Approximately 28 acres would be utilized and disturbed during the construction of the injection and monitoring wells and associated facilities, including a stormwater retention and infiltration basin, and erosion prevention measures (e.g., berms, fencing). A total of 64 acres would be disturbed to support the construction of the access roads. The footprint of land area disturbance for construction of the surface facilities would be approximately 30,620 square feet (0.7 acre) for the buildings, sidewalks, and parking lot. Aside from these structures, the area affected during construction of the surface facilities would include the construction of a stormwater retention and infiltration basin, a packaged wastewater treatment system, screening berms, and fencing; which would result in an estimated 182,600 square foot (4.2 acres) area of land disturbance during construction. The land not required for the permanent access roads would be returned to agricultural production once construction is complete. Because of the high percentage of prime farmland soils within the CO2 storage study area, it is likely that most or all of the soils disturbed during construction of the injection wells, supporting facilities, and roads would be classified as prime farmland soils. Some of the area would be regraded and revegetated once construction was complete, while the fenced areas around the injection well site(s) and the facilities would be removed from agricultural production for the duration of the project. The amount of soils permanently withdrawn is described in the operational impacts section, below. The Alliance, to the extent practicable, would avoid net reductions in agricultural land by potentially replacing lands taken out of agricultural use with local land that could be placed into agricultural use. However, the total amount of prime farmland soil would still be reduced by 25 acres as a result of this project. Source: USDA/NRCS 2006 a. Impervious areas and previously disturbed soils. Not prime farmland. b. Includes prime farmland, if drained, or not frequently flooded, and farmland of statewide importance. CO2 = carbon dioxide Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. In each of the siting scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have lesser impacts to physical resources while others would have greater impacts, while still representing reasonable paths. The Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1, and would likely disturb between 20 to 32 acres of soils. The pipeline spurs could cross some agricultural fields and would likely disturb approximately 19 to 32 acres of prime farmland during construction. The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the southern route would likely impact between 23 and 32 acres during construction, all of which are classified as prime farmland soils. In addition, this scenario would impact between 0 and 1.7 acres of soil classified as severe erosion hazard. The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the northern route would likely impact between 20 and 28 acres during construction, where all of the soils except for 1 acre would be classified as prime farmland. In addition, this scenario would likely impact between 0.6 and 1.1 acres of soil classified as severe erosion hazard. Impacts to prime farmland soils and agricultural uses would be minimized through compliance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement, the NPDES permitting requirements, and implementation of the SPCC plan. As a result, there would be minor, temporary impacts to soils from construction within the CO2 storage study area. At the injection well site(s), the Alliance would use drilling BMPs, including using secondary containment for all fuel storage tanks, and placing synthetic sheeting in all mud pits and associated circulation equipment. A synthetic liner would be placed beneath the drilling rig, and the drilling contractor would maintain an inventory of absorbent materials (e.g., pads and booms) in order to respond to any release of engine oil, hydraulic oil, diesel fuel, gasoline, antifreeze, drilling fluids or any other contaminants as a result of the driller’s activities. Any spills involving fuel or other liquid or dry chemicals would be cleaned up immediately, including any affected soil. All spill cleanup materials as well as any affected soil would be contained and disposed of properly. Section 2.5.2.3 provides additional detail on the drilling techniques that would be used to construct the injection wells, including spill prevention methods. As a result, impacts to soils from the construction of the injection and monitoring wells are expected to be short term and minor. Educational Facilities The educational facilities could involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination of new construction and rehabilitation. Although a specific site has not yet been identified, the proposed site or sites for the educational facilities would be areas that have been previously disturbed, with utilities (e.g., electricity, telecommunications, water, and sewer) located on or immediately adjacent to the site or sites. Considering that the selected site(s) would be located on previously disturbed land with utility connections, it is unlikely that additional, new soil disturbance would result from the construction of the educational facilities. No farmland soil impacts would be anticipated. Compliance with NPDES permitting requirements and spill prevention and soil contamination minimization measures as outlined above would ensure effects to soil remain negligible to minor. 3.3.3.2 Operational Impacts Direct impacts to soils during operation could include soil contamination from hazardous or nonhazardous material spills or soil disturbance during routine maintenance and repairs. These impacts are discussed in more detail below. Overall, impacts to soils from operation of FutureGen 2.0 Project would be minor. Meredosia Energy Center Impacts to soils during operation would be minimal. There would be a minor potential for soil contamination from hazardous and non-hazardous material spills due to storage and transport of process chemicals and wastes at the Meredosia Energy Center. Soils could also be contaminated from fuels, oils, and other fluids used to power onsite vehicles and operational equipment. With effective BMPs and compliance with all federal and state regulations, including a facility SPCC plan for storage and handling of oils, spills would be infrequent and minimized. Personnel would be trained and equipped to respond to spills, so the spills would be cleaned and remediated. Implementation of these measures would ensure that impacts to soils during operations would be minor. CO2 Pipeline After construction, the soils above the CO2 pipeline that previously supported agricultural production, including the operational ROW, would be returned to agricultural production. Pipeline patrolling would be conducted by road, by foot, and by helicopter, and contracted to specialist companies. Access to the pipeline would be through existing access roads or at access points for the new pipeline. These visual surveys would be conducted every two weeks and would look for signs of leaks (e.g., discolored vegetation, disturbed soil) and potential infrastructure concerns (e.g., exposed pipe at stream crossings), as required by the DOT. If major repairs or maintenance activities (i.e., periodic hydrotesting) were needed along the pipeline, impacts would be similar to those described for pipeline construction in Section 3.3.3.1. Impacts to prime farmland soils and agricultural uses would be minimized through compliance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (IDOA 2012) and other measures, as described above, resulting in a minor impacts during operation. CO2 Storage Study Area The injection well site(s) would occupy up to 25 acres for the duration of the project. The footprint of the surface facilities near the injection well site(s) would be approximately 30,620 square feet for the buildings, sidewalks, and parking lot. Although some areas within the property line would be reseeded with native vegetation and maintained to prevent erosion, the area occupied by the support facilities, parking lots and access roads (25 acres) would withdraw the soils from agricultural use for the duration of the project (see Figure 2-19). Because there is a high concentration of prime farmland soils within the CO2 storage study area, all of the soils at the injection well site(s) would likely be classified as prime farmland. No additional impacts, beyond those addressed in Section 3.3.3.1, would be anticipated during the operation of the pipeline across the CO2 storage study area to the injection wells. Between 7 to 14 acres of prime farmland would be within the proposed operational ROW; however, agricultural production would be allowed along the pipeline up to the fence line of the injection well site(s). Although highly unlikely, near-surface leaks during injection could cause an increase in CO2 in the soil horizon. Because supercritical CO2 vaporizes readily at atmospheric pressure, an increase of CO2 concentration in the soil could lower the pH of the soil, which could affect plant growth (DOE 2007a). CO2 dissolved in groundwater could also increase the mobility of heavy metals through the soil column. However, periodic integrity testing of each well would eliminate the risk of such a near-surface leakage. As discussed in Section 3.4, Geology, there would be a very low risk that the CO2 would travel up from the Mt. Simon Formation and through the caprock formation; therefore, these types of impacts are not anticipated. Educational Facilities No additional impacts to soils would occur during operation of the educational facilities. 3.3.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, there would be no changes to physiography and soils under this alternative. 3.4 GEOLOGY 3.4.1 Introduction This section describes the geologic resources potentially affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and its related components. This section also analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of this proposed project on these resources. 3.4.1.1 Region of Influence DOE identified three different ROIs for the analysis of potential CO2 Storage Study Area – 5,300-acre impacts to geologic resources. The first ROI addresses potential area that would contain the injection impacts to geologic formations and landforms resulting from the and monitoring wells and the CO2 planned construction and presence of surface facilities at the plume. A section of the CO2 pipeline (spurs) would also be installed within Meredosia Energy Center property, within the CO2 pipeline corridor, this area to the injection wells. at the CO2 storage study area, and at the site for the proposed educational facilities. This ROI would include any geologic resources Area of Review (AoR) – an area up to underlying or near the proposed project features, and would be 5,000 acres around the injection wells, restricted to the construction footprint. and determined by computer modeling of the CO2 plume. The dimensions and The second ROI addresses potential impacts to geologic resources location will be presented in the UIC resulting from the injection of CO2 into deep geologic formations. This permit applications.  ROI is specific to the formations that would be used for the injection UIC Survey Area – a 5-mile-by-5-mile and storage of CO2 (the injection zone) and the lateral extent of the square (25 square miles) area, CO2 plume within those formations. Because the locations of the centered on the CO2 storage study injection wells have not yet been identified, a 25-square mile UIC area, used to analyze the USDW and well locations within and around the survey area that is centered around, and encompasses, the CO2 storage AoR to support UIC permitting. study area, is used as the ROI. This ROI would include all potential locations of the CO2 plume. The third ROI addresses potential impacts from seismic (i.e., earthquake) effects, at approximately 30 miles, which covers the area that could be impacted by earthquakes, based on damage reports from past seismic events in the region (USGS 2013). 3.4.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered The geologic setting for the proposed project includes the glacial deposits, bedrock, and any minerals within the ROIs that have been defined for the project. DOE evaluated the potential effects of the construction and operation of the project on these geologic resources. Several data sources were used to support this analysis, including USGS topographic maps, geologic reports and GIS data from the Illinois State Geological Survey, and USGS earthquake maps.  In addition, DOE used data provided by the Alliance from geologic characterization activities conducted in the CO2 storage study area. Under its cooperative agreement with DOE, the Alliance completed a stratigraphic well in the CO2 storage study area in December 2011. This well was constructed to allow the Alliance to collect the comprehensive data needed to characterize the geology and hydrogeology of the area. This data will be used to support the design and permitting of the project as well as the analysis of impacts in this EIS. DOE, the Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium, and other private entities are researching the possibility for large-scale geologic sequestration throughout the Illinois Basin (NETL 2010a). Three other sequestration projects have been planned or are in operation in Illinois, and are discussed in further detail in Section 4.3, Cumulative Impacts. Two projects are located outside of Decatur, IL, and one is in the planning stage near Taylorville, IL. The information and data gathered from these projects have been used to support the impact analysis in this EIS. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would:  Cause or be damaged by geologic-related events (e.g., earthquakes, landslides, sinkholes);  Reduce the value of mineral or petroleum resources or unique geologic formations, or render them inaccessible;  Alter unique geologic formations resulting in the migration of geologically stored CO2 through faults, compromised caprock, or other pathways such as abandoned or unplugged wells;  Cause visible ground heave or upward vertical displacement of the ground surface; or  Affect human exposure to radon gas. 3.4.1.3 Regulatory Framework The injection of CO2 for geologic sequestration is regulated under the authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act’s UIC Program. On December 10, 2010, the USEPA published a final rule, “Federal Requirements Under the Underground Injection Control Program for Carbon Dioxide Geologic Sequestration Wells” (75 FR 77230) (the “Class VI rule”). Under this rule, the USEPA created a new category of injection wells (Class VI wells) with new federal requirements to allow for injection of CO2 for geologic sequestration and to ensure the protection of USDWs. In accordance with the Class VI rule, the Alliance would be required to submit permit applications and obtain Class VI UIC permits from the USEPA for each injection well before injection would be allowed to commence. The Class VI rule requires operators of Class VI wells to develop, gain approval for, and implement five project-specific plans, including an AoR and Corrective Action Plan, a Testing and Monitoring Plan, an Injection Well Plugging Plan, a Post-Injection Site Care and Site Closure Plan, and an Emergency and Remedial Response Plan. The AoR and Corrective Action Plan describes how an operator intends to delineate the AoR for the Class VI injection well and ensure that all identified deficient artificial penetrations (i.e., wells that are improperly plugged or completed) would be addressed by corrective action techniques so that they would not become conduits for fluid movement into USDWs. The AoR is defined as the region surrounding the geologic sequestration project where USDWs may be endangered by the injection activity. The AoR is delineated using computational modeling that accounts for the physical and chemical properties of all phases of the injected CO2 stream and displaced fluids, and is based on available regional and site characterization, monitoring, and operational data as set forth in 40 CFR 146.84. The Alliance has not yet finalized its permit applications for the Class VI wells; however, the Alliance has conducted computer modeling (see Appendix G, Geological Report) to predict the lateral extent of the CO2 plume within the injection zone. The computer modeling was used to simulate the currently proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site, where 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 would be injected per year for 20 years into a horizon within the Mt. Simon. Section 2.5.2.3 has a description of the wells that the Alliance used for the model analysis. The computer modeling indicated that the CO2 plume would encompass an area of approximately 4,000 acres, roughly centered on the injection wells. This area would likely be designated as the AoR for purposes of the UIC permits. In addition, the Alliance has collected data within a 25-square mile (16,000-acre) survey area, centered on the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. Because the injection well locations within the CO2 storage study area have not yet been identified, the analysis in this section uses the 25-square mile UIC survey area when characterizing potential impacts resulting from the injection of CO2 into the injection zone. The UIC rule also requires the identification of the USDWs within the AoR that could be affected by injection activity (40 CFR 146.81(d)). Section 3.5, Groundwater, describes the USDWs in the CO2 storage study area in more detail, along with potential impacts to these aquifers. The final UIC Class VI permit applications would detail the locations of the injection wells and the delineated AoR. The Alliance would reevaluate the AoR at least every 5 years after the issuance of the UIC Class VI permits, which would consider the volume of CO2 injected, the resulting subsurface CO2 plume, and any other results from the MVA program. 3.4.2 Affected Environment 3.4.2.1 Regional Geologic Setting The FutureGen 2.0 Project would be located in the Central Lowland Province, which is further subdivided into till plain areas based on glacial topography. The delineation of the till plain areas is based on the change of sedimentary deposits from the glaciations of the Illinois and Wisconsin episodes (USGS 2011a). In the Central Lowland Province, the topography is generally flat, although scarps and moraines are present in the region. The FutureGen 2.0 Project is located within the Springfield Plain, which is also flat with very localized variations in topography from the glacial deposits from the Illinois episode. Beneath the glacial deposits is a deep sequence of sedimentary bedrock that formed over a period of millions of years. The ages of the bedrock units range from the Pennsylvanian (300 million years) Spoon-Carbondale formation to the Precambrian metarhyolite basement (540 million years). Metarhyolite is a volcanic rock that has been altered by heat and pressure over time. The remainder of this section provides additional details on the geologic formations that underlie the project area. Surficial Geology The topography of Morgan County has low relief, which is incised by small streams that flow to the Illinois River. The elevation ranges from 400 feet in the west, near the Illinois River, to 700 feet above sea level in the east. The northwestern and southern portions of Morgan County tend to have deep valleys and narrow upland ridges, while the eastern portion is nearly level to slightly undulating. The Illinois River forms the western border of Morgan County. Adjacent to the river is a flat floodplain with alluvial sediments deposited over the remnants of an ancient glacial channel. The floodplain extends eastward for approximately 2 miles until it reaches a series of sand outwash hills that stretch from north to south (Hajic and Leigh 1985). These hills rise 100 to 120 feet above the river valley. The Illinois Episode drift deposits in Morgan County are also covered by fine, wind-blown sediment (loess) from the Wisconsin episode. The most common glacial formations in Morgan County include the Cahokia, Glasford, and Peoria Formations (ISGS 2011a). The Cahokia Formation is present in the floodplain area between the Illinois River and the glacial bluffs. The formation consists of stratified silt, clay, loess, and sand deposits that were deposited after the last glacial event (Wisconsin episode) and reworked by the Illinois River. The Cahokia Formation is approximately 100 to 200 feet thick around the Illinois River (Piskin and Bergstrom 1975). Loess deposits are not usually found immediately around the Illinois River because the soils have been extensively reworked by the flow of the river. Starting at the bluffs, and extending eastward, is the glacial till plain of the Glasford Formation, which was deposited during the Illinois episode, and then covered by loess of the Peoria Formation during Wisconsin episode (ISGS 2011a). The Cahokia Formation is also found in the bottom of stream valleys, such as Snake Creek, where the glacial tills have been reworked by stream action. The Glasford Formation is comprised of glacial tills interbedded with sandy outwash deposits. The thickness of the glacial till generally increases from west to east; however, the thickness is extremely variable, ranging between 25 and 100 feet from Meredosia to Jacksonville (Piskin and Bergstrom 1975). Soils in eastern Morgan County are formed from the Peoria Loess, which was draped over the deeper till and drift deposits at the end of the Wisconsin glacial event. The Peoria Loess decreases in thickness from west to east, from over 20 feet outside of Meredosia to 10 feet approaching the CO2 storage study area (ISGS 2011b). Bedrockk Geology The FuturreGen 2.0 Prooject componnents would be located in tthe western shhelf of the Illlinois Basin, wwhich covers ann area of abouut 110,000 sqquare miles iin parts of Illlinois, Indianna, and Kentuucky. The beedrock sequence within the baasin consists of thousandss of feet of saandstone, shaale, and carboonate layers oover a basement of ancient ggranite and rrhyolite. The sediments ththat formed tthe bedrock were depositted in alluvial faans and shallow water in a variable cooastal environnment during the Paleozoiic era, starting 570 million yeears ago. Theere are no beddrock formatiions youngerr than the Pennnsylvanian eepoch (300 mmillion years agoo) in the Illiinois Basin, which indicaates that thee basin ceaseed to grow and the domminant sedimentaary processes changed fromm depositionn to erosion. TThe presencee of an erosioon contact bettween formationns in the bedroock sequence also represennts a period of halting depoosition and suubsequent eroosion. A primaryy characteristtic of the Illinnois Basin’s wwestern shelf is broad, parrallel sedimenntary layers thhat do not displaay any majorr faults (Alliaance 2012b). The major sstructural feaature in the bbedrock at MMorgan County iss the Sangammon Arch, a broad, gentlly curving ananticline, whoose “ridge” rruns roughly east-northeast from Jacksonnville to Chammpaign (ISGSS 1995a). Thee arch causes  the bedrock in Morgan CCounty to gently ddip about 1 too 2 degrees too the southeasst. Figure 3.4--1 shows a reppresentative ccross section of the bedrock fformations in Morgan Couunty. The beddrock is showwn dipping to the east; therrefore, the beedrock closest to the surface teends to becomme younger frrom west to east. Source: AAlliance 2012b Dev = Devonian; Dol = DDolomite; Fm = Foormation; Ls = Limmestone; Quat = QQuaternary; Sdst == Sandstone; Sh == Shale; Sil = Siluurian; Sltst = Siiltstone Figure 3.44-2 presents aa detailed straatigraphic collumn for the formations ppresent at the CO2 storage study area. The figure detailss the formatioon depths baseed on measurrements takenn from the straatigraphic weell that was comppleted by the Alliance in ffall 2011. Thee well was drrilled throughh the Mt. Simmon Formatioon and into the Precambrian metarhyolite basement to a depth of 4,826 feet bgs. Descriptions of the formations are provided in the text below. Mississippian and Pennsylvanian Formations The shallowest bedrock formations are located in the eastern portion of Morgan County. The youngest formation in the FutureGen 2.0 Project area is the Spoon-Carbondale Formation, which was deposited in the middle Pennsylvanian epoch, and consists of shale deposits with sandstone lenses. The Spoon-Carbondale presents a small section of a larger sequence of alternating marine and non-marine sediments that have been identified in other areas of the Illinois Basin (Willman et al. 1975). The upper and lower contacts of the formation are erosional surfaces. The next sequence of formations was formed in the Mississippian epoch, when much of Illinois was beneath a large inland sea. As such, the individual formations and members tend to taper out from east to west, as the deposits were controlled by the depth of the water and location in relation to the coastline and rivers (Willman et al. 1975). These formations are characterized by alternating sequences of dolomitic limestone, calcareous shales, and light grey limestones that slowly change in composition from one formation into the one above. The Mississippian formations in eastern Morgan County are the St. Louis Limestone, Salem Limestone, Warsaw Shale, Keokuk-Burlington Limestone, and Hannibal Shale.  The St. Louis and Salem Formations are fine-grained, cherty limestone formations. The St. Louis is laterally extensive, and is truncated at the top by an erosion unconformity (Willman et al. 1975). The Warsaw Shale is comprised of gray shale and silty limestone with numerous invertebrate fossils. The Keokuk-Burlington Limestone is a fine-grained, cherty limestone, with numerous microfossils. It gradually becomes siltier as it grades upwards to the Warsaw Shale. The Hannibal Shale is a green to gray, clay-rich shale with abundant microfossils. In western Morgan County, near the Meredosia Energy Center the sequence of Mississippian formations is the Burlington-Keokuk Limestone, Fern Glen Formation, and Meppen Limestone (ISGS 2005). The Fern Glen consists of red and green calcareous shale, shaley limestone, and a base of large, yellowish gray limestone, with abundant invertebrate fossils. The Meppen Limestone is a tan dolomitic limestone with small calcite geodes.  Silurian and Devonian Formations The New Albany Shale is an Upper Devonian-Lower Mississippian formation that is comprised of black, organically rich marine shales. The New Albany has an erosion contact with the Devonian Limestone with thin beds of sandy material near the base, and carbonates near the top of the formation. The New Albany Shale is the primary source of oil and gas in Illinois, although its presence at a location does not guarantee the existence of economically recoverable oil or gas deposits (Cluff and Dickerson 1982). Beneath the New Albany Formation are two undifferentiated formations, which are part of the Hunton Limestone Megagroup. These Silurian and Devonian formations are very thin because tectonic activity at the time changed the area’s sediment deposition patterns and increased erosion. The Silurian and Devonian formations are local deposits of fine-grained limestone, with numerous microfossils. These formations have erosion contacts at the base and top. Upper Ordovician Formations The Upper Ordovician formations include the Maquoketa Shale, Galena Limestone, Platteville Limestone and Dolomite, and the Joachim Glenwood Dolomite. Each of these formations has upper and lower erosion contacts, which represent multiple episodes of deposition and erosion of the unconsolidated sediments. The formations tend to be fine grained and low porosity. The Maquoketa Shale contains gray to dark brown shale, while the Galena Limestone has fine-limestone, which contains numerous fossils, and is occasionally capped by dolomite. The Plattesville Limestone/Dolomite consists of brown, slightly shaley limestone and impure dolomite. The Joachim SSource: Alliance 2012b DDol = Dolomite; fft GS* = feet beloow ground surfacee; Fm = Formatioon; Mbr = memberr; Sh = Shale; Slttst = Siltstone; SSs = Sandstone; USDW = undergrouund source of drinkking water -Glenwood Dolomite are two formations that cannot be differentiated within the stratigraphic well, and are characterized by light gray, clay-rich, silty and sandy dolomite, with beds of brownish gray, and relatively pure dolomite. Sandy beds and other inclusions may also be present (Willman et al. 1975). St. Peter Formation  The St. Peter Formation is an Ordovician-age, well-sorted poorly cemented, quartz sand with little clay or carbonate inclusions. The formation was deposited in a beach environment in a period of increasing water depth (Willman et al. 1975). An erosion contact occurs between the Shakopee Dolomite and the St. Peter. In Illinois, the St. Peter is a well-known bedrock aquifer with salinity that varies from northwest to southeast. Maps of the aquifer salinity show that the St. Peter aquifer contains water with total dissolved solids between 2,500 and 10,000 milligrams per liter at the storage area (ISGS 2004). Samples taken from the stratigraphic well confirm that the salinity concentration is less than 10,000 milligrams per liter. Section 3.5, Groundwater, contains additional hydrogeologic information about the St. Peter Formation. The St. Peter is also a well-documented natural gas storage formation with 38 gas reservoirs throughout Illinois. In the early 1950’s, the Panhandle Eastern Pipeline company acquired gas storage rights to inject natural gas in the Waverly dome of the St. Peter Formation, about 15 miles south of the CO2 storage study area. After injecting approximately 5,500,000 million cubic feet of natural gas over 5 years, injection was discontinued (Bell 1961). Lower Ordovician and Upper Cambrian Knox Group The formations between the St. Peter and the Eau Claire, which were deposited in the Ordovician and Cambrian, are correlated to the Knox Group, which is found throughout the Illinois Basin (Swezey 2009). Regionally, the Knox Group consists of impermeable, dense dolomites, and few thin sandstone formations. At the stratigraphic well, the Knox group consists of about 1,500 feet of bedrock. From top to bottom, the Ordovician formations within the sequence are the Sakopee Dolomite, New Richmond Sandstone, Oneota Dolomite, and Gunter Sandstone. The Shakopee dolomite is a thick, clay-rich to pure fine-grained dolomite with some thin beds of sandstone, siltstone, and shale. Beneath the Shakopee is the New Richmond Sandstone, a fine- to medium-grained sandstone with some interbedded sandy dolomite. The Oneota Dolomite is a fine- to coarse-grained cherty dolomite with minor amounts of sand and thin shaley beds at the base. The Gunter Sandstone consists of medium- to fine-grained quartz sand, and is generally thin throughout the basin. The Oneota Dolomite/Gunter Sandstone sequence is bounded in the top and bottom by erosional contacts with the surrounding formations. The rest of the formations (Eminence Dolomite, Potosi Dolomite, Franconia Dolomite, and the Ironton-Galesville Sandstone) were deposited in the Cambrian. The Eminence Dolomite is a medium-grained dolomite with some chert and thin beds of sandstone, while the Potosi Dolomite is a relatively pure dolomite. The Franconia Dolomite is a clay-rich dolomite sequence that is separated into two members: the Derby-Doerun and the Davis. The Davis is a widespread, low-permeability shale that grades upwards into the silty and sandy dolomite of the Derby-Doerun Member. The Ironton-Galesville Sandstone is a calcareous coarse sandstone, and contains a deep subsurface aquifer. The formation has been used for natural-gas storage in the Waverly field in southeast Morgan County. Eau Claire Formation (Confining Zone) The Eau Claire Formation consists of dolomite, dolomitic sandstone, limestone, siltstone, and shale, with no erosion contact between its base and the top of the Mt. Simon Formation, (Willman et al. 1975). The Eau Claire has been identified throughout Illinois, with thicknesses that range from less than 200 feet in western Illinois to greater than 1,000 feet in the southeast (Willman et al. 1975). The Eau Claire is composed of three members, which reflect the increasing water depth in the depositional environment. The upper layer is the Proviso siltstone member, which consists of dolomite and sandy siltstone with beds of greenish gray, pink, or red shale. Below the Proviso is the Lombard dolomite member, which consists of glauconitic and sandy dolomite interbedded with greenish gray shale (Willman et al. 1975). The underlying Elmhurst member consists of sandstone with thin, irregular gray shales, which gradually contains more carbonate and fine-grained material as it grades into the Lombard member. Mt. Simon Formation (Injection Zone) The Cambrian-age Mt. Simon contains one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline aquifers and is considered the best formation for carbon sequestration in the region. The DOE estimated that the CO2 storage capacity for the Mt. Simon Formation is approximately 30 to 120 billion tons (27 to 109 billion metric tons) (NETL 2010a). The Mt. Simon is comprised of fine- to coarse-grained quartzose-cemented sandstone that is partially conglomeratic, with some lenses of micaceous shale toward the top of the formation. In the southern Illinois Basin, the Mt. Simon Formation formed from distal alluvial fan deposits from the granitic highlands and likely included extensive braided river deposits, barrier islands and deltaic environments (Bowen et al. 2011; Leetaru and McBride 2009). Over time, accumulating sediment and tectonic movement shifted the depositional environment to more extensive braided fluvial systems, with a gradual transition to a marginal marine environment that formed the shales of the Eau Claire (Bowen et al. 2011). The Mt. Simon is present throughout Illinois, with thicknesses that range from over 2,000 feet in the northeast to 500 feet or less in the south-southwest. For years, natural gas has been successfully stored in the Mt. Simon in 50 wells throughout north-central Illinois. This suggests that the formation exhibits characteristics, such as sufficient permeability and porosity, which make it suitable for long-term gas storage. The total dissolved solids concentration in the brine that was sampled at the stratigraphic well (at a depth of 4,050 feet bgs) was 48,000 milligrams per liter. Precambrian Metarhyolite and Sedimentary Breccia At the base of the Mt. Simon is a thin layer of fractured and weathered rhyolite wash deposits (sedimentary breccia), which are weathered remnants of the Precambrian metarhyolites and granites that form the base of the Illinois Basin. The basement metarhyolite is medium to coarse-grained, silica-rich, volcanic rock, with an age of approximately 1.47 billion years. After it was formed, the Precambrian basement was subjected to long periods of heat and pressure, which reorganized the mineral structure of the bedrock. Seismic Activity The presence or absence of faults and seismic activity is particularly relevant to carbon sequestration projects because faults, if present, could provide preferential pathways for injected or displaced fluids to migrate from the injection zone. The proposed project area is located in a relatively low risk zone for earthquakes, with no major mapped faults within or near the proposed project areas. In addition, no known large, structural faults occur in Morgan County (ISGS 1995b). The nearest major fault zone to the project area is the Wabash Valley Seismic Zone, which is located along the Illinois and Indiana border, approximately 150 miles southeast of the energy center and 180 miles southeast of the CO2 storage study area. The New Madrid Fault Zone, which has been the source of magnitude 7.0 or greater earthquakes in the central United States, is located approximately 210 miles south of the energy center and the CO2 storage study area. Historically, earthquakes from either of these two fault zones have not caused damage in central Illinois. To identify past earthquakes that could have been felt at the project sites, USGS earthquake records were searched in a 30-mile radius around the FutureGen 2.0 Project areas. Since 1973, when the USGS and other government agencies started monitoring seismic activity in the United States, no earthquakes have been recorded within 30 miles. However, historical documents show that at least two earthquakes occurred within the seismic ROI before the start of seismic monitoring. One earthquake occurred approximately 15 miles northeast of the CO2 storage study area and 37 miles northeast of the energy center, just outside of Petersburg, Illinois. The earthquake occurred on November 10, 1923, with an estimated magnitude of 3.3 (Stover et al. 1984). Another earthquake occurred on July 19, 1909, with an estimated magnitude of 4.5. This earthquake occurred approximately 26 miles directly north of the CO2 storage study area, and 40 miles northeast of the energy center (Stover et al. 1984). These earthquakes were also the closest reported earthquakes to the Meredosia Energy Center.  Through the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program, the USGS has generated a geologic seismic hazard probability database to estimate the potential for earthquakes in the United States. The database is built from data on known fault sequences and historical earthquake data. Models generated from the database show the probability of a damage-inducing earthquake at a location. According to this data, there is less than a 1 percent chance that a magnitude 5.0 or greater earthquake would occur within 30 miles of the FutureGen 2.0 Project in the next 50 years (USGS 2012a) for any of the areas proposed for the construction and operation of the proposed project. This is the lowest probability rating for the model. For shaking hazard potential in the next 50 years, there is a 2 percent probability of exceeding a peak horizontal acceleration of 8 to 10 percent of the gravity coefficient (USGS 2012b). Peak horizontal acceleration of 10 percent of the gravity coefficient is considered capable of minor structural damage in normal buildings. These model results show that the Morgan County area is considered part of the tectonically stable section of North America (see Figure 3.4-3). Economic Mineral Resources In Illinois, oil and gas deposits were initially discovered in the early 1860s. The most productive oil and gas formations, deposited in the Mississippian to lower Pennsylvanian epochs, are generally absent in Morgan County. Three gas fields are located along the eastern edge of the county. The Prentice field is located south of Ashland, and has 25 oil and gas wells that were drilled in the 1950s and 1980s. Oil and gas from the Prentice field has been produced from small stratigraphic traps in the shallow Pennsylvanian formations (e.g., Spoon-Carbondale), at depths of 250 to 350 feet bgs. As of 2009, there were no producing wells, and many of the wells in the field have been plugged, although at least one well was drilled to 279-foot horizon in 2012 (ISGS 2012b). The Jacksonville field is located directly east of the city of Jacksonville, and contains more than 75 wells drilled between 1900 and 1984. The wells were drilled between 350 and 500 feet deep, primarily to the Pennsylvanian bedrock. The field was first discovered in 1910, and had produced a total 10,400 barrels by the end of 2009. As of 2009, there were three producing wells (ISGS 2012b). The Waverly field natural-gas storage site in the southeast corner of Morgan County originally produced oil from a structural trap in Silurian carbonates called the Waverly Dome. The field no longer produces oil, but the field has been used for natural gas storage since around 1954 (Alliance 2012b). The Herrin, Springfield, and Colchester coal-bearing formations are present in the southern portions of Morgan County; however, they are very thin or absent in the project area. Minable subsurface coal deposits are found to the southeast of the CO2 storage study area, with the closest active mine located 10 miles away. Three closed sand pits are located on either side of Interstate (I-) 104, on the west bank of the Illinois River. The farthest sand pit is located about 625 feet north of the highway, while the other two pits are located 160 and 380 feet south of the road. Aerial photos show that excavation likely started around 1939, but by 1956, the pits were overgrown and no longer used (ISGS 2011c). 3.4.2.2 Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center is located within the Illinois River valley. The topography at the energy center is very flat up to the riverbank, which then drops about 20 feet to the Illinois River. The Cahokia Formation is the primary surficial deposit at the Meredosia Energy Center. The bedrock at Meredosia is buried beneath the glacial and river sediments. The shallowest formations at the energy center are the Meppen Limestone, the Fern Glen Formation, and the Burlington-Keokuk Limestone. Sourcce: USGS 2012b %g = peak horizontal acceleration as a peercent of the gravitty coefficient 3.4.2.3 CO2 Pipeeline  The CO2 pipeline to thhe CO2 storagge study area would initiallly cross depoosits of the CCahokia Formmation, then the GGlasford Formmation, whichh is covered by the Peoriaa Loess. The CO2 pipelinee would also cross several beedrock formaations. Startinng at the Meredosia Energgy Center, thee proposed CCO2 pipeline wwould initially cross the olderr Mississippiaan formationss (e.g., Burlinngton-Keokukk Limestone),, then the Waarsaw-Chouteau limestone, inn the central ssection of the corridor. Thee final approaach of the COO2 pipeline coorridor to the COO2 storage sttudy area croosses the Spooon-Carbondaale Formatioon and undifffferentiated MMiddle Pennsylvaanian bedrockk. 3.4.2.4 CO2 Storrage Studyy Area The surfiicial geology for the CO2 storage stuudy area connsists of the Glasford Foormation, whiich is approximately 75 to 1000 feet thick, and is covereed with 10 to  15 feet of looess deposits. The topograpphy at the CO2 storage study area gradually slopes towards stream channels that drain to the Illinois River to the west. The Spoon-Carbondale Formation is the bedrock formation that occurs beneath the glacial deposits. CO2 would be injected into the Mt Simon Formation; however, the injection zone for the FutureGen 2.0 Project is comprised of both the Mt. Simon Formation and the Elmhurst Member of the Eau Claire Formation (see Figure 3.4-2). The Mt. Simon has several characteristics that are beneficial for CO2 storage; it is consistently deep (over 3,900 feet), laterally continuous, and a relatively permeable formation that is bounded by several impermeable layers. At the CO2 storage study area, the Mt. Simon is approximately 500 feet thick, located at approximately 4,000 feet bgs to 4,500 feet bgs. The formation thickness gradually increases towards the east, and can be found in outcrops throughout the midwest and eastern states (Bowen et al. 2011). The Elmhurst Member is 66 feet thick. The total thickness of the injection zone (including both the Mt. Simon Formation and the Elmhurst Member) at the CO2 storage study area is 565 feet thick. In January 2011, the Alliance performed a two-dimensional seismic survey on public roads throughout the CO2 storage study area. The profiles show a thick sequence of the Mt. Simon Sandstone with no visible faulting (Alliance 2012b). In addition, the Alliance measured the permeability and porosity of the formations in the stratigraphic well. The measurements confirm that the confining zone has much lower permeability and porosity levels than the injection zone, as measured at other sites (Griffith et al. 2011; O’Connor and Rush 2005).  The permeability for the injection zone ranges from 0.1 millidarcies to 400 millidarcies, with lower values at the contact with the metarhyolite basement, then gradually increasing in the center of the Mt. Simon, then starting to decrease again as it grades to the Elmhurst member (Alliance 2012b). The porosity in the injection zone ranges from 5 to 20 percent, with the greater porosity in the middle of the Mt. Simon (Alliance 2012b). The permeability and porosity ranges measured in the stratigraphic well were similar to those used in the early plume modeling analysis of the Mt. Simon Formation, which used a horizontal permeability of 37 to 417 millidarcies and porosity of 9.6 to 17.1 percent. The Mt. Simon Formation is confined between metarhyolite at its base and the Proviso and Lombard Members of the Eau Claire Formation. These two upper members of the Eau Claire Formation make up the primary confining zone (caprock formation) and are located between 3,852 and 3,439 feet bgs. Together the Proviso and Lombard Members comprise 413 feet of low porosity and permeability caprock. The members have been correlated to layers in Pike County, and have been successfully used as confining layers for 38 natural gas storage reservoirs across Illinois (Alliance 2012b). The permeability values decrease from the base of the Lombard upwards through the Proviso, which mirrors the decreasing amount of silt found in the Eau Claire Formation (Alliance 2012b). The Proviso permeability ranges from 0.0001 millidarcies to 1 millidarcy. Permeabilities of the Lombard member range from 0.001 millidarcies to 28 millidarcies. The porosity for the Lombard member is between 5 and 10 percent, with greater porosity at the base of the formation. The Franconia Dolomite is located from 3,330 and 3,086 feet bgs, and forms a secondary confining zone. The formation is comprised of low-permeability shale and silty dolomite.  The deepest USDW at the CO2 storage study area is the St. Peter Formation, which is about 200 feet thick and occurs at approximately 1,754 feet bgs. It is located approximately 1,480 feet above the Proviso Member of the Eau Claire. A USDW is an aquifer that is used or could be used to supply drinking water. Section 3.5, Groundwater, provides additional detail on the presence of USDWs in the CO2 storage study area.  There are several wells located within the UIC survey area, including 24 water wells, which are typically drilled within the first hundred feet of the surface. The use and location of these wells are described in Section 3.5, Groundwater. The discovery of three oil and gas fields in Morgan County surrounding the CO2 storage study area in the early 20th century resulted in exploratory wells being drilled in the area, including the UIC survey area. None of the oil and gas fields is located within the survey area, although the Prentice gas field and Jacksonville field are located within a mile of the survey area boundary (2,500 feet east and 3,000 feet south, respectively). The Waverly field is located about 13 miles south of the UIC survey area boundary. There are 22 oil, gas, gas storage, and research wells within the survey area (see Figure 3.4-4). Table 3.4-1 presents the well types, range of depths, their purpose, and the status as logged with the Illinois State Geological Survey. Most of these wells were drilled to investigate the presence of coal, gas, or oil and were plugged or abandoned afterwards. At the CO2 storage study area, the top of the Eau Claire Shale (the primary confining formation) is 3,439 feet bgs, which is well below the deepest oil and gas well. Source: ISGS 2012b bgs = below ground surface; UIC = Underground Injection Control 3.4.2.5 Educational Facilities  The visitor and research center are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois, in Morgan County. The geology of this general area is similar to that described for the CO2 pipeline corridor and CO2 storage study area in Morgan County, as discussed above. 3.4.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action This section analyzes the potential for impacts based on the criteria listed in Section 3.4.1.2 and the information found in the affected environment section. Impacts resulting from increased soil erosion or groundwater contamination (including potential contamination of USDWs) are discussed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, and Section 3.5, Groundwater, respectively. 3.4.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Construction of proposed project components at the energy center would have negligible impacts on the local geology. The major equipment at the Meredosia Energy Center would be constructed on deep foundations, which would provide additional stability for the structures. Construction would primarily occur on previously disturbed land at the Meredosia Energy Center site, so construction would not affect geologic resources unique to the region. Activity during construction would not induce seismicity in the area, and the flat topography would preclude impacts from landslides or subsidence. There are no coal beds or oil and gas deposits in the area, so no economic minerals would be affected by the construction at the Meredosia Energy Center. CO2 Pipeline Construction of the CO2 pipeline would occur at a depth of at least 4 feet in loess and glacial till. The Alliance does not anticipate that any blasting would be required for the pipeline installation. Due to the overall low topographic relief of the terrain that would be crossed by the pipeline corridor, construction of Source: ISGSS 2012b CO2 = carbonn dioxide; UIC = UUnderground Injection Control the pipeline is not expected to require any stabilization efforts to ensure that landslides or ground instability would not be induced as a result of construction. As needed, standard construction practices and BMPs used in the pipeline construction industry, as described in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, would be implemented to minimize the potential for construction to result in locally induced ground instability. Pipeline construction procedures would also follow IDOA guidance, which would ensure safe storage of topsoil and proper restoration of the surface topography (IDOA 2012). There would be no impact to the local geologic resources from construction of the pipeline, because the construction would only temporarily disturb the glacial deposits, which would be replaced once construction is completed.  The project is located in a relatively low risk zone for earthquakes, with no major or mapped faults within or near the proposed CO2 pipeline. Based on these conditions, there is minimal potential for geologically related impacts to occur either to the proposed pipeline or to geologic resources during pipeline construction. CO2 Storage Study Area The Alliance has not finalized the location of the pipeline routes within the CO2 storage study area, because the locations of the injection wells have not been finalized. Therefore, DOE developed a range of potential impacts based on hypothetical injection well sites and various representative end-of-pipeline spurs, whereby some hypothetical routes have less impacts to physical resources while other routes have more impacts, while still representing reasonable paths. Once the locations of the injection wells are finalized, the Alliance would route the pipeline using the criteria in Section 2.5.1.1. The impacts to the geology from construction of the pipeline within the CO2 storage study area would be negligible, similar to the impacts for the rest of the CO2 pipeline, as described above. Construction of the injection wells in the CO2 storage study area would have a negligible impact on the local geology. Up to 4 injection wells and 10 deep and shallow monitoring wells would be constructed at the CO2 storage study area. Construction of the wells would remove some bedrock, although the amount would be negligible and not unique to the region. Drilling and installation of the injection wells would not induce seismicity, nor would it cause landslides or subsidence. The Alliance intends to apply for Class VI UIC permits from the USEPA in 2013, and would work with the USEPA to complete the application process and receive the permits to drill prior to starting construction of the wells. The injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings would be constructed on a maximum of 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. An additional 64 acres would be utilized to support construction of access roads. Local fill may be required during the grading process; however, the use of materials would not reduce the overall availability of the gravel and other fill. As a result, the construction of the facilities would have a negligible impact to the local geologic resources. Educational Facilities The educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The Alliance would either renovate existing structures or build new facilities. In either case, the construction activities would have a negligible impact on geologic resources. 3.4.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Impacts to geologic resources from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would be negligible and limited to areas of soil-related impacts, as discussed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils. No onsite or nearby geologic resources (e.g., valuable gravel or clay or other deposits) are known to exist that could be impacted by operation of the facility. Operation of the oxycombustion facility would not be expected to result in seismic effects that could lead to damage of structures or facilities; result in impacts to, or render inaccessible, any unique geologic resources; or result in displacement of the ground surface. CO2 Pipeline There would be negligible impacts to geologic resources from the operation of the proposed CO2 pipeline. Pipeline repairs or maintenance may be required during operation; however, these activities would only disturb surficial and near-surface soils that were previously disturbed during construction of the pipeline. Operation of the pipeline would not be likely to result in any seismic effects that could damage structures; result in destruction of high-value or unique geologic resources; render any such resources inaccessible; or cause displacement of the ground surface. CO2 Storage Study Area During operations, CO2 would be injected into the Mt. Simon Formation through up to four injection wells located in the CO2 storage study area. The exact location for the injection wells and surface facilities has not yet been determined. Chapter 2 describes the siting criteria, plans, and design of the wells. The Alliance would operate the injection wells under the UIC Class VI permits issued by the USEPA, which would include the procedures and practices for CO2 injection and monitoring.  The Alliance has evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical and horizontal injection wells at one or two injection well sites. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is currently proposing to operate up to four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site for the annual injection of 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 20-year period. Under normal operating conditions, 58 percent of the CO2 flow would be split equally between two of the wells while the remaining 42 percent would be split equally between the other two wells. The injection wells would be constructed to provide operational flexibility and backup capability, such that one well could be taken off line while the remaining three injection wells receive 100 percent of the flow. The horizontal injection would occur along the final 1,500 to 2,000 foot section of each injection well, allowing the CO2 to infiltrate through a single horizon within the Mt. Simon Formation at about 4,030 feet bgs. Over the course of the injection period, the individual CO2 streams from each of the four wells would merge to form a combined plume.  The Alliance conducted modeling using the Subsurface Transport Over Multiple Phases (STOMP)-CO2 computer program to predict the areal extent and distribution of the CO2 plume for the proposed injection well configuration. Data from the stratigraphic well, as well as data collected from hydrologic testing, wireline logging, and vertical seismic profiling, was used to support the modeling effort. The Alliance used multiple variables to model the formation (e.g., vertical and horizontal permeability and porosity, rock and grain density, capillary pressure) and the reservoir (e.g., temperature, fluid pressure, salinity), combined with the injection stream values (pressure, saturation) to determine the lateral extent of the plume after 20 and 70 years. The Alliance ran the model to determine the maximum extent of the plume, the time period of pressure buildup and drop off, and a sensitivity analysis to determine the most significant parameters for determining plume size (i.e., fracture gradient and porosity). Appendix G, Geological Report, contains the technical report detailing the model’s inputs, assumptions, and outputs. As shown in Figure 2-23, the plume model predicted that the CO2 plume would occupy a subsurface area of approximately 4,000 acres within the CO2 storage study area.  The first step to safely manage the injection and storage of CO2 is the selection of a site with characteristics that make it suitable for the long-term storage of CO2. The USEPA has outlined a set of siting requirements to ensure that site proponents demonstrate that there is a viable injection zone and a separate, competent confining zone (caprock formation) at the project site (USEPA 2011i; 75 FR 77230). The Mt. Simon Formation is an ideal target for sequestration, as research has shown that it contains the characteristics that support long-term storage of CO2 (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011, DOE 2011a, Griffith et al. 2011; NETL 2010a). At the CO2 storage study area, the Mt. Simon Formation is located over 3,900 feet bgs and is laterally continuous and about 500 feet thick, as described in Section 3.4.2 and shown in Figure 3.4-2. It is capped by members of the Eau Claire Formation, which consists of 400 feet of siltstone and shale layers. Brine aquifers in sandstone formations that formed in braided fluvial environments, such as the Mt. Simon Formation, are believed to be ideally suited for fluid storage, because the shale lenses in the sandstone allow the plume to spread and react with the brine before reaching the caprock formation (Berger et al. 2009). These characteristics are particularly evident in the transition between the Mt. Simon Formation and the Elmhurst member of the Eau Claire. There are several geologic resource impacts that could occur as a result of the injection and storage of CO2. These impacts could include:  CO2 migration out of the injection zone and into a USDW;  Earthquake generation;  Ground surface displacement; and  Increased human exposure to radon gas. DOE expects adverse impacts to geologic resources to be unlikely and negligible to minor for a variety of reasons that are addressed in the remainder of this section. Although CO2 sequestration technology is still evolving, injection regulations, site selection methods, industry BMPs, and additional mitigation procedures would minimize the potential for impacts. CO2 Migration As supercritical CO2 is injected into a deep saline formation, the brine (saline groundwater) is displaced and flows away from the injection wells through the interconnected pore space. Because the injected CO2 is less dense than the surrounding groundwater, buoyancy causes the CO2 to rise within the injection formation to lower-pressure zones until it is stopped by laterally extensive impermeable layers (e.g., the caprock layer or confining zone). Generally, as CO2 filters through the formation, it starts to slowly mix and dissolve with the brine, creating a denser, mildly acidic solution. However, if a pathway exists between the injection zone and the shallower formations that overlie the confining zone, CO2 could migrate vertically from the injection zone into shallower bedrock formations. This can occur if there are faults or fractures in the caprock seal or if the CO2 pressure exceeds the capillary pressure of the caprock. In addition, a leak could occur if the injected CO2 finds a pathway through a more permeable zone within the caprock (Griffith et al. 2011). CO2 could also migrate upward along improperly sealed injection well casings, or improperly abandoned wells that penetrate the caprock. Given the site investigation and characterization undertaken by the Alliance and studies that have been conducted by the Illinois State Geologic Survey over many years, the existence of unknown faults, fractures, or wells within the CO2 storage area is highly unlikely. CO2 is trapped in the injection zone by four primary mechanisms: (1) structural trapping, (2) residual CO2 trapping, (3) solubility trapping, and (4) mineral trapping. These trapping mechanisms are dependent upon the physical and chemical properties of the CO2 and the injection zone. Figure 3.4-5 shows the comparative effectiveness and time delay for the different types of trapping mechanisms. Mechanisms that take longer to occur (solubility trapping, mineralization) are also more effective for long-term trapping (Liu and Maroto-Valer 2011). Structural trapping is the retention of the injected CO2 by a physical barrier (the impermeable caprock). Residual CO2 trapping (or hydraulic trapping) occurs as the formation acts like a sponge, capturing CO2 in the pore spaces. The effectiveness of residual trapping is dependent upon the permeability and porosity of the injection zone. Solubility trapping occurs when CO2 dissolves in the brine, forming a liquid that is denser than the host brine. The dissolved CO2 and brine may sink in relation to the surrounding brine. Mineral trapping occurs when the injected CO2 reacts with minerals in the brine or the formation to form carbonate minerals. In the Mt. Simon Formation, carbonate minerals that could be formed through mineralization would include iron carbonate precipitates. The presence of feldspar in the Mt. Simon Formation may enhance mineral trapping (Alliance 2012b). The Mt. Simon Formation contains lenses of shale within the sandstone layers, which would likely increase the storage capacity of the formation by forcing the CO2 to move laterally as its buoyancy causes it to migrate upward (Ambrose et al. 2008; Bowen et al. 2011; Zhou et al. 2009). This would provide additional exposure to brine and pore space, which would improve the potential for long-term trapping of CO2. As part of the site selection and UIC permitting process, the Alliance performed seismic studies and modeling to determine how the Mt. Simon, Eau Claire, and overlying formations are draped over the metarhyolite basement and whether any local fracture or fault systems intersect the confining zone. The studies found no indications of faults or tectonic fracture zones in the bedrock layers and it is unlikely that any undetected faults or fracture zones are critically stressed (Alliance 2012b). While there is no evidence of vertical fractures or fissures in the shallow subsurface in the CO2 storage study area, some of the well logs indicated that karst zones may be present in some of the dolomite formations around 1,600 feet bgs. These zones are encased within carbonate units with low permeability, located over 1,500 feet above the primary confining layer (caprock) (Alliance 2012b). It is very unlikely that CO2 could reach these dolomite formations because the primary confining zone would inhibit the upward migration of CO2. The secondary confining zone and several layers of dense, low permeability dolomite would also impede upward migration. A review of the drilling records of existing water, oil, and gas wells in the UIC survey area determined that the only well penetrating the injection zone is the stratigraphic well drilled by the Alliance in 2011. This well, which would be used as a deep monitoring well, was specifically designed to be resistant to brine acidization by CO2, and has been cemented with CO2-resistant cement to prevent upward CO2 migration. The next deepest well was drilled to 1,530 feet, well above the injection zone. Therefore, it is very unlikely that CO2 would migrate up through existing well bores or abandoned wells, because it would first have to escape from the primary and secondary confining zones to reach the next deepest well. CO2 migration up the injection well bores is a potential threat to containing CO2 in the Mt. Simon Formation. The Alliance would design and construct the injection wells by following CO2 injection well BMPs, using CO2-resistant cement to construct the injection wells within the injection zone, and cementing each string casing up to the surface (see Figure 2-21 and Figure 2-22) (NETL 2012a). A CO2resistant cement that is specifically designed to prevent casing degradation from contact with the acidic brine would be used in the production casing where it crosses the injection and primary confining zones. A corrosion inhibited potassium chloride brine, or similar fluid, would be used in the space between the pipe (tubing) that delivers the CO2 into the well and the well casing (annular space) (see Figure 2-21 and Figure 2-22). To prevent the CO2 from infiltrating the annular space, the packer assembly, which secures the well tubing and separates the annular space from the perforated section of the well, will be maintained at a pressure sufficient to contain the injected CO2. The packer assembly would be designed for an estimated pressure differential of 500 pounds per square inch (psi), including a factor of safety. Prior to injection, extensive testing would be conducted on the injection wells to ensure the integrity of the tubing, annular fluid and cemented casings. For example, pressure testing, wireline logging, and mechanical integrity testing, would be performed to ensure that the casing can withstand the injection pressures and that the cement has cured properly. Acidic brine solution can also dissolve minerals, which could increase the salt and heavy metal concentration in the brine. However, models have shown that the quartz-rich Mt. Simon Formation would tend to be resistant to acid dissolution (DOE 2007a). As a result of the BMPs and design elements that the Alliance would execute in the design and construction of the injection wells, the leakage of brine from the injection zone up through the well casing is considered unlikely, and as a result, impacts to geologic resources from vertical brine leakage would be considered negligible to minor. In general, brine from the injection zone that is displaced by the injected CO2 can migrate from the point of injection either vertically (potentially up through the confining zone) or laterally (Zhou et al. 2009). The injection of CO2 would displace brine and increase the pressure within a portion of the injection zone, gradually decreasing with distance from the injection wells. For UIC permitting purposes, the pressure front is defined as a zone of elevated pressure, where the pressure differential is sufficient to cause movement of CO2 or brine into a UDSW (USEPA 2012e). Models that simulate the increased pressure from CO2 injection have been used to investigate the potential for brine migration and have shown that while the confining zone does prevent vertical CO2 migration (provides structural trapping), the pressure front can be strong enough to force small amounts of brine from the injection zone into shallower formations (Birkholzer et al. 2009; Lemieux 2011). This process would occur over tens of years, as the displaced brine is first forced into the Mt. Simon pore space before it can migrate vertically (Zhou et al. 2009). If the brine does pass through the caprock and reaches a shallower (less than 3,500 feet bgs), permeable formation, it would likely also spread laterally within the formation, slowing its vertical migration. The temperature and density differential between the injection zone brine and the shallower formation would cause the dense brine to stay within the lower-most region of the formation. Birkholzer et al. (2009) determined that vertical brine migration through a sequence of layers into shallow aquifer bodies (e.g., USDW), would be extremely unlikely. Brine could migrate with CO2 through permeable pathways through the caprock; however, as mentioned above, the project site selection would minimize this potential effect. Overall, the impact from brine migration would be minor because it would be extremely unlikely that it would reach the deepest USDW.  Brine in the injection zone can also be displaced laterally, although the models show that the lateral movement would be slow and not much faster than the natural groundwater flows in deep saline aquifers, on the scale of inches over hundreds of years (Birkholzer et al. 2009; Zhou et al. 2009). For the Mt. Simon, this means there is no potential for displaced brine to migrate up-dip (i.e., towards the northeast) to the potable Mt. Simon aquifers in the northern Illinois Basin. The closest potable Mt. Simon aquifer is over 50 miles away (Zhou et al. 2009; Brower et al. 1989). Because the displaced brine would remain within the vicinity of the CO2 storage study area, the impacts from up-dip brine migration would be negligible. Ongoing monitoring and modeling would serve as an important means of reducing the potential for impacts to geological resources from the proposed project. The plume modeling conducted by the Alliance, as discussed earlier, projects that injected CO2 would remain within the CO2 storage study area and remain stable after 70 years (see Figure 2-23). The Alliance ran the plume model for over 300 years to determine the greatest extent of the aerial plume and the peak pressure differential within the formation. Although the plume does change slightly throughout the modeling period, the variation from the maximum plume extent becomes insignificant after the injection period. The pressure differential also peaks at the end of the injection period, but slowly dissipates to 90 percent of the peak within the first 100 years of injection (Appendix G, Geological Report).  As part of the proposed CO2 monitoring and verification program, the Alliance would conduct monitoring to detect migration of injected or displaced fluids, should migration occur, so that potential long-term impacts to geologic resources may be minimized or avoided (e.g., by correcting deficiencies in well construction, adjusting injection and production rates or locations, or other appropriate mitigation strategies). While some of the monitoring would be required by the Class VI injection regulations, the Alliance is also planning to use additional monitoring techniques for research purposes. A preliminary CO2 monitoring program is summarized at the end of this section and will be described in detail in the MVA plan that will be submitted with the UIC permit applications. Considering the proposed mitigation measures (i.e., the well integrity testing program and the CO2 monitoring and verification program) and the low probability of CO2 leakage from the injection zone, potential impacts related to migration of injected and displaced fluids through improperly sealed wells or unknown faults or fracture pathways are expected to be negligible to minor. Induced Seismicity The expanding use of pressurized fluids in hydraulic fracturing and wastewater injection has increased the visibility of human-induced seismic effects in energy projects (NRC 2012; Ellsworth et al. 2012; Suckale 2010). DOE recognizes the public’s interest in human-induced seismicity from geologic sequestration, as CO2 would be injected into a saline aquifer within a sandstone formation deep within the earth’s crust. The remainder of this section addresses the potential for the project to induce seismicity based on currently available information. A report produced in 2012 by the National Research Council (NRC 2012) summarized the latest research into induced and triggered earthquakes as a by-product of energy production, which includes carbon sequestration. Currently running projects, such as the Sleipner field in Norway, the In Salah gas field in Algeria, and the Illinois Basin-Decatur Project (by the Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium) in Decatur, Illinois were used to characterize the potential risk of seismic events from the injection of CO2. The report notes that no harmful seismic events have been connected with any of these projects, although their injected volumes are still considered small-scale (NRC 2012). From the review of seismic events from other injection-related energy technologies (e.g., geothermal, enhanced oil recovery, wastewater injection), the National Research Council identified an apparent correlation between the net fluid balance (difference between the amount of fluid injected and withdrawn) and the maximum magnitude of seismic events at an injection well. However, this analysis is extremely site-specific, and the report notes that it cannot be used to predict earthquake magnitudes for an entire region or industry. In areas that are already predisposed for faulting and earthquakes, the combination of increased pore pressure and potential hydrochemical-mechanical effects of liquid CO2 in saline formations could increase the potential for seismic risk on induced or triggered earthquakes. This risk could be mitigated through lowering the fluid viscosity, using lower injection pressures, and implementing site-specific limits to permanent pressure change within the injection zone. Ultimately, the National Research Council determined that there is not enough large-scale data to accurately analyze the seismic risks from geologic sequestration, and that additional test projects would be needed to expand the knowledge base. Data gathered from operating the FutureGen 2.0 injection wells would be used to help further the overall research in this area. There are three types of seismic events that could be caused by subsurface fluid injection: microseismic, induced, and triggered seismicity. Microseismic events are low-intensity (too small to be felt by humans, magnitude less than 2) seismic occurrences that occur when the host formation is fractured by injecting large quantities of fluid under high injection pressures (NRC 2012; IPCC 2005). Hydraulic fracturing uses this method to increase formation permeability when extracting natural gas. An induced seismic event occurs when the increase in pore pressure introduces large changes to the local stress field and reactivates an existing fault. A triggered seismic event would occur if the CO2 or migrating brine reduced the friction along a fault line, which reduced the amount of stress needed to generate an earthquake. In theory, a triggered seismic event could happen without being influenced by the injection pressures, while microseismic or induced events are unlikely to occur naturally (Oldenburg 2012). As discussed above, an increase in pore pressure as a result of injection has been identified as a major factor in microseismic and induced seismicity. The pressure field would change three times during injection: (1) the early stage with little pressure interference, (2) an intermediate stage with transient changes between injection wells, and (3) a final stage in which the fields have intermingled and there was a continuous pressure buildup from the injection wells (Zhou et al. 2009). The pressure field could extend laterally for tens of miles, gradually decreasing with distance from the injection wells (Zhou et al. 2009). Pressure can be reduced over time as brine is displaced from its original location. Modeled studies of large-scale injection in the Mt. Simon Formation have projected that the formation can safely accommodate the pressure changes within the fractional pressure buildup thresholds deemed safe by natural gas entities in the region (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011). Although there are no known faults or seismic-related structures at the CO2 storage study area, the large CO2 volumes that would be injected at the site could increase the potential for seismic activity, especially if they are not monitored and managed correctly. Excess pressurization at the injection wells could cause microseismic events (bedrock fracturing). The pressure response would depend on the boundary conditions of the injection zone. Each formation has a fracturing pressure threshold, where additional stress applied would cause the formation to fracture and cause microseismic events. Excessive injection pressure can also limit the storage capacity of a formation, as it represents the inability of the host brine and earlier injected CO2 to move out of the way of the newly injected CO2. The potential for microseismic events to occur can be limited during injection operations by maintaining the injection pressure below the fracturing pressure threshold for both the injection zone and confining zone formations. In the modeling that the Alliance conducted, a pressure gradient of 0.65 psi per foot was used. The injection zone would be between 4,000 and 4,500 feet deep, for a calculated fracture pressure of 2,600 psi at 4,000 feet and increasing to 2,925 psi at 4,500 feet. Pursuant to the USEPA Class VI UIC regulations, the injection pressures must not exceed 90 percent of the fracture pressure in order to protect the confining zone and to prevent fractures from forming. The pressure constraint is required to maintain the CO2 in a supercritical state during injection, while preventing fractures from forming in the injection and confining zone formations. As part of the MVA plan, the Alliance would monitor the injection pressure at the surface and within the formation to ensure that the fracture threshold is not exceeded, which would substantially reduce the risk for induced seismicity. By actively monitoring the injection and formation pressures, the Alliance would be able to adjust the injection rate to ensure that the injection pressures remain within the limits of the UIC permits, and therefore remain below the fracture threshold. The primary method to prevent seismic events is through careful site selection during the planning process, and monitoring the CO2 and formation pressures during injection. In cases where fluid injection has been positively attributed to small, triggered earthquakes, the earthquake foci were connected to mapped faults that were miles long (Frohlich et al. 2011). There are no mapped faults in the UIC survey area, and the Sangamon Arch is the only structural feature in Morgan County, which indicates that the stresses strong enough to cause visible faults and deform bedrock have not been present for hundreds of millions of years. In the subsurface seismic study of the CO2 storage study area, no faults were found in the injection and confining zones. This suggests that induced or triggered seismic events would be very unlikely, as the seismic stability of the location and lack of faults would minimize the potential that the CO2 or increased injection pressure could mobilize an existing fault. The impacts due to the increased potential for injection-induced events would be minor because the Alliance would follow the procedures in the injection plan to ensure that the maximum fracture pressure threshold is not exceeded in the injection or confining zone formations. The Alliance would also construct a multi-level monitoring well that would be designed to measure the pressures at several different layers above the caprock, and use it to help regulate the formation pressure during injection. Surface Deformation Injection of large quantities of fluid, such as supercritical CO2, can cause small changes to the ground surface that can be measured by sensitive equipment, as seen in some oil and gas fields (McColphin 2009). Research at the In Salah CO2 injection site in Algeria has shown that the ground surface around the injection site tends to rise when injection starts, and then starts to settle as injection tapers off (Onuma and Ohkawa 2009). At the In Salah gas field, the surface deformation occurred at a rate of up to 7 millimeters (0.3 inches) per year and was measured using radar technology from satellites. The rate also varied based on the well location, which may be related to the underlying bedrock structure (Onuma and Ohkawa 2009). Other technologies, including tiltmeters and differential global positioning system receivers can also be used to measure the changes, since the deformation is too small to be visually perceived (McColphin 2009). Measuring subtle surface changes can also be a cost-effective way to estimate the location of the CO2 plume (NETL 2012b). As surface deformation is related to the plume size, any changes would occur close to the injection wells, and remain within the CO2 storage study area. While surface deformation monitoring is not required under the UIC regulations, the Alliance is considering using a variety of technologies (e.g., tiltmeters or satellite surveys) in addition to the monitoring techniques outlined in the proposed MVA plan. The monitoring program that the Alliance would implement would ensure that any surface deformation is measured and monitored; therefore, impacts due to surface deformation are expected to be localized to the injection well site(s) and minor. Radon The USEPA has labeled Morgan County as an area that has a high potential for radon gas, which indicates a predicted average indoor radon level over 4 picocuries per liter (USEPA 1993). In Morgan County, the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) has recorded 40 homes that were tested for radon, of which 28 (70 percent) recorded over 4 picocuries per liter of radon (IEMA 2012a). As a result, nine mitigation systems have been installed (IEMA 2012b). If CO2 were to escape the injection zone and increase pore pressures in the shallow unsaturated soil zone, it could potentially displace radon. As stated above, the potential for a leak from the injection zone is considered unlikely. As a result, the chance that CO2 could leak from the injection zone and reach the shallow soil is considered to be highly unlikely, and any increase of CO2 in the soil would not have a pressure great enough to displace radon gas. The monitoring procedures described below would identify any CO2 migration before it reaches shallow soils and affects radon concentration at the surface; therefore, impacts resulting from the potential for increased exposure to radon gas are considered to be negligible. Monitoring and Verification Overall, the potential impacts from CO2 leaving the injection zone would be minor, as the injection well site(s) have the characteristics needed for long-term carbon sequestration. The potential for impacts would be further reduced by implementing various monitoring and verification techniques to identify the CO2 plume, detect CO2 leaks, and monitor brine movement and formation pressure. This section addresses the monitoring technologies that could be implemented as part of the project to further reduce the likelihood of the impacts discussed above. The UIC Class VI rule regulates CO2 injection for sequestration, including the monitoring procedures that would be implemented in support of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. The UIC Class VI rule requires the establishment and implementation of a monitoring program to demonstrate the integrity of the injection wells and monitor the location of injected CO2. In addition, the program must be able to detect leaks and identify procedures for quickly implementing remediation activities in the event that an issue is identified. As part of the monitoring program, and at regular intervals, the Alliance would identify the CO2 plume location during the operation and post injection periods to determine the movement of the plume boundary. Both the USEPA and NETL have provided guidance for designing and implementing a monitoring program that complies with the UIC Class VI requirements (USEPA 2012e; NETL 2012a; NETL 2012b).  The Alliance proposes to undertake five major types of monitoring: (1) mechanical integrity testing, (2) operational testing, (3) groundwater quality monitoring, (4) plume and pressure front monitoring, and (5) near-surface gas (soil and surface air) monitoring. Each of these types of monitoring would have its own timeline based on the status of the injection wells. Mechanical integrity testing would assess the reliability of the injection wells and would occur prior to injection, during the injection phase, and prior to well plugging. Injection monitoring would occur during injection and include analyzing the CO2 stream; monitoring the rate, pressure, and volume of injection; and monitoring the well for corrosion. Groundwater monitoring would occur at set intervals before, during, and after the injection period by using a monitoring well network to assess groundwater quality and groundwater pressure at various depths. Pressure front monitoring would be used to track the pressure front and the CO2 plume during and after injection and would be used to update the AoR after injection had ceased and the injection wells had been closed. Soil and air monitoring would involve the collection of air samples from the ambient area and from shallow soils above the injection zone to monitor for changes in concentrations of CO2 that could indicate a leak. The USEPA has suggested, but not required, that a suite of monitoring activities be implemented (USEPA 2012e) based on the characteristics of each site. Soil and gas monitoring may be required at the UIC Program Director’s discretion, based upon site-specific characteristics and the potential that CO2 could reach a USDW. The Draft Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program Class VI Well Testing and Monitoring Guidance (USEPA 2012e) describes each monitoring requirement, the reason why it is included, and the applicable regulatory citation in greater detail. These monitoring technologies can also be used to support monitoring that would satisfy the GHG reporting requirements of CAA Subpart RR. The Alliance would design and implement a monitoring program to address all requirements of the Class VI UIC regulations and the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule. Monitoring would be conducted through each stage of the project, including construction, operations, and post injection to identify and address any instance of well breakdown, CO2 leak, or other adverse impacts. As part of the Class VI UIC permit applications, the Alliance would provide an injection plan and post-injection MVA plan, which would outline the monitoring techniques that would be implemented to protect USDWs. The Alliance would reevaluate the AoR and MVA plan every 5 years (at a minimum) after the issuance of a UIC Class VI permits. This reevaluation would consider the volume of CO2 injected during the previous 5 years, the pressure at which it has been injected, and the resulting CO2 plume. Injection and monitoring procedures would be revised, added, or removed, or the duration of monitoring activities would be changed depending on the actions of the CO2 plume. The Alliance has not yet finalized the MVA plan for the project; however, monitoring techniques that are being considered have been summarized in Table 3.4-2. Additional monitoring activities may also be considered that have not been included in the table. The Alliance would also report injection amounts to the USEPA annually, as required by the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule, by calculating the amount of CO2 retained within the injection zone using a mass balance approach (USEPA 2010f). The Alliance has characterized the injection and confining zones and designed the injection wells to minimize the potential of a CO2 release. If, however, an adverse event were to occur during construction or operation, the Alliance would deploy a variety of emergency or remedial responses, depending on the characteristics of the event (e.g., the location, type and volume of a release). The immediate response would be to stop drilling or injection, in order to assess the situation. The Alliance would then conduct an investigation to determine the cause of the event by reviewing monitoring records, checking the well casing, annulus seals and down-hole pressure. The Alliance could also perform geophysical surveys to support the investigation. Depending on the cause of the event, several solutions could be implemented, including repairing the well casing, lowering the reservoir pressure by removing brine or CO2, increasing the upstream reservoir pressure (e.g., creating a hydraulic barrier), diverting the CO2 stream, or modifying the injection flow rate or quantity. In certain situations, an injection well could be sealed with cement or USDW groundwater remediation could be implemented if necessary. All emergency and remedial response procedures would be described in detail in the MVA, which will be included with the UIC permit applications. Section 2.5.4 describes the closure procedures for the injection wells at the end of the 20-year injection period. During the injection period, the Alliance would work with the UIC Program Director to refine and finalize the Post-Injection Site Care and Closure Plan, which would detail the plugging and abandonment of the wells and future monitoring activities. Monitoring Category Monitoring Method Description Wireline Monitoring of Casing and/or Tubular Corrosion Pressure Fall-Off Testing Multi-Level Monitoring Wells Ultrasonic, electromagnetic, and mechanical logging tools used to evaluate the condition of the well-casing and the CO2 injection tubing. A pressure transient test that involves shutting in the injection well after a period of prolonged injection and measuring pressure falloff. Fluid sampling and pressure and temperature monitoring for assessment of CO2 fate and transport and leak detection, injection zone heterogeneity, and anisotropy. Plume and Pressure Front Monitoring (Indirect Geophysical Monitoring Techniques)  Varies  Multiple technologies tested for efficacy and cost effectiveness.  Source: Alliance 2012b CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2O = water; O2 = oxygen; RAT = radioactive tracer; USDW = Underground Source of Drinking Water Educational Facilities There would be no direct or indirect impacts to local geology from the operation of the educational facilities. Use of the facilities by employees and visitors would not affect the geologic resources or regional economic mineral resources. 3.4.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to the local geologic resources. In addition, CO2 injection would not occur under the no-build alternative, so there would be no change to the subsurface within the CO2 storage study area. 3.5 GROUNDWATER 3.5.1 Introduction This section describes the groundwater resources that could be impacted by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and its related components. This section also analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of this proposed project on these resources. 3.5.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for groundwater resources includes the drinking water aquifers that underlie the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline corridor, CO2 storage study area, and the educational facilities, which have the potential to be contaminated from spills during construction and operations. The ROI includes the aquifers that would be used as a source of water to support construction and operations.  The ROI also includes the drinking water aquifers within the UIC survey area that would overlie the CO2 plume area. This ROI encompasses a 25-square mile survey area, centered on the CO2 storage study area (see Section 3.4, Geology). Computer modeling of the CO2 plume suggests that the plume would encompass an area of approximately 4,000 acres around the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area. 3.5.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered The affected environment for the FutureGen 2.0 Project was characterized using GIS data from the Illinois Natural Resources Geospatial Data Clearinghouse, drinking water aquifer reports produced by the IDNR, USEPA water quality reports, and water source data from the Meredosia Water Department and the Meredosia Energy Center. DOE determined potential impacts to groundwater resources based on anticipated project water requirements, spill prevention and mitigation BMPs, and the results of preliminary computer modeling of the CO2 plume. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would:  Deplete groundwater supplies on a scale that would affect available capacity of a groundwater source for use by existing water rights holders, or interfere with groundwater recharge;  Conflict with established water rights, allocations, or regulations protecting groundwater for future beneficial uses;  Potentially contaminate shallow drinking water aquifers due to chemical spills, well drilling or well completion failures;  Conflict with regional or local aquifer management plans or goals of governmental water authorities; or  Potentially contaminate a drinking water aquifer (i.e., USDW) due to migration of CO2 or brine (saline groundwater) into the aquifer from CO2 injection, or through contamination by chemical spills, well drilling, well development, or well failures. 3.5.1.3 Regulatory Framework The injection of CO2 for geologic sequestration is regulated under the USEPA’s UIC Program (see Section 3.4, Geology, for additional details). The USEPA protects underground drinking water resources from contamination by waste injection through the UIC Program. In 2010, the USEPA designated a new UIC classification (Class VI) specifically for geologic sequestration of CO2. This new class of regulations includes minimum technical criteria for the permitting, geologic site characterization, injection well construction and operation, monitoring requirements, and post-injection requirements. Identification of the deepest source of drinking water in relation to the injection zone is a critical part of the permitting process. The USEPA defines a USDW as an aquifer, or part of an aquifer, with the following characteristics:  Supplies any public water system or contains a sufficient quantity of groundwater to supply a public water system and currently supplies drinking water for human consumption or contains fewer than 10,000 milligrams per liter of total dissolved solids; and  Is not an exempted aquifer. The UIC Program works with state and local governments to oversee underground injection in an effort to prevent contamination of drinking water resources. The program requires that the permit applicant demonstrate the integrity of the confining zone between the injection zone and the deepest USDW. All injection wells require authorization under general rules or specific permits. The Alliance would apply for Class VI Geologic Sequestration Well Permits from the USEPA, which would cover the injection activities for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. 3.5.2 Affected Environment 3.5.2.1 Regional Hydrogeology In Illinois, potable groundwater is usually obtained from near-surface aquifers composed of deposits of sand and gravel, or from deeper limestone or sandstone formations. Some sand and gravel aquifers can produce large quantities of water from relatively shallow depths and are used to provide water for many municipalities and industrial users. The deeper limestone and sandstone formations that exist below the sand and gravel aquifers are used to supply groundwater in the northern third of Illinois, but as the formations dip to the southeast in the Illinois Basin, they become more saline (briny) and unsuitable for most purposes. In Morgan County, shallow sand and gravel aquifers are the primary underground source of drinking water. Drinking water is also obtained from the Illinois River. Figure 3.5-1 presents the areas where sand and gravel aquifers are present within the ROI. The map shows major sand and gravel aquifers, which are defined as aquifers capable of yielding at least 70 gpm of potable water, and shallow sand and gravel aquifers that are located less than 50 feet bgs (ISGS 2004). In western Morgan County, the primary sand and gravel aquifer is directly influenced by the Illinois River, which follows an ancient lake and riverbed formed and then buried during the Wisconsin Episode of glaciation. The major sand and gravel aquifers have a greater potential to support municipal and industrial users, while individual users may still be able to withdraw water from small, localized aquifers. In areas without a major aquifer, groundwater is likely present between thin layers of sand and gravel and confined in layers of clay, which restricts groundwater flow and preclude large withdrawals.  Shallow bedrock formations (less than 500 feet bgs) do not typically exhibit the yields and water quality required to support commercial and industrial users in the area. Shallow Pennsylvanian formations consist principally of shale in Morgan County. They are not considered a potential source of potable groundwater except for thin beds of sandstone or fractured limestone that may yield small domestic supplies. The Mississippian formations in Morgan County dip to the southeast at about 10 to 40 feet per mile (Woller and Sanderson 1979). The Burlington-Keokuk Limestone and the Salem Limestone units of the Mississippian System contain the principal bedrock aquifers, but their yield greatly depends on the fracture sequences within the bedrock. The Salem Limestone has the potential to support domestic and farm supplies, although yields are marginally adequate. Formation depths range from 175 feet in the northwest part of Morgan County to about 650 feet in the southeast (Woller and Sanderson 1979). The salinity and mineral concentration increases with depth in the Salem Limestone groundwater. In the east and the south, the Salem Limestone is as much as 200 feet thick and is overlain by the St. Louis Limestone. These two units have limited potential for water supply uses and may contain mineral concentrations too high for most uses. Source: ISGSS 2004 < = less than;; CO2 = carbon diooxide; ft = feet Major deep bedrock aquifers (greater than 500 feet bgs) are also located in Morgan County. These include the Mt. Simon, St. Peter, and Ironton/Galesville Formations. However, these aquifers are not used as sources of public drinking water in Morgan County because of their depth and salinity (Woller and Sanderson 1979). Of the three major deep bedrock aquifers, only the St. Peter Sandstone has a mineral concentration within USEPA drinking water standards (ISGS, 2004; Alliance 2012b). However, the St. Peter Sandstone lies at a depth of about 1,750 to 1,950 feet, and its salinity is high enough that it is unusable as drinking water (without treatment) and the state of Illinois does not consider it a source of drinking water. There are no sole source aquifers in the state of Illinois. A sole source aquifer is one that supplies at least 50 percent of the drinking water consumed in an area where no alternative drinking water sources can supply those who depend upon the aquifer for drinking water. 3.5.2.2 Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Water Department withdraws water from the Illinois River and a shallow sand and gravel aquifer to produce drinking water. The water department serves a population of approximately 1,040 people (USEPA 2011j) and provides potable water that meets USEPA water quality standards, with no health-based violations in the past 10 years. While there were incidences of monitoring and reporting violations in 2007 and 2009, compliance was achieved within three months of the end of testing (USEPA 2011j). The Meredosia Water Department pumps groundwater from production wells that were first installed in 1950 (Woller and Sanderson 1979) into a sand and gravel aquifer. Currently, the utility withdraws water from two wells that were drilled in 1980 at depths of 90 and 92 feet (ISGS 2012c). The wells are located approximately one mile south of Main Street, and have an approximate capacity of 300 gpm (Midwest Technology Assistance Center 2009). The sand and gravel aquifer system from which these wells withdraw water is hydraulically connected to the Illinois River, so it has a good withdrawal capacity and is considered an unconfined aquifer (Midwest Technology Assistance Center 2009; Anliker and Woller 1998). In 1995, the village of Meredosia and the Meredosia Energy Center each withdrew approximately 0.06 mgd from the sand and gravel aquifer (Anliker and Woller 1998). In addition to the Meredosia Water Department, several industrial and other private users operate their own well systems in the area. Most groundwater wells around the Illinois River extend to 50 to 130 feet bgs (Gibb et al. 1979). Farms and residences not connected to the Meredosia public water supply use their own wells to extract water from sand and gravel aquifers. The majority of the groundwater withdrawn through private wells is used for crop irrigation along a 6-mile strip of farmland between the bluffs and the Illinois River (Gibb et al. 1979). In 1995, manufacturing plants south of Meredosia and the Meredosia Energy Center withdrew a combined 3.13 mgd of groundwater from large capacity shallow wells (Anliker and Woller 1998). There is no regional groundwater plan for Morgan County or the local aquifer. Although regional groundwater levels vary based on the Illinois River level, the local ground surface elevation, and season, the average groundwater levels for the Meredosia Energy Center wells are approximately 23 to 25 feet bgs. The Illinois State Water Survey conducted pumping tests on one of the groundwater wells at the Meredosia Energy Center (Ameren well 6) to evaluate the characteristics of the sand and gravel aquifer in this area. From these tests, it was determined that the transmissivity of the aquifer is 100,000 gpd per foot and the hydraulic conductivity is 1,200 gpd per square foot (Gibb et al. 1979). Transmissivity is a parameter used to characterize the amount of water that can be transmitted horizontally through an aquifer, while hydraulic conductivity is a parameter used to characterize the ease with which water can flow through an aquifer. These values of hydraulic conductivity and transmissivity can be attributed to the high permeability of the sand and gravel aquifer and the fact that the Illinois River is hydraulically connected to the aquifer system. At the end of 2011, Ameren suspended operations at the Meredosia Energy Center. While it was operating, the Meredosia Energy Center withdrew makeup water and potable water from the major sand and gravel aquifer using three production wells (Wells 5, 6, and 7). The Ameren wells are screened in sand deposits near the base of the Cahokia Formation, at approximately 103 to 106 feet bgs. Each well has a capacity of approximately 500 gpm (Ameren and Alliance 2012). Two older wells (Wells 3 and 4) are still present on the energy center site but have not been used since before the energy center suspended operations. The energy center also supplemented the process water supply with an intake in the Illinois River (Anliker and Woller 1998). Table 3.5-1 presents an estimate of the amount of groundwater withdrawn from the three Ameren wells, as reported by Ameren to the Illinois State Water Survey under the Illinois Water Inventory Program. The general decrease in annual water use in 2008-2009 is attributable to Ameren reducing the use of boilers for energy production. Table 3.5-1. Summary of Past Water Use at the Meredosia Energy Center 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Well 5  720  720  720  475  –  –  –  261  264  238  –  Well 6  720  720  720  842  –  –  –  265  289  212  –  Well 7  860  860  860  982  –  –  –  266  294  284  –  Well 5  7  7  7  4.6  7  7  21  24  16  9  2  Well 6  7  7  7  8.2  7  7  21  24  16  11  4  Well 7  7  7  7  8.2  7  7  21  24  31  31  16  Note: Dash ‘–‘ indicates no data is available. In 2010, in response to the coal ash spill at a Tennessee Valley Authority facility, the IEPA initiated a management strategy for ash impoundments located at coal-fired power plants within the state of Illinois. The IEPA assessed the vulnerability of groundwater to contamination from ash ponds throughout the state and categorized facilities with ash ponds into two priority groups according to their potential to cause groundwater contamination. Priority 1 facilities were identified in areas where there is a high potential for aquifer recharge and an existing or future population that depends on the groundwater as a source of drinking water. Priority 2 facilities have a low potential for aquifer recharge and existing or future potable uses in the area. Because the ash ponds at the Meredosia Energy Center are located above a potable aquifer with a high potential for recharge, the facility was categorized as Priority 1 (IEPA 2011c). As a result, Ameren submitted a hydrogeologic assessment plan that was accepted by the IEPA, and is conducting groundwater monitoring on a quarterly basis. The IEPA analyzed the groundwater flow direction at the Meredosia Energy Center and determined that groundwater flows towards the river. Therefore, potential contamination from the ash ponds would not impact the drinking water wells near the facility. Ameren is continuing to maintain the ash ponds and is working with the IEPA on its management strategy. 3.5.2.3 CO2 Pipeline As the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor leaves the Meredosia area, it crosses the major sand and gravel aquifer that is described in Section 3.5.2.1. The majority of the CO2 pipeline corridor overlies groundwater aquifers that are shallower than 50 feet and consist of glacial sand and gravel deposits that are limited in extent (see Figure 3.5-1). These aquifers are present in layers too thin for municipal or large industrial use, although households and farms may use them for individual water wells. 3.5.2.4 CO2 Storage Study Area There is a major sand and gravel aquifer beneath the CO2 storage study area located in the northeastern corner of Morgan County (Figure 3.5-1). This aquifer could be connected to the sand and gravel aquifer system at the Meredosia Energy Center by a bedrock valley buried by glacial deposits. The other groundwater resources in the area are typically found in glacial till, mostly confined to thin layers of sand and gravel between clay.  A shallow monitoring well drilled and installed at the CO2 storage study area found thin glacial sediment consisting of silts and clays, which resulted in a poor yield of groundwater. The Alliance conducted groundwater sampling from this monitoring well in the fall of 2011. The groundwater pH values ranged from 7.08 to 7.66. Most of the constituent concentrations were below applicable drinking water standards, although a few exceeded the USEPA primary or secondary standards. The concentrations of iron, manganese, nitrate and total dissolved solids exceeded the USEPA primary or secondary standards in some of the groundwater samples. The aquifers located in the sand and gravel deposits and the shallowest bedrock (less than 500 feet bgs) are considered USDWs because they are used as potable water and have a total dissolved solids concentration well below the USEPA’s threshold (10,000 milligrams per liter). The deeper bedrock aquifers are typically characterized by increased levels of total dissolved solids, which increase with depth. Around Chicago and in northern Illinois, the St. Peter and Mt. Simon Formations have total dissolved solids concentrations that are low enough to be used as freshwater aquifers. The formations depths and salinities increase to the southeast.  At the CO2 storage study area, the St. Peter Formation contains a deep aquifer at approximately 1,750 feet bgs, with a total dissolved solids concentration of 2,500 to 10,000 milligrams per liter (ISGS 2004). The Alliance sampled water from the St. Peter aquifer at the stratigraphic well (see Figure 3.5-2) and determined that the total dissolved solids concentration was about 3,700 milligrams per liter. Although the aquifer could likely support the volume of pumping required by a public utility, none of the communities in and around Morgan County withdraw water from the St. Peter aquifer and the state of Illinois does not consider it to be a source of potable water at this location. For the UIC permit applications, the St. Peter Formation is classified as a federal USDW, and as an Illinois non-USDW (Alliance 2012b). There is about 1,900 feet of bedrock between the top of the injection zone and the base of the St. Peter Formation, of which 570 feet are composed of the primary and secondary caprock formations (Figure 3.4-2). At the CO2 storage study area, the Mt. Simon Formation has a reported total dissolved solids concentration of over 48,000 milligrams per liter, and is not considered a USDW in Morgan County (Alliance 2012b). In the 25-square mile UIC survey area, there are 24 water wells present (ISGS 2012c). Figure 3.5-2 shows the location of the groundwater wells within the UIC survey area. Seventeen wells are screened to depths of 50 feet or less. These wells are drilled for domestic use and for livestock watering. One well is drilled to 54 feet bgs and is used as a livestock watering well. Five groundwater wells have been drilled deeper than 100 feet bgs. The deepest of these was drilled to 1,056 feet bgs by the Linden Oil Company; the other four wells were drilled to a depth of 100 to 400 feet bgs (ISGS 2012c). The deep well was likely drilled for hydrocarbon production, proved unsuccessful (as a “dry hole”), and was transferred to a private user to support agricultural needs. The stratigraphic well drilled by the Alliance is also included in the water well database. The stratigraphic well was drilled to 4,820 feet bgs and penetrates the Mt. Simon and Eau Claire Formations (Alliance 2012b). It was designed and constructed using carbon sequestration well standards to prevent the upward migration of CO2, with the intention for it to be used as a deep monitoring well. Source: ISGSS 2012c CO2 = carbonn dioxide; ROI = reegion of influencee; UIC = undergrouund injection contrrol The village of Ashland, the closest community to the CO2 storage study area, is located approximately 5 miles to the northeast and outside of the study area. The municipal water sources for the community are between 12 and 26 miles from the CO2 storage study area. Although the village of Ashland had drilled municipal water wells in 1936, Ashland’s current water supply comes from the city of Jacksonville water system and the water plant at Virginia, Illinois via rural water cooperatives (Journal Courier 2011; Journal Courier 2010). The Virginia water plant is located about 12 miles northwest of the CO2 storage study area and withdraws groundwater from five wells drilled between 50-70 feet bgs in the Mahomet aquifer. The city of Jacksonville withdraws most of its water from a radial well drilled on the banks of the Illinois River, about 26 miles west of Jacksonville (City of Jacksonville 2012a). When the main well is undergoing maintenance, two local, gravel pack wells are used. The water is piped to a local water treatment plant before being distributed to the public. 3.5.2.5 Educational Facilities The educational facilities are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The groundwater in this area is restricted to thin, individual pockets in sand deposits. The Alliance expects that the public water utility would provide for the water needs of the educational facilities (see Section 3.15, Utilities). 3.5.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action 3.5.3.1 Construction Impacts During construction, accidental spills of fuel, fuel constituents, and other materials onto the ground surface may occur and could potentially impact shallow groundwater resources. The potential for spills to impact groundwater is considered low as the BMPs described in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, would be applied to prevent spills and unintentional releases to groundwater from wastes or petroleum-based materials generated during construction. If oil spills were to occur, response actions and control measures specified in the SPCC plan for the project would be employed to address the spill. As a result, DOE expects that impacts to groundwater resources from spills during construction would be short term and minor. Meredosia Energy Center The Alliance would remove Wells 3, 4, and 5 and construct one new production well at the Meredosia Energy Center to replace them. The new well would be completed in the same shallow sand and gravel aquifer in which the other wells at the energy center are installed. Three potential locations have been identified for the new well, although a final location has not been selected. The construction of the well would comply with Title 77 IAC 920, Illinois Water Well Construction Code. The construction of this well would not cause or contribute to adverse impacts to the groundwater resources in this area. During construction, the Alliance may use the new and existing groundwater wells onsite to provide water to support construction needs. Water could also be obtained from the village of Meredosia or trucked in to support construction. The construction demand is not expected to exceed 200,000 gpd, the operational demand for the project, and would be less than the historical water demand of the Meredosia Energy Center (see Table 3.5-1). As a result, adverse impacts to the local aquifer, which is connected to the Illinois River, are expected to be negligible. In addition, there would be no direct onsite discharge to groundwater during the construction process. CO2 Pipeline Potential impacts to groundwater from spills that could occur during construction of the CO2 pipeline would be similar to those addressed for the energy center. There is only one existing well that would be located within the construction ROW for the pipeline routes, which is located within 34 feet of the centerline of the southern pipeline route. However, construction would be minimized in this area such that no ground disturbing activities would take place in close proximity to the well. The well would be flagged and cordoned off to protect it during construction. As a result, construction activities would not directly impact groundwater resources. Based on the proposed depth of pipeline burial (up to 5 feet), shallow groundwater is unlikely to be encountered during excavation of the pipeline trench. Any groundwater wells that exist within the vicinity of the pipeline would likely be screened at depths much deeper than the pipeline trench; therefore, the aquifers used would not be directly impacted by trenching or horizontal directional drilling because of their depth below the pipeline and the distance from the pipeline to the wells. Therefore, based on the location of the proposed pipeline routes, it is not anticipated that any existing water supply wells would be directly affected by construction of the CO2 pipeline. In the unlikely event that an existing supply well were to be directly impacted by the construction activities, resulting in the temporary impairment of the quantity or quality of water available in that well, alternative sources of water would be identified and provided (e.g., a new well would be drilled to replace the damaged well or other water service would be provided until such time as the issue was resolved). The Alliance has no current plans to withdraw groundwater or to discharge directly to groundwater during construction of the proposed pipeline. Water required for construction purposes (e.g., hydrostatic testing, preparation of drilling mud for directional drilling, and dust suppression) may be trucked in or obtained from surface waterbodies adjacent to the pipeline. If hydrostatic test water is discharged to the ground after testing, an NPDES permit would be obtained for each discharge, as appropriate, and applicable procedures, including water quality testing, would be followed; therefore, impacts to groundwater resources would be negligible.  CO2 Storage Study Area The injection wells would be located above a major sand and gravel aquifer, so the construction impacts would be similar to those described for the groundwater wells at the Meredosia Energy Center. The wells would be designed and installed in accordance with the design standards specified by the Class VI injection well regulations and as defined in the UIC permits. These design standards were adopted to protect drinking water resources from well construction and operation. The wells would be constructed to isolate each of the potential aquifers from one another and from the CO2 reservoir. This would be accomplished by constructing the injection wells with casings that telescope down in diameter with depth. In other words, the largest diameter casing is at the surface and each succeeding casing of smaller diameter is drilled and installed through the larger casing above. As each casing is installed, it would be cemented in place before the borehole was advanced. The base of the long string casing would be cemented with CO2-resistant cement in the injection zone. Figure 2-21 and Figure 2-22 present the casing program, and the depths, cement types, and well design for vertical and horizontal injection wells, respectively. The series of cemented casings would prevent CO2 from escaping around the borehole casing and would isolate each of the aquifers.   The CO2 pipeline spurs would be constructed from the end of either the southern or the northern CO2 pipeline route (at the western border of the CO2 storage study area) to the injection well site(s). The Alliance has not finalized the location of the injection wells and thus has not identified a proposed route from the southern or northern pipeline routes to the injection wells through the CO2 storage study area (the connecting pipeline spurs). The Alliance would site the pipeline such that the construction ROW would not intersect existing water supply wells; therefore, no direct impacts to water supply wells are anticipated. Potential indirect impacts resulting from the construction of the pipeline across the CO2 storage study area would be similar to those described in the previous section regarding pipeline construction within the pipeline corridor.  In addition, the Alliance would locate the pipeline and injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Sections 2.5.1.1 and 2.5.2.1, which includes avoiding major bodies of water and wetland areas. Such areas tend to have shallow groundwater tables and high infiltration rates, so avoiding these locations would reduce the potential for impacts to shallow groundwater resources.  Educational Facilities The construction of the educational facilities would not require groundwater pumping or the direct discharge of water or wastewater to an aquifer. Potential impacts to shallow aquifers would be consistent with those described for the energy center and would be expected to be negligible. 3.5.3.2 Operational Impacts During operations, petroleum, oils, lubricants, and other hazardous materials could be spilled onto the ground surface and potentially contaminate groundwater resources at any of the project facilities. However, the operational BMPs and SPCC plan for the project, as described in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, would be implemented to reduce the potential for impacts to groundwater resources from spills. Meredosia Energy Center Historically, the Meredosia Energy Center used well water as its source for drinking water as well as for freeze protection of the bottom ash pond piping during the winter months when necessary. Groundwater was obtained from several groundwater wells located east of the energy center on the property. As shown in Table 3.5-1, in the late 2000s, Ameren was withdrawing up to 294,000 gpd (daily maximum flow) from each of the three operational wells. The planned operations of the oxy-combustion facility under the proposed project would require approximately 124,000 gpd. Groundwater would be pumped from one new well and two existing wells on the Meredosia Energy Center site.  The IEPA has determined that the groundwater flow at the Meredosia Energy Center is toward the Illinois River (IEPA 2011c). While withdrawal from the new well would change highly localized groundwater movements, the changes are not anticipated to affect the surrounding groundwater wells. The new well would be located further from the river and would not withdraw enough water to divert the local groundwater flow. A groundwater monitoring study performed in 1981 at an industrial site less than a mile from the energy center determined that, while pumping 1,400,000 gpd, the drawdown cone stayed within 100 feet of the well (Naymik and Barcelona 1981). The municipal and other industrial wells are located over 100 feet from the energy center wells, which suggests that any impacts on existing wells from changes in local groundwater movement caused by the addition of the new well would be minor. The amount of water withdrawn for the FutureGen 2.0 Project would generally be lower than the historical usage at the energy center. Based on the characteristics of the sand and gravel aquifer and the history of pumping at the facility, the aquifer can readily supply the water required to support operations of the energy center and would not affect the available capacity or quality of groundwater in the area. Therefore, DOE would expect impacts to groundwater availability to be minor.  A revised NPDES permit application has been submitted for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Under the NPDES permit, stormwater not exposed to industrial pollutants would flow to a stormwater management basin, which would allow the water to infiltrate back to the groundwater. Since the water from this basin would not be exposed to industrial contaminants, it is not expected that the infiltration of stormwater to the groundwater table would adversely impact groundwater quality in the area. CO2 Pipeline Although there are no anticipated needs for groundwater supplies along the pipeline and no plans to discharge directly to groundwater during operations, there may be limited discharges of water to the ground (e.g., spent hydrostatic test water used for periodic testing of pipeline integrity), subject to the provisions of the NPDES permit. During project operations, there is also some potential for spills to occur from operational equipment (e.g., hydraulic fluids, fuels, lubricants) during maintenance activities. These activities along the pipeline would be limited in scope and frequency. The Alliance would follow the BMPs discussed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, as applicable, during maintenance activities to avoid or minimize potential impacts to groundwater resources from accidental spills of fuel, fuel constituents, and other materials. Taking these BMPs into account, DOE anticipates that potential impacts to groundwater quality from the operation of the CO2 pipeline would be minor. DOE expects that operation of the CO2 pipeline would not impact the availability of groundwater resources. During the operation of the pipeline, supercritical CO2 would be pumped through the pipeline to the injection wells. As discussed in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, based on the frequency of releases from similar pipelines in the United States, a release of CO2 due to pipeline puncture or rupture is considered unlikely. Several design and procedural methods would be implemented to minimize the potential for an accidental pipeline release. The CO2 pipeline would use mainline block valves to isolate pipeline sections, a leak detection system to alert the operator, and a SCADA telecommunication system to communicate information and data about pipeline performance. In addition, pipeline monitoring and surveillance procedures would be included in the Operating Manual for the pipeline and implemented in the field on a daily basis. If CO2 were released from the pipeline, it would expand rapidly as a gas and could include both liquid and solid phases, depending on temperature and pressure. As the product in the pipeline is over 97 percent CO2 with few impurities and would not remain under sufficient pressure to dissolve into groundwater, it would have negligible impacts to groundwater quality in the unlikely event of a release. CO2 Storage Study Area The Alliance has evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical and horizontal injection wells at one or two injection well sites. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is currently proposing to operate up to four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site for the annual injection of 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 20-year period. The injection wells would be designed to inject CO2 in a horizon within the Mt. Simon Formation (the target injection formation). Under normal operating conditions, 58 percent of the CO2 flow would be split equally between two of the wells while the remaining 42 percent would be split equally between the other two wells. The injection wells would be constructed to provide operational flexibility and backup capability, such that one well could be taken off line while the remaining three injection wells receive 100 percent of the flow. The horizontal injection would occur along the final 1,500 to 2,000 foot section of each injection well, allowing the CO2 to infiltrate through a single horizon within the Mt. Simon Formation at about 4,030 feet bgs. Over the course of the injection period, the individual CO2 streams from each of the four wells would merge to form a combined plume.  The Alliance conducted modeling using the STOMP-CO2 computer program to predict the areal extent and distribution of the CO2 plume for the proposed injection well configuration. Data from the stratigraphic well, as well as data collected from hydrologic testing, wireline logging, and vertical seismic profiling, was used to support the modeling effort. The Alliance used multiple variables to model the formation (e.g., vertical and horizontal permeability and porosity, rock and grain density, capillary pressure) and the reservoir (e.g., temperature, fluid pressure, salinity), combined with the injection stream values (pressure, saturation) to determine the lateral extent of the plume after 20 and 70 years. The Alliance ran the model to determine the maximum extent of the plume, the time period of pressure buildup and drop off, and a sensitivity analysis to determine the most significant parameters for determining plume size (i.e., fracture gradient and porosity). Appendix G, Geological Report, contains the technical report detailing the model’s inputs, assumptions, and outputs. As shown in Figure 2-23, the plume model predicted that the CO2 plume would occupy a subsurface area of approximately 4,000 acres within the CO2 storage study area.  Injected CO2 would be less dense than the surrounding brine (saline groundwater), so it would migrate upwards and laterally within the injection zone to areas of lower pressure until it reached impermeable layers (e.g., the caprock). Over time, the CO2 would be incorporated into the brine and would either migrate with the groundwater flow, be trapped in the formation’s pore space by capillary action, or would begin to mineralize to form new carbonate minerals. As the CO2 migrates through the formation, it would displace the Mt. Simon Formation brine within the plume radius. As a result, the brine would migrate laterally to lower pressure areas within the formation. Brine displacement would decrease with distance from the injection wells and CO2 plume.  The potential impacts associated with well operations and CO2 injection into geologic formations are largely associated with the possibility of CO2 leakage into drinking water aquifer resources. CO2 could leak from the target formation by:  Passing through the caprock through a higher permeability zone or from excessive pressure within the injection zone;  Leaking into a drinking water aquifer via a transmissive fault;  Escaping through a fracture or more permeable zone in the caprock into a drinking water aquifer;  Migrating up-dip and increasing reservoir pressure and permeability of an existing fault; or  Escaping into a drinking water aquifer via improperly installed, abandoned, or unknown wells.  The potential for leaks to occur would depend on caprock integrity, the reliability of well construction and well-capping methods, and the degree to which CO2 is permanently stored by long-term trapping mechanisms. CO2 is trapped in the injection zone through four mechanisms: (1) structural trapping, (2) residual CO2 trapping, (3) solubility trapping, and (4) mineralization. These mechanisms are described in Section 3.4, Geology. If CO2 were to escape the injection zone and reach a USDW, there is a potential that it could react with and acidify the groundwater. However, this occurrence would be very unlikely because the CO2 would have to escape from the injection zone to reach the St. Peter Formation or shallower drinking water aquifers and, as discussed earlier, the site was specifically selected to reduce the potential of this happening. In addition, vertical migration of CO2 to USDW aquifers would be unlikely as a consequence of the following:  Depth of the injection zone in the Mt. Simon Formation;  Substantial primary seal provided by the Eau Claire shale (413 feet thick);  Presence of a secondary seal formation (Franconia Dolomite) between the Mt. Simon Formation and the St. Peter Formation;  Presence of more than 3,700 feet of various strata (much of it with low permeability) between the injection zone and any actively used drinking water aquifers in the project area;  Lack of regional wells that penetrate the Eau Claire; and  Aquifer monitoring of the injection zone, St. Peter Formation and shallow sand and gravel aquifers as outlined in the MVA plan. CO2 would be injected into the Mt. Simon Formation, so that the CO2 would need to migrate up before it would reach the base of the primary confining zone, the Proviso and Lombard Members of the Eau Claire Formation. Refer to Section 3.4, Geology, for a detailed description of the primary confining zone. In addition, the lenses of silt and clay that are present throughout the Mt. Simon Formation would likely help to laterally disperse the CO2 and reduce opportunities for vertical migration. Section 3.4, Geology, presents a full discussion on how the site selection has minimized the potential for CO2 leaks and migration. A 2-D seismic study performed by the Alliance in 2011 confirmed that the Mt. Simon Formation is uniformly thick, dips gently (less than 1 degree) to the southeast, and there are no faults or breaks in the lateral continuity of the formation (Alliance 2012b). In the UIC survey area, the only well that currently penetrates the St. Peter, Eau Claire, or Mt. Simon Formations is the stratigraphic well completed by the Alliance, which was specifically drilled with CO2 injection well techniques. Any other deep wells that would be drilled for the proposed project (e.g., injection, or other monitoring wells) would be constructed to the same CO2-resistant standards. The next deepest water well is 1,056 feet bgs, which is almost 700 feet shallower than the top of the St. Peter Formation. Because of the lack of deep wells in the area, it is very unlikely that the CO2 could migrate to shallower USDWs through improperly sealed water wells.  The longer that CO2 is in contact with the brine in the Mt. Simon Formation, the more time is available for the CO2 to react and dissolve, producing carbonic acid that would slightly lower the pH of the injection zone brine. While the carbonic acid would react with any clay-rich or calcium-rich minerals in the Mt. Simon and Eau Claire Formations, the quartz in the formations would not react to the change in pH (IPCC 2005). Heavy metals could be liberated as minerals react with the CO2-brine solution and dissolve; however, there are no known anomalous concentrations of metals that could pose a risk to the shallower drinking water aquifers. The injection wells would be constructed with CO2-resistant cement and specifically designed so that the acidification of the brine would not reduce the well integrity. The increased pressure from CO2 injection would also force the brine in the target formation laterally from the injection zone. The research on brine migration in reaction to the injection pressure front is still ongoing, as models are refined with new data. As discussed in Section 3.4, Geology, there is a potential, if the injection pressure is high enough, for small amounts of brine to diffuse into or through the caprock, while simultaneously trapping the CO2 (Birkolzer et al. 2009; Zhou and Birkolzer 2011; Lemieux 2011). While the upward movement of brine would reduce the overall pressure to the Mt. Simon Formation and the Eau Claire Formation, it would increase the possibility that brine could reach a shallower drinking water aquifer. However, if the brine were to pass through the caprock and reach a shallower (less than 3,700 feet bgs), permeable formation, it would tend to spread laterally and slow its vertical migration. The temperature and density differential between the target formation brine and the shallower formation would cause the dense brine to only remain within the lower-most region. Models suggest that the gradual cooling at the shallower horizon would increase the density of the brine, and pull it back to the deeper reservoir (Oldenburg and Rinaldi 2011).  The Ironton-Galesville Sandstone is located between the primary and secondary confining formations, at about 3,300 feet bgs. If brine were forced upwards, it is likely that it would first reach the Ironton-Galesville Sandstone and spread laterally along the formation bed before continuing upwards. Another sandstone formation, the New Richmond Sandstone, is also located between the secondary confining zone and the St. Peter Formation. Therefore, it is very unlikely that brine displaced by CO2 and the injection pressure front would reach the St. Peter Formation. In formations like the Mt. Simon that have slowly flowing groundwater, reservoir-scale modeling for similar projects shows that, over tens of years, up to 30 percent of the CO2 would dissolve (IPCC 2005). Once CO2 dissolves in the saline groundwater, it could be transported away from the injection wells by circulation on a regional scale, or it could sink from the increased density, but the time scales of such transport are millions of years and are not considered relevant for this EIS (IPCC 2005). Therefore, it is extremely unlikely that the laterally moving brine would reach locations in northern Illinois and Wisconsin where the Mt. Simon USDW aquifers are closer to the land surface. The Alliance would employ a series of construction and operation techniques, materials, activities and other injection BMPs to prevent the migration of CO2 or brine from the injection zone. The USEPA also requires all UIC Class VI permit applications to submit a detailed description of all of the procedures that would be implemented to prevent impacts to USDWs, and to create an early warning system in the event of a problem. The MVA program would be implemented to track the lateral migration of CO2 within the injection zone, monitor containment within the injection zone, characterize any geochemical or geomechanical changes that occur within the injection zone and overlying confining zones, and provide for early detection of any leakage of injected CO2 or brine to ensure protection of USDWs (Alliance 2012b).  Although unlikely, if the monitoring results showed that CO2 was released from the injection zone, then injection would be halted, the source of the leak would be identified, and a series of remediation procedures would be implemented, depending on the adverse event. These procedures could include repairing the well casing, lowering the reservoir pressure by removing brine or CO2, increasing upstream reservoir pressure (e.g., creating a hydraulic barrier), diverting the CO2 stream, or modifying the injection flow rate or quantity. In a situation where CO2 or brine reaches a USDW, the Alliance would implement groundwater remediation in the impacted aquifer. As required by the UIC Class VI Geological Sequestration Rule, a monitoring well would be drilled into the lowermost USDW aquifer (St. Peter Formation) above the injection zone to monitor changes to the aquifer during CO2 injection and storage. As the St. Peter Formation contains the deepest USDW in relation to the injection zone, the monitoring wells would provide first evidence of a leak in the caprock formations. Collectively, these measures would minimize the potential for long-term impacts on potable groundwater from CO2 storage activities to a negligible level.  Operation of the CO2 pipeline within the CO2 storage study area would be the same as described for the main CO2 pipeline leading to this area. The impacts would be identical to those described above for the CO2 pipeline. Educational Facilities There would be no impacts to groundwater from the operation of the educational facilities. The activities at the facilities would be located in buildings with little opportunity for an outside spill. The educational facilities would not consume groundwater or directly discharge to groundwater; therefore, no impacts to groundwater resources are expected from the operation of the educational facilities. 3.5.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no impacts to groundwater resources. 3.6 SURFACE WATER 3.6.1 Introduction This section describes the surface waters potentially affected by the construction and operation of the proposed project. This section also analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of this project on these resources. Surface waters are closely related to wetlands and floodplains, which are further addressed in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains. 3.6.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI defines the extent of the areas where direct effects from construction and operation may be experienced, and it encompasses the areas where indirect effects from the proposed project would most likely occur. The ROI for surface water resources includes the surface waters that exist within the areas potentially affected by the construction and operation of the proposed project, consisting of the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 injection wells, and the proposed educational facilities. It also includes the surface waters that would receive stormwater and wastewater discharges from the construction and operation of the proposed project. 3.6.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE reviewed the proposed project to determine which construction and operational activities would have the potential to directly or indirectly affect surface waters. DOE also reviewed published studies and GIS-based data of surface water features within the ROI. DOE assessed the potential for impacts to surface waters based on whether the project would:  Alter stormwater discharges, which could adversely affect drainage patterns, flooding, erosion, and sedimentation;  Alter or damage existing farmland drainage infrastructure;   Alter infiltration rates, which could affect (substantially increase or decrease) the volume of surface water that flows downstream;  Conflict with applicable stormwater management plans or ordinances;  Violate any federal, state, or regional water quality standards or discharge limitations;  Modify surface waters such that water quality no longer meets water quality criteria or standards established in accordance with the CWA, state regulations, or permits; or  Change the availability of surface water resources for current or future uses. 3.6.1.3 Regulatory Framework The USEPA regulates water quality under the Safe Drinking Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) is defined Water Act (SDWA) and the CWA. Section 303(d) of the as the maximum amount of a pollutant that a CWA requires states to identify and develop a list of impaired waterbody can receive and still safely meet water quality standards. TMDLs are based on analyses waterbodies. Impaired waterbodies are considered too polluted that include pollution source identification and or otherwise degraded to meet the water quality standards or development of strategies for contaminant source designated uses set by the state. Section 305(b) of the CWA reduction or elimination. requires states to assess and report the quality of their waterbodies. The IEPA monitors the waters of the state as required by the CWA and reports the results in the Impaired Waters of Illinois Integrated Report, published biennially in even-numbered years. This report lists impaired waterbodies under Section 303(d) indicating their total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) and their water assessment and designated use determinations under Section 305(b). Stormwater and wastewater discharges are regulated by the IEPA under Sections 401 and 402 of the CWA (permitting requirements) through the NPDES permit program. The state’s NPDES program is modeled on the federal NPDES program, which requires stormwater to be treated to the maximum extent practicable. NPDES permits also include effluent limits and requirements for facility operation and maintenance, discharge monitoring, and routine reporting. Many of the surface water resources addressed in this section qualify as waters of the U.S., which are regulated by the USACE under the CWA, because they are important for the preservation of navigable waterways and interstate commerce. Waters of the U.S. are subject to federal jurisdiction and permitting under Section 404 of the CWA and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899. Waters of the U.S. include all navigable waterways and their tributaries, as well as wetlands contiguous (connected) to and adjacent to those navigable waterways and tributaries. Under Section 404 of the CWA, a USACE permit would be required for the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S., which is often authorized by a Nationwide Permit or could be authorized by an Individual Permit. Construction of utility lines (e.g., pipelines) that would affect waters of the U.S. can be permitted with a Nationwide Permit (Number 12 – “Utility Line Activities”) if less than 0.5 acre of waters of the U.S. are disturbed, or an Individual Permit, if more than 0.5 acre is disturbed. Throughout the project area, federal regulations are enforced by either the USACE St. Louis or Rock Island District. Construction within or alteration of (e.g., dredging activities, placement of fill material) a traditional navigable waterway (e.g., the Illinois River) below the defined ordinary high water mark requires USACE permitting under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act. The ordinary high water mark is the highest level that a body of water maintains for a sufficient period of time to leave visual evidence (i.e., changes in character of soil, destruction of vegetation) on the shoreline. 3.6.2 Affected Environment This section describes the surface water resources potentially affected by the construction and operation of an oxy-combustion facility at the existing Meredosia Energy Center, as well as those present within the potential CO2 pipeline corridor and CO2 storage study area, and the location for the proposed educational facilities. As discussed in this section, surface waters in these areas can be broadly classified as follows:  Perennial Streams and Rivers: Waterbodies in which some water flows throughout the year.  Intermittent Streams and Rivers: Waterbodies in which water flows for only part of the year and may come from groundwater or runoff (e.g., from rainfall). When not flowing, surface water may remain in isolated pools or may be absent.  Ephemeral Streams and Rivers: Waterbodies in which water flows only during, and for a short duration after, precipitation events in a typical year. Runoff from rainfall is the primary source of water for streamflow; groundwater is not a source of streamflow.  Ditches and Canals: Manmade waterbodies generally used for drainage or to convey stormwater (i.e., ditches and swales) or to provide water for irrigation or industrial use (i.e., canals).  Lakes and Ponds: Naturally occurring or manmade waterbodies typically located in topographic low spots, that receive water from runoff (e.g., from rainfall) or other overland flow (e.g., creeks, streams, rivers) or from groundwater sources (i.e., springs and seeps) and generally do not flow. Wetland areas (i.e., areas that are generally inundated or saturated by water and that support vegetation typically adapted to saturated soil conditions, such as swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas) may also occur within or around the perimeter of surface waterbodies. Additional details regarding wetlands are provided in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains. Surface water systems are typically defined in terms of watersheds (also called basins). A watershed is a land area bounded by topography that drains water to a common destination. Watersheds vary in size; every waterway (stream, tributary, and river) has an associated watershed and smaller watersheds combine to form larger watersheds. Any activity that affects water quality, quantity, or rate of movement at one location within a watershed has the potential to affect the characteristics of locations downstream. The proposed project would be located within the Illinois River Basin (see Figure 3.6-1), which encompasses approximately 30,000 square miles, covering 44 percent of the land area of the state of Illinois (USACE 2007). Nearly 11,000 miles of perennial streams occur in the Illinois River Basin, with an estimated 20,000 to 25,000 additional miles of ephemeral streams (USACE 2007). The Illinois River Basin is divided into the Upper and Lower Illinois River watersheds. The proposed project would be located in the Lower Illinois River Watershed (HUC 07130011), which encompasses 17,960 square miles of central and western Illinois (USEPA 2011k; USDOI/USGS 1994). This watershed extends from the downstream end of the Upper Illinois River Watershed at Ottawa, Illinois, to the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers at Grafton, Illinois. Major rivers in the watershed include the Illinois, Vermilion, Mackinaw, Spoon, Sangamon, and La Moine rivers.  The mean annual precipitation for the Lower Illinois River watershed is 35 to 39 inches and the mean annual precipitation at the Meredosia Energy Center is 38 to 39 inches (USGS 2011a). Precipitation and discharge from the Upper Illinois River watershed account for most of the inflow to the Lower Illinois River watershed. Discharge to the Illinois River across the watershed basin consists of return flow, surface runoff, and groundwater discharge. Return flow is water that has been released from a facility (e.g., discharges from industrial and municipal wastewater treatment facilities). The combined return flow, based on average annual discharge for all facilities, was 4,400 mgd in 1991(USGS 2011a). Major water quality issues in the Lower Illinois River watershed include sedimentation, toxic substances in sediment, high concentrations of nutrients and agricultural chemicals, and low dissolved oxygen concentrations. Sedimentation has resulted in the partial or complete filling of many lakes within the watershed. The Illinois River receives much of the state's human, animal, industrial, and agricultural wastes (USGS 2000c). As a result, contaminants detected in sediments from the Chicago metropolitan area in the Upper Illinois River have also been identified in sediments in the Lower Illinois River watershed. The Chicago area appears to be the source of these contaminants, which include the USEPA priority pollutants: arsenic, barium, chromium, lead, and mercury (Colman and Sanzolone 1991). The Illinois River flows for a distance of 273 miles, entering the Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois, approximately 40 miles north of St. Louis, Missouri. The Illinois River is the largest tributary to the Mississippi River above the mouth of the Missouri River (USACE 2007) and is a navigable link between Lake Michigan and the Mississippi River (USDOI/USGS 1994). Water depth and flow in the Illinois River is maintained by a series of locks and dams (see Figure 3.6-2) (USDOI/USGS 1994; USGS 2011a). The Alton, La Grange, Peoria, and Starved Rock pools are the reaches of stream (i.e., navigation pools) between the locks and dams from Grafton to Ottawa. The general change in stream elevation between locks and dams is 20 feet, and each pool is named for the dam immediately downstream. The Alton Lock and Dam are located on the Mississippi River and also regulate flow on the Illinois River. 3.6.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center Surface waters located on the Meredosia Energy Center property are limited to fly and bottom ash ponds (these ponds are not part of the FutureGen 2.0 Project). The nearest natural surface water feature is the Illinois River, which is located immediately adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center property, approximately 700 feet west of the proposed oxy-combustion facility. The USACE determined that the ordinary high water mark of the river in the area is 440 feet above sea level (see Appendix D, Wetlands Surveys [D1]). The Meredosia Energy Center is located between miles 70 and 71 on the Illinois River (USACE 1998), where the Illinois River ranges in width between approximately 1,000 and 1,200 feet. The La Grange Lock and Dam is the closest dam to the Meredosia Energy Center, located approximately 9 miles upstream (north). Source: USGS 2011a CO2 = carbonn dioxide Source: USGS 2011a The Merredosia Enerrgy Center iis located aalong the AAlton Pool pportion of tthe Illinois River (see Figurre 3.6-2). Thee Alton Pooll extends from the confluuence of the Mississippi and Illinois rivers (River Miile 0) to the base of the La Grange LLock and Daam (River MMile 80.2), forr a total lenggth of 80.2 miless. The Alton Pool is charaacterized by a dramatic looss in producctive backwatters, side channnels, and channnel border areeas due to exxcessive sedimmentation andd erosion, whhich limits thee ecological hhealth and alters the characterr of the river ((IEPA 2010b). The sectioon of the Illinnois River adjacent to the eenergy center is impaired ddue to mercurry, PCBs, andd fecal coliform contaminatioon (IEPA 2012a; IEPA 22010b). This segment, a subsection oof the Alton  Pool described above, is identified ass segment ILL_D-32 by the USEPA. Table 3.6-11 summarizees the informatioon from the 2010 and 20012 Impairedd Waters (froom Section 303(d) of the CWA) of Illlinois Integratedd Reports relaated to the imppairment of thhe Illinois Rivver in this areea. Tabble 3.6-1. Summmary of Impaired Waters Data for Illlinois River Year LListed Segment ID Miles//Priority Designated Use Cauuse of Impairmment Primary Conntact 20010 IL_D-32 33.8/MMedium Fecal Coliformm Recreatioon Fish Consummption CBs Primary Conntact 20012 IL_D-32 34.01/Medium Fecal Coliformm Recreatioon Sources: IEPA 2010b; IEPA 22012a  PCBs = polychlorinated bipheenyls DOE reviewed streamflow data for the Illinois River upstream and downstream of the energy center to characterize flow rates. Table 3.6-2 summarizes this data, which shows that streamflow in the Illinois River is highly regulated by locks and dams. In addition, the minimum and maximum flow rates vary significantly, which demonstrates that the Illinois River is highly influenced by precipitation and surface runoff. Table 3.6-2. Average Flow Rates of the Illinois River in Morgan County Minimum Maximum Gauging Station Gauging Station Period of Annual Flow Flow Rate Flow Rate Number Location Record Rate  (year) (year) 14,923 mgd October 1938 Meredosia, Illinois 5,976 mgd 24,276 mgd 05585500 to September 14,139 mgd (MP 70.8) (1940) (1973) 1989 mgd = million gallons per day; MP = milepost The 7-day, 10-year (7Q10) low-flow frequency value is a widely used measure of surface water availability. It represents the lowest streamflow for 7 consecutive days that would be expected to occur once in 10 years. The 7Q10 low-flow frequency value is determined by statistically analyzing streamflow data from USGS stream gauging stations. The 7Q10 low-flow value for the stream gauging station closest to the energy center (Meredosia gauge) was 2,391 mgd, while the 7Q10 low-flow value at a stream gauging station upstream of the energy center (Kingston Mines gauge) was 1,971 mgd (Singh et al. 1988). At the end of 2011, operational activities at the Meredosia Energy Center were suspended. Until that time, the energy center pumped water from the Illinois River at an average rate of 217 mgd to support energy center operations. Water was drawn from a river water intake structure (with five separate intake bays) located at mile 70.8 in the Illinois River (USACE 1998). The design capacity for the intake structure is 414 mgd, which represents 17 percent of the 7Q10 low-flow rate for the river. Prior to the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, the facility generated approximately 189 mgd of wastewater from industrial processes. The treated wastewater and stormwater from the site was discharged to the Illinois River at eight locations (outfalls) under NPDES Permit No. IL0000116. The NPDES Permit was renewed on September 30, 2011, and is valid for the next 5 years (IEPA 2011d). The permit covers eight discharges (outfalls) to the river and includes the following:  Outfall 001 – Condenser cooling water (Units 1, 2, and 3)  Outfall A01 – Boiler blowdown  Outfall 002 – Cooling tower blowdown  Outfall A02 – Cooling tower emergency overflow  Outfall 003 – Bottom ash pond discharge  Outfall A03 – Chemical metal cleaning wastewater  Outfall 004 – Fly ash pond discharge  Outfall 006 – Intake screen backwash From 2006 to 2010, there were two exceedances of NPDES permit discharge limitations, both for total suspended solids only. One exceedance occurred in 2008 at discharge point (Outfall) 003 and the other in 2009 at discharge point (Outfall) 004 (IEPA 2011d). There have been no exceedances of permit discharge limits since the permit was renewed in September 2011. The location of each outfall at the Meredosia Energy Center is depicted on Figure 2-4 in Chapter 2. 3.6.2.2 CO2 Pipeline  The proposed CO2 pipeline corridor from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area is approximately 26 miles in length and 4 miles in width (see Figure 3.6-1) (note that the total length of the CO2 pipeline would be approximately 30 miles and the operational pipeline ROW would be 50 feet wide). Table 3.6-3 summarizes the existing surface water features within the CO2 pipeline corridor. These surface water features are located within the Lower Illinois River watershed and ultimately drain to the Illinois River. The Alliance has identified two possible pipeline routes from the energy center to the western border of the CO2 storage study area in which the injection wells would be located. These are referred to as the southern route and northern route. As discussed in Section 2.5.1.1, the Alliance’s preferred option is the southern route. Table 3.6-3. Surface Waters within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor Surface Water Distance/Area Waterbodies  (acres)  Ponds and Lakes  498.3  Impaired Waterbodies  0.0  Sources: USEPA 2012f; USGS/USEPA 2011 CO2 = carbon dioxide The CO2 pipeline corridor includes a total of approximately 737 miles of perennial and intermittent waterways and 498 acres of ponds and lakes (Table 3.6-3). Major streams within the corridor include Willow Creek, Coon Run, Spring Run, Indian Creek, Lick Branch, Snake Creek, and Conover Branch. A levee (dike) has been constructed along a portion of Coon Run, which extends from the Illinois River to U.S. Highway (US-) 67 (State Route 100), approximately 3 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center. Two of the perennial streams within the pipeline corridor are impaired; the Mauvaise Terre Creek (also called Mauvaise Terre River) and Indian Creek. The Mauvaise Terre Creek runs along the southern boundary of the pipeline corridor just east of Jacksonville with tributaries extending further north into the pipeline corridor. The Mauvaise Terre Creek supports aquatic life and is impaired due to turbidity and mercury (IEPA 2010b; IEPA 2012a). Approximately 1.7 miles of Mauvaise Terre Creek is located within the pipeline corridor. A 15.1-mile-long section of Indian Creek, which flows through much of the eastern half of the pipeline corridor, supports aquatic life and is impaired due to habitat alterations. Impairment due to habitat alteration indicates that adverse changes to the stream environment, including channelization, absence of streambank vegetation, bank failure, and heavy erosion, have significantly affected the waterbody and may limit its ability to support aquatic life. 3.6.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area  Indian Creek and its associated tributaries flow through the northern half of the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area from east to west. The entire section of Indian Creek within the CO2 storage study area (approximately 3 miles in length) is impaired from habitat alteration. The CO2 storage study area also includes approximately 48 miles of intermittent streams and 13 acres of ponds and lakes, none of which are listed as an impaired waterbody. Table 3.6-4 summarizes the existing surface water features within the proposed CO2 storage study area. Table 3.6-4. Surface Waters within the CO2 Storage Study Area Surface Water Distance/Area (miles) 3.3 48.2 3.0 (acres) 12.8 0.0 Sources: USEPA 2012f; USGS/USEPA 2011 CO2 = carbon dioxide 3.6.2.4 Educational Facilities Visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the educational facilities) would be provided at a suitable location in the Jacksonville area. Jacksonville is approximately 10 square miles in size, of which approximately 0.2 square miles are covered with surface water (U.S. Cities 2012). Major surface waters in Jacksonville include Mauvaise Terre Creek, Jacksonville Lake, and Mauvaise Terre Lake. 3.6.3 Impacts of Proposed Action This section summarizes potential impacts to surface waters that could result from the construction and operation of the proposed oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, CO2 injection wells and associated infrastructure (e.g., access roads). This section also discusses impacts to surface waters that would result from the construction and operation of the proposed educational facilities. DOE assessed the potential for impacts to surface water resources based on whether the proposed project would result in any of the effects identified in Section 3.6.1.2. Impacts are limited to those associated with water quality as well as the availability and use of surface water resources. Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, addresses impacts to wetlands in terms of impacts related to the placement of fill material, type conversions, and surface disturbances, which can ultimately affect the functions and values of these resources (e.g., flood flow attenuation). 3.6.3.1 Construction Impacts Many of the general construction activities for the proposed project would be similar in nature; therefore, the potential impacts to surface water resources from these construction activities would also be similar, regardless of where or when the construction takes place. This section summarizes potential impacts resulting from general construction activities, while the remaining subsections address impacts related to construction specific to the energy center, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and proposed educational facilities.  Initial construction activities for the proposed project would consist of clearing vegetation and leveling areas, which would expose soil and make it susceptible to erosion. Stormwater runoff from construction sites has the potential to carry the exposed soils offsite, resulting in increased sedimentation and turbidity to receiving waters downstream. Additionally, stormwater runoff from construction sites has the potential to be contaminated by hazardous materials, such as fuel, that are used onsite. These types of impacts would increase during heavy rains or during snowmelt due to the increase in stormwater runoff.  Stormwater runoff from construction sites is regulated by the IEPA and the IDNR under Sections 401 and 402 of the CWA (permitting requirements) and implemented through NPDES permits. For the components of the proposed project that would require more than 1 acre of disturbance and that are not currently regulated by an NPDES permit, an NPDES General Permit from the IEPA would be required prior to construction activities. The NPDES General Permit for construction would require the preparation of a SWPPP that includes BMPs for erosion control and pollution prevention. The NPDES permit would also require that the construction standards outlined in the IEPA Urban Manual be followed, including material specifications, planning principles, and procedures (AISWCD 2012). The SWPPP would describe all of the BMPs to be followed during construction. Typical BMPs that could be used to minimize impacts on surface waters during construction are listed below:  Use silt fencing and other erosion control devices to prevent soils and debris from entering nearby streams during construction.  Except on cropland, use temporary seeding and mulching or matting to produce a quick ground cover to reduce erosion on exposed soils that may be re-disturbed or permanently stabilized at a later date. This would minimize bare soil available for sediment transport during storm events.  Use gravel or stones to stabilize temporary access roads, haul roads, parking areas, laydown areas, material storage areas, and other onsite vehicle transportation routes immediately after grading. This practice would reduce erosion and the need for subsequent re-grading of temporary and permanent roadbeds, work areas, and parking areas rutted by construction traffic during wet weather.  Maximize use of existing roads when planning site access.  Keep construction materials, debris, construction chemicals, construction staging, fueling, etc. at a safe distance from surface waters to prevent unintentional contamination and keep spill kits on hand in case of spills to reduce response time.  Where practical, consider weather and ground conditions when scheduling construction activities to minimize potential impacts to surface waters, such as erosion and the spread of contaminants that may be exacerbated by sheet flow during storm events.  Locate construction staging, parking, and equipment storage activities in areas already disturbed by past construction activities to minimize the need for additional land disturbance.  Use water conservation measures to the extent practicable (e.g., efficient landscaping and recycling wastewater).  After construction, re-seed all temporarily disturbed areas with indigenous species to re-establish vegetative cover, except on cropland. In addition, the Alliance intends to drill under all waterbodies, except perhaps for ephemeral streams that would be trenched only when dry. With implementation of BMPs as a condition of the NPDES General Permit and drilling under all waterbodies, it is anticipated that impacts to surface waters during construction would be temporary and minor. Proper project design would ensure that drainage and runoff would occur without excessive erosion and increased turbidity. Meredosia Energy Center As described in Chapter 2, construction would take place in several areas of the Meredosia Energy Center and nearby offsite areas, as shown on Figure 2-14. As no surface waters exist within the footprint for the oxy-combustion facility and the construction laydown areas, no direct impacts to surface waters would occur. Temporary indirect impacts resulting from potential stormwater runoff to the Illinois River from areas of construction would be consistent with those described for general construction, above. Development of impervious surfaces in areas that were previously pervious (e.g., grassy areas) would cause an increase in stormwater runoff; however, this effect would be negligible, as a majority of stormwater would be routed to a new stormwater management basin that would be designed, constructed, and managed by an Ameren company (see Section 2.4.2.2). No water would be withdrawn from surface waters on or adjacent to the site to support construction activities. Water required during construction (for mixing concrete, dust suppression, washing tools and machinery, etc.) would be supplied by onsite groundwater wells and city water; therefore, the availability of surface water resources would not be impacted by construction. The temporary barge unloading facility (see Section 2.4.3.2) would be located on the eastern bank of the Illinois River. Two options have been evaluated for barge unloading operations: (1) using mooring dolphins or (2) grounding the barges on the river bottom. The use of mooring dolphins would require the installation of support piles into the riverbed and subsequent removal at the end of the barge delivery phases. Each of the 3 to 5 pilings that would be required for this option would be up to 48 inches in diameter. Pile driving is likely to stir up sediments that would be carried downstream, as would also occur during removal of the pilings. The suspension of sediment would increase turbidity locally, but the river current would provide some dilution. Dissolved oxygen demand could increase locally with the suspension of anaerobic sediments. Given the small amount of sediment resuspension expected to occur during pile driving (and later removal), it is anticipated that temporary direct impacts to the Illinois River would include minor increases in turbidity during construction. It is also possible that sediments contaminated with mercury and PCBs could be resuspended, which could temporarily increase the concentrations of these contaminants in the water column during construction. Overall, the construction of the pilings for the barge unloading facility and subsequent removal would result in minor temporary impacts to water quality in the Illinois River during the construction and removal events. The second option for the barge unloading facility, grounding the barges, would require that large objects (e.g., boulders) be removed from the river bottom to ensure that they do not puncture the barge during unloading. If necessary, rip-rap or other suitable material would be placed on the river bottom to provide a foundation for the barge and prevent damage to the barge. This option could result in the disturbance of up to 18,360 square feet of the river bottom and bank. Disturbance would occur during the installation of rip-rap on the river bottom (and subsequent removal at the end of construction) or during each grounding and unloading event (in the event that rip-rap is not used). These disturbances and the potential installation of rip-rap on the river bottom would result in increased turbidity and temporary streambed disturbance. These impacts would be similar in nature to those described for the installation of pilings but would occur over a larger area of the streambed. Implementation of either of these options would require a permit from USACE under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act for construction of the temporary facility and for the potential temporary placement of fill material. It is possible that a Section 404 Permit (Nationwide Permit 33) may also be required depending upon the option selected and the specific nature of the activities; however, the specific permit(s) needed will be confirmed after the design has been finalized and prior to construction. It is also possible that these permits could be applied for as part of an Individual Permit application that could cover other regulated activities related to the proposed project. After construction, any rip-rap or other temporary fill material would be removed from the river. This would create additional turbidity and increased streambed disturbance, resulting in additional minor temporary impacts. The Alliance is also evaluating options for unloading equipment from barges that would avoid potential impacts by using a combination of on-shore equipment, tugs, and temporary ramps so that there would be no disturbance to the bank or bottom of the Illinois River. However, these plans are still under development and being reviewed for their feasibility. CO2 Pipeline As described in Chapter 2 and in further detail below, DOE would use one of three primary methods to construct the pipeline in areas of surface water features. The method used to construct pipeline crossings would be dependent upon the size of the stream or waterbody to be crossed, as well as the presence or absence of water within the feature (e.g., seasonally dry ephemeral and intermittent stream channels). The three methods to be used by DOE include horizontal directional drilling, jack and bore tunneling, and dry trenching. Horizontal directional drilling would be used to cross major waterbodies (i.e., crossings of perennial streams, and ponds and lakes, greater than 100 feet in width). As necessary, geotechnical investigations would be performed prior to the use of horizontal directional drilling to ensure that subsurface conditions can safely support drilling operations. Horizontal directional drilling would not disturb the bed or bank of the waterbody that would be crossed, thereby eliminating impacts such as increased turbidity and sedimentation. However, it could still present a remote potential for surface disturbance through inadvertent drilling fluid releases, as well as minor increases in sedimentation and turbidity from ground vibrations caused by drilling adjacent to the stream. An unexpected release of drilling mud (consisting primarily of water and bentonite, a naturally occurring clay) to the environment could occur if a natural fracture or unconsolidated area in the ground is encountered. Therefore, primary factors in selecting the pipeline crossing profile include the type of soil and rock in the geological material and the depth of cover material. Impacts resulting from horizontal directional drilling are expected to be minor, since geotechnical investigations and adequate planning would be conducted to reduce the likelihood of any releases of drilling fluid. Jack and bore tunneling (also known as pipe ramming) would be used for crossings of smaller perennial streams and wetlands, as well as intermittent and ephemeral streams that contained water at the time of construction. The jack and bore tunneling method involves the use of a horizontal bore machine or auger to drill a hole, and a hydraulic jack to push a casing through the hole under the crossing. As the bore proceeds, a steel casing pipe would be jacked into the hole; then the pipeline is installed in the casing. The casing would be jacked using a large hydraulic jack in a pit located at one end of the crossing. The jack pit would be excavated and shored. Similar to horizontal direction drilling, jack and bore tunneling would involve no disturbance to the bed or bank of the stream being crossed, eliminating impacts related to stream diversion. Impacts from jack and bore tunneling would be minor and limited to increased turbidity and sedimentation resulting from stormwater runoff from the jack and bore pits on either side of the stream. Dry trenching would be employed for narrow intermittent and ephemeral stream channels that were devoid of water at the time of construction, such as when a stream feature is seasonally dry or is frozen to the bottom. A field assessment would be made prior to construction at each crossing to determine the presence of water, and weather forecasts would be monitored to evaluate the potential for precipitation events that could lead to temporary water flow within the stream channel. Dry trenching would consist of excavating a trench through the stream channel, laying the pipe down, and then burying the pipe with the spoils removed during trench excavation. The pipeline crossing would be as nearly perpendicular to the stream channel as possible to minimize overall linear disturbance to the stream channel. After pipeline installation, the surface would be regraded to match pre-construction contours, which would allow the stream channel to continue to function without permanent impacts to surface water flow. BMPs required through Section 404 permitting (i.e., Nationwide Permit No. 12, Utility Line Activities) would be implemented both during and after construction. The BMPs would reduce temporary minor impacts by ensuring that stream crossings are restored to their original grade to stabilize streambanks post construction. Dry trenching would cause temporary direct and indirect disturbances to stream channels and streambanks during trench excavation and pipe installation. For the purposes of this analysis, DOE conservatively assumed that all surface waters within the 50-foot operational ROW would be drilled underneath for placement of the pipeline. Furthermore, any streams located outside of the operational ROW, but within the construction ROW (80 to 100 feet), would be avoided to the maximum extent practicable. In the event that avoidance of surface waters within the construction ROW is determined to be impracticable, temporary impacts to surface waters would be minimized and mitigated as necessary. Pipeline attributes (e.g., ROW width, pipe size, etc.) and methods of installation (e.g., horizontal directional drilling, jack and bore, or dry trenching) would be essentially the same for each potential pipeline route. Therefore, the type of construction impacts would be the same for each route; however, the magnitude of potential temporary impacts would be dependent upon the number of dry stream crossings that would be required. Table 3.6-5 summarizes the stream crossings that would be required for each pipeline route. Table 3.6-5. Surface Water Crossings for Pipeline Routes Surface Waters  Southern Route  Northern Route  Total Total Distance of Crossings Crossings (miles)  Total Total Distance of Crossings Crossings (miles)  Streams    Perennial Streams  2 0.04  8 0.2  Intermittent Streams  89 1.8  75 1.6  Impaired Streams Waterbodies  0 0  0 0  Perennial Lakes and Ponds  1 0.5  2 0.2  Intermittent Lakes and Ponds  1 0.05  0 0  Impaired Waterbodies Other  0 0  0 0  Wetlands (NWI)  0 0  1 0  Sources: USEPA 2012f; USGS/USEPA 2011 NWI = National Wetland Inventory  Note: Horizontal directional drilling or jack and bore technology would be used for all surface water crossings, except for dry intermittent or ephemeral streams. For either of the potential routes, the CO2 pipeline would cross beneath the Coon Creek Dike. For this crossing, the Alliance would be required to obtain permission from the USACE. In addition, the Alliance would likely be required to consult with the Coon Run Levee and Drainage District prior to construction. The dike and the creek would be crossed using horizontal directional drilling and no direct impacts to the waterway would be anticipated.  In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from the southern pipeline route, impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, as the same siting criteria would be followed. In the event that the final pipeline routing would result in additional impacts to surface water resources, impacts would be temporary and minor, since they would be limited to the construction period and the Alliance would follow the construction processes and permitting requirements addressed earlier in this section.  This section analyzed the impacts of the southern and northern pipeline routes, which end at the western border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area depends on the final locations of the CO2 injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed below under CO2 Storage Study Area. Hydrostatic Testing The construction of the CO2 pipeline would require hydrostatic testing to certify the integrity of the pipeline before it can be put into operation. Hydrostatic testing would be performed in accordance with DOT pipeline safety regulations. If water is used, the pipeline would be filled with water and pressurized to check for any pressure loss that may indicate a leak. Table 3.6-6 summarizes the estimated amounts of water that would be required to support hydrostatic testing for both the southern and northern pipeline routes. These estimates represent a worst-case scenario and are based on the assumption that 31,000 gallons of water would be required for each mile of pipeline, that the entire pipeline would be 12 inches in diameter, and that no reuse of water would occur. Actual pipeline sizing would be determined during final engineering. If a smaller diameter pipeline were used, then less water would be required to support testing. The southern pipeline route would require slightly more water, since it is 0.2 mile longer than the northern pipeline.  Water to support hydrostatic testing may be supplied from local streams or trucked in; however, sources for hydrostatic testing water have not yet been identified. In the event that water is withdrawn from local streams, a water use (appropriation) permit from the IDNR would likely be required, since any withdrawal of more than 10,000 gpd or 1 million gallons per year is required to be permitted. No chemicals would be added to the water used to test the pipeline. In the event that hydrostatic testing water is withdrawn from streams, it would cause temporary minor impacts to the streams from which it is withdrawn, due to the diversion of flow that would occur to support the water withdrawal. Water withdrawals from surface waterbodies would only occur at features with sufficient flow to sustain such withdrawals without permanent impacts. Any such withdrawals would be conducted in compliance with water use permit requirements. Hydrostatic testing water that could not be reused would likely be discharged to local waterways under an NPDES permit from the IEPA or to an existing treatment facility. Sampling of the water would occur prior to discharge if required by the NPDES permit or receiving facility. The results of sample analysis would determine the fate of the discharge water. Since the hydrostatic testing would occur in virgin pipe prior to implementation, it is not anticipated that unacceptable concentrations of contaminants would be present in the effluent. Since any disposal of hydrostatic testing water would occur in compliance with NPDES permit conditions, only minor temporary impacts to local surface water resources would occur from the disposal of hydrostatic test water. CO2 Storage Study Area The locations proposed for the CO2 injection wells and related facilities would occupy up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Approximately 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining acreage would be used for access roads to the well sites. See Section 2.5.2.2 for additional details about the proposed surface facilities. Approximately 28 acres would be required to support the construction of the injection and monitoring wells and associated facilities, and up to 64 acres would be required to support the construction of access roads. The CO2 injection well site(s) would not intersect any lakes, ponds, or surface waters based on the siting criteria. Direct and indirect impacts to surface water resources located in close proximity to the injection well site(s) would be consistent with those described above for general construction impacts. Construction could cause temporary, indirect impacts to adjacent surface waters, such as increased sedimentation and surface water turbidity from runoff. These impacts would be minimized or avoided using BMPs to be outlined in the NPDES and UIC permits (see Section 2.5.2.3). Construction of the injection wells and monitoring wells would require fresh water to support drilling operations. The Alliance estimates that each injection well would require approximately 2.4 million gallons. The monitoring wells would likely require an amount less than this, since they would be smaller in diameter and shallower than the injection wells. The fresh water for well construction would be obtained from the North Morgan County Water Co-Op, as it was for the stratigraphic test well. The North Morgan County Water Co-Op obtains its water from the city of Jacksonville, which obtains raw water from groundwater and surface water sources. As a result, negligible impacts to surface water availability would occur due to the construction of the injection and monitoring wells. Construction of the wells would result in the generation of wastewater, including brine, requiring disposal. For the injection wells and any deep monitoring wells, the groundwater withdrawn during well development would be very saline and would require measures to prevent this water from reaching surface waterbodies. These measures could include pre-treatment before discharge to surface water or direct removal of the withdrawn water by a tanker truck offsite. Lined earthen pits would contain any excess fluids generated during drilling, discarded water used in the cementing process, and spent drilling mud from mud change-outs. The pits would be lined with 30-mil high-density polyethylene plastic sheeting with welded seams to prevent infiltration of fluids into the subsurface. By appropriately storing and managing wastewater, potential runoff to nearby streams would be avoided. Potential impacts to surface waters from the construction of the wells would be short term and negligible based on the fluid-handling procedures employed during the well construction process. Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the locations of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. In each of the siting scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have less impacts to physical resources and others would have greater impacts, while still representing reasonable routes. The Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1, such that they would avoid surface waters. The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the southern route would likely encounter between 0.08 and 0.34 miles of intermittent streams. The hypothetical siting scenarios for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the northern route would likely encounter between 0.13 and 0.20 miles of intermittent streams. Impacts related to the crossing of intermittent and ephemeral streams for which dry trenching is utilized would be consistent with those presented for the CO2 pipeline, above. Since the exact number of dry stream channels to be crossed at the time of construction (if any) is unknown, the magnitude of temporary impacts associated with construction cannot be quantified at this time for any of the above hypothetical scenarios. There would be no impacts associated with stream channels within the above siting scenarios that are avoided using horizontal directional drilling or jack and bore tunneling. Construction of access roads to the injection well site(s) from existing roadways could result in the need for additional stream crossings; however, the Alliance would use existing roads to the maximum extent practicable to avoid the need to construct access roads over streams. DOE does not anticipate that any perennial streams would be crossed to support the construction of access roads, since existing public roads are present throughout the CO2 storage study area. Stream crossings would be limited to ephemeral and intermittent streams, which would be culverted. The construction of access roads over these features could result in minor to moderate temporary adverse impacts to these streams. BMPs required through Section 404 permitting (i.e., Nationwide Permit No. 12, Utility Line Activities) would be implemented both during and after construction. The BMPs, including a combination of stabilization and structural erosion and sediment control methods, would be implemented to reduce temporary impacts by controlling sedimentation and turbidity and to stabilize streambanks after construction. Key aspects of the BMPs are to control both surface and subsurface slope drainage, minimize slope erosion, and minimize or prevent channel erosion at stream crossings. Specific types of structural BMPs include installing temporary control structures such as sediment traps and filter fences. Educational Facilities The educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The facilities may be co-located or there may be one location for the visitor and research center and another location for the training facility. Specific locations for these facilities have not yet been determined; however, they would likely occupy areas that have been previously disturbed and have existing utility connections onsite or immediately adjacent. Construction of the visitor and research center would require up to 2 acres of land disturbance, while the training facility would disturb up to 1.5 acres. Because the selected site(s) would be located on previously disturbed land with existing utility connections, surface waters are not expected to be present onsite, and it is unlikely that direct impacts on surface waters would occur. Potential impacts related to the construction of the educational facilities would be consistent with those addressed above for general construction activities. These impacts would be short term and minor with BMPs applied as described above for general construction activities. 3.6.3.2 Operational Impacts Impacts common to the operation of the proposed project would include water quality impacts to local streams from stormwater runoff generated at these facilities, which generally consists of increased sediment and contaminants entering these waterbodies from surface sources and increased flow due to an increase in impervious cover. Adequately designed stormwater collection and distribution systems and pollution prevention measures would reduce or eliminate the potential for these operational impacts to surface water resources. Adherence to applicable laws, regulations, policies, standards, and BMPs would also help avoid and minimize potential adverse operational impacts to surface waters; therefore, impacts to water quality from typical operations would be minor. As with any industrial activity, there is potential for surface water contamination from spills of fuels, lubricants, and coolants used by vehicles or heavy equipment for maintenance and operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline, or the CO2 injection wells. The Alliance would implement a SWPPP (if required) and SPCC plan procedures and BMPs during maintenance activities to avoid or minimize potential impacts to surface waters from accidental spills of fuel, fuel constituents, and other materials. Taking into account the spill prevention and response procedures and BMPs that would minimize the potential for spills to affect surface water resources, DOE anticipates that potential impacts to surface water quality would be minor. The remainder of this section addresses potential impacts from operations specific to each element of the proposed project. Meredosia Energy Center Stormwater from the energy center would be directed to a new lined settling basin or an unlined stormwater management basin, depending upon where the stormwater originates. Neither basin has been designed, so the required sizes, depths, and retention times have not yet been determined. The Alliance has designated preliminary areas where the basins are expected to be sited (see Figure 2-13). All new impervious surfaces would be sloped to provide positive drainage to inlets and surface conveyances. Runoff would be conveyed using surface drainage; however, it is likely that some newly constructed inlets and underground storm sewers would be required. The revised SPCC plan would reduce potential impacts from site oil spills, as required by federal regulations. Based on the plans and procedures that would be implemented to prevent contamination of stormwater and surface waters, impacts to surface waters are expected to be minor. Any stormwater runoff exposed to coal storage (including coal pile runoff, coal handling dust suppression water, coal handling equipment wash-down water, and stormwater from the coal yard) would be diverted to the new lined settling basin through berms and above-ground conveyance systems. The basin is expected to be sited in the area shown on Figure 2-13 and would be lined to detain water and provide settling for removal of suspended solids. After an appropriate detention time, the wastewater would flow to the wastewater treatment system and would then be discharged to the Illinois River. Chemical reagents, including flocculants and polymers, may be used in the lined settling basin to increase settling before discharge to the wastewater treatment system. Stormwater from other areas where the water may be exposed to industrial materials or processes would be identified during the final design (e.g., the bottom ash bunker and fly ash silo unloading) and would either flow to the lined settling basin or flow directly to the wastewater treatment system through the use of curbing and either aboveground or underground conveyances. The treated effluent would be discharged to the Illinois River in compliance with an NPDES permit. Stormwater runoff not exposed to industrial pollutants would be directed to a stormwater management basin that would be constructed and managed by an Ameren company with input from the Alliance. The Alliance would coordinate on the design of the basin to ensure it is sized to accommodate stormwater runoff from the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The exact location, configuration, and design of the basin would be determined in the final design phase for the project. The basin is expected to be constructed within the area shown on Figure 2-13. Water sources for the project’s makeup water would include deep wells on the property, city water, and the Illinois River. The Illinois River would be the primary source of makeup process water for the proposed project and would require additional treatment at the new process water treatment facility as discussed in Section 2.4.2.2. River water would be used to meet the following needs:  Screen and strainer backwash;  Makeup water for the cooling towers for Unit 4, the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber, and the air separation unit and compression and purification units;  Makeup water for gas quality control equipment;  Process water for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit;  Equipment cooling;  Equipment wash down; and  Coal handling dust suppression in the coal yard. As indicated earlier, the Meredosia Energy Center used an average of 217 mgd of cooling water supplied through the river water intake structure until operations were suspended at the energy center at the end of 2011. The maximum capacity of the river water intake structure is 414 mgd. The proposed project would require approximately 11.4 mgd of cooling water withdrawal from the river, which represents a nearly 95 percent reduction in river water usage from past operations at the energy center. However, water discharges from the Meredosia Energy Center to the Illinois River would equal approximately 9.0 mgd, which results in an actual net withdrawal from the river of only 2.4 mgd. As a result of the significant reduction in cooling water withdrawal compared to historical values, there would be no need for an upgrade to the existing river water intake structure. The projected net total demand for the project of 2.4 mgd of water from the river represents less than 0.02 percent of the average flow rate (14,139 mgd) and approximately 0.1 percent of the 7Q10 low-flow rate (2,391 mgd) for the Illinois River. Therefore, the proposed project would have a minor impact on the Illinois River even during typical drought (i.e., 7Q10 low-flow) conditions.  In 2011, a new rule was proposed under Section 316(b) of the CWA for existing facilities, which the USEPA plans to finalize by June 2013. As per the proposed rule, existing facilities that withdraw at least 25 percent of their water from an adjacent waterbody exclusively for cooling purposes and have a design intake flow of greater than 2 mgd would be subject to an upper limit on how many fish can be killed by being pinned against intake screens or other parts at the facility (i.e., impingement). In addition, existing facilities that withdraw very large amounts of water (125 mgd or more) would be required to conduct studies to help their permitting authority determine whether and what site-specific controls, if any, would be required to reduce the number of aquatic organisms sucked into cooling water systems (i.e., entrainment). The decision process may also include public input. The scheduled Section 316(b) rulemaking would likely have no bearing on the proposed project because the water withdrawn via the existing intake structure would be used predominantly to provide makeup water for the cooling water systems and the intake structure would be designed such that the intake velocity does not exceed 0.5 feet per second. At this rate, most fish can swim away from the cooling water intake of the facility (USEPA 2011l). See Section 3.8, Biological Resources, for an analysis of potential impacts of the cooling water intake on fish species. Cooling water intake structures are reviewed by the IEPA with each NPDES operating permit renewal application; therefore, any required upgrades would be identified during this process. Prior to the suspension of the energy center at the end of 2011, the Meredosia Energy Center generated approximately 189 mgd of wastewater from industrial processes (including non-contact cooling water) and discharged treated wastewater to the Illinois River under NPDES Permit No. IL0000116. In September 2011, the Alliance received approval for a modified NPDES Permit No. IL0000116, which went into effect on November 1, 2011, and is valid through October 31, 2016. The permit modification included changes in effluent water sources, contaminant loads, and flow rates (discussed in greater detail below) to support the planned discharges from the FutureGen 2.0 Project. If the final design for the proposed project results in any changes to contaminant loads or flow rates, the permit may need to be modified further. Under the proposed project, a considerably smaller amount of wastewater (9.0 mgd) would be discharged to the Illinois River, as summarized in Table 3.6-7. Most of the wastewater would come from the main cooling tower, while the remainder would consist of backwash from the river water intake screen, once-through cooling water from the air compressor, and effluent from two new onsite wastewater treatment systems. All of the wastewater (100 percent) from the compression and purification unit, and the blowdown from the cooling tower for the air separation unit and compression and purification unit, would be reused onsite as makeup water for the direct cooler polishing scrubber and its cooling tower. Approximately 22 percent of the blowdown from the direct cooler polishing scrubber cooling tower would be reused onsite for fly ash wetting. Reused wastewater would reduce water withdrawals and wastewater discharges associated with the project. The proposed project would use two wastewater treatment systems to remove contaminants from wastewater before discharge to the Illinois River. The compression and purification unit wastewater treatment system would use pH adjustment and mercury filtration media to treat wastewater before conveyance to the Unit 4 wastewater treatment system. The Unit 4 treatment system would be designed to meet all state of Illinois applicable water quality standards found in 35 IAC 302 (Water Quality Standards) and applicable state and federal effluent limits. Table 3.6-7. Estimated Wastewater Discharge to Illinois River Average Average Daily Source Flow Rate Discharge Process Wastewater Treated Effluent  (after treatment at the proposed wastewater 133 0.2 treatment systems) gpm = gallons per minute; mgd = million gallons per day The Unit 4 wastewater treatment system would discharge effluent to the Illinois River through Outfall 002 under the existing (modified) NPDES Permit (IL0000116). Impacts to the Illinois River resulting from the discharge of wastewater are expected to be minor, and no effluent limits would be exceeded. In addition, discharges would not contribute to the impairment of the Illinois River for fecal coliform, PCBs, or mercury. The total flows and loads associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be substantially lower than the historic Meredosia Energy Center flows and loads, taking discharges from all outfalls into account, which includes Outfalls 001, 001A, 002, 003, 004, and 006. The 21 constituent loadings listed on the NPDES discharge permit would be reduced by an average of nearly 89 percent. Five of the six outfalls associated with the project would see a reduction for all applicable constituents. The discharges from Outfall 002 would have increased loads of certain constituents when examined in isolation, which includes an increase in sulfites. The increased sulfites discharged at Outfall 002 would be a result of removing sulfur dioxide from the boiler flue gas by the air pollution control devices and transferring the sulfur to water as sulfites. Other constituents that could increase in discharge amount at Outfall 002 include total suspended solids, aluminum, iron, manganese, titanium, and chromium. However, as stated earlier, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would result in a net decrease in all constituents when all discharges are taken into account. In addition, since the recirculating cooling towers release heat to the surrounding air, the towers would minimize thermal discharges to the Illinois River, which would also have a positive impact on water quality when compared with historical operation of the energy center. Table 3.6-8 provides a summary of the daily maximum effluent concentration limits for each constituent by outfall, pursuant to the modified NPDES Permit No. IL0000116. The permit also includes 30-day average concentration limits and 20 additional special conditions that are applicable to onsite operations and monitoring requirements. Table 3.6-9 compares the water withdrawal rate and wastewater production rate for the FutureGen 2.0 Project with historic flow rates for the energy center prior to its suspension at the end of 2011. The historical scenario represents the water demand before the energy center suspended operations, while the projected scenario represents the estimated water demand for the proposed project. The river water withdrawal rate and wastewater production rate would decrease by approximately 95 percent when compared with the prior operation of the energy center. With this significant reduction in flow, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would reduce impacts to the Illinois River when compared with historical operation of the energy center. However, the river withdrawal and discharge rates would increase by a net withdrawal rate of 2.4 mgd, in comparison to the current conditions where there is no withdrawal or discharge. Outfall Outfall Outfall Outfall Outfall Outfall Outfall Outfall Constituent (mg/L)a 001 A01 002 A02 003 A03 004 006 a. All units are mg/L except for pH mg/L = milligrams per liter; NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; “–“ = no permit limit currently exists; ≥ = greater than or equal to; ≤ = less than or equal to. Average Discharge Rate 192 9.0 95 to Illinois River mgd = million gallons per day CO2 Pipeline Normal operations of the proposed CO2 pipeline are not expected to affect surface waters. On occasion, maintenance or inspection activities may require excavation around segments of the pipeline. During these kinds of maintenance operations, the BMPs discussed in Section 3.6.3.1 would be used, as applicable, to avoid or minimize any indirect impacts (e.g., sedimentation and turbidity) to adjacent surface waters.  Hydrostatic testing may be required every 3 to 5 years to verify the integrity of the CO2 pipeline. If water were used in the testing, it would be obtained from available sources and trucked to the testing sites. Hydrostatic testing water would likely be discharged to local waterways under an NPDES permit from the IEPA, or to a permitted treatment facility. Since any disposal of hydrostatic testing water to local waterways would occur in compliance with NPDES permit conditions, disposal of hydrostatic test water would have minor temporary impacts on local surface water resources. These impacts would be similar to the construction impacts discussed in Section 3.6.3.1. As discussed in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, based on the frequency of releases from similar pipelines in the United States, a release of CO2 due to a pipeline puncture or rupture is considered unlikely (frequency from 1 x 10-2 to 1 x 10-4 per year). Mainline block valves would be provided approximately every 10 miles to isolate and contain any pipeline leak. In industrial, commercial, and residential areas, the spacing would be reduced to 7.5 miles. Mainline block valves would also be provided on either side of major river crossings, at other waterbody crossings of more than 100 feet wide from high water mark to high water mark, and optionally at major road crossings. If CO2 were released from the pipeline, it would expand rapidly as a gas and could include both liquid and solid (i.e., dry ice) phases, depending on temperature and pressure. As the product in the pipeline would be over 97 percent CO2 with few impurities (i.e., oxygen, nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, nitrogen, argon, and water) and would not remain under sufficient pressure to dissolve into surface water, it would have negligible adverse impact on surface water quality in the unlikely event of a release; however, it could potentially reduce surface water temperatures near a release. The magnitude of temperature reduction would depend upon the size of the release. The effects of temperature changes on aquatic biota are discussed further in Section 3.8, Biological Resources. Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, addresses the potential human health impacts resulting from the operation of the CO2 pipeline. CO2 Storage Study Area As discussed in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, a possible impact from the operation of the injection wells may result from an injection well blowout (i.e., a sudden loss of CO2 from failure of an injection well during operation), which is considered an extremely unlikely event. If a CO2 injection well blowout were to occur, the main adverse outcome to surface waters near the wellhead would be the potential for release of formation fluids (e.g., brine) to an adjacent surface waterbody, which would be similar to a conventional spill. Because such a release is considered highly unlikely, operation of CO2 injection wells would be expected to have a minor impact on any surface water resources present near the well. Effects would include an increase in salinity of nearby surface water features and would be localized to the area around the affected wellhead. This could have direct, temporary adverse impacts to surface water chemistry and aquatic biota. The effects would be temporary as continued flow would dilute and disperse the brine, in addition to remedial activities conducted during spill cleanup. Events of this type would be avoided or minimized by incorporating high-pressure piping, overpressure protection (i.e., relief) valves, and blowout preventers into the design of the injection wells. No additional impacts, beyond those addressed previously for the operation of the CO2 pipeline, would be anticipated during the operation of the pipeline across the CO2 storage study area to the injection wells. Educational Facilities Normal operations of the educational facilities would generally not affect surface water resources. Considering that the selected site(s) would be located on previously disturbed land with existing utility connections, it is unlikely that direct or indirect impacts would result from operation of the facilities. 3.6.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to surface water resources. 3.7 WETLANDS AND FLOODPLAINS 3.7.1 Introduction This section describes wetlands and floodplains potentially affected by the construction and operation of the proposed project. This section also analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of the proposed project on these resources. This section provides the required wetland and floodplain assessment and this Draft EIS provides an opportunity for public review in compliance with regulations promulgated at 10 CFR 1022, “Compliance with Floodplain and Wetland Environmental Review Requirements.” These regulations provide a guide for DOE compliance with Executive Order (EO) 11988, “Floodplain Management,” and EO 11990, “Protection of Wetlands.” EO 11988 requires federal agencies, while planning their actions, to avoid to the extent possible adverse impacts associated with the modification of floodplains and to avoid support for development in a floodplain when there is a better practicable alternative. EO 11990 requires that federal agencies, while planning their actions, consider alternatives to affecting wetlands, if applicable, and limit adverse impacts to the extent practicable if impacts cannot be avoided. Floodplains are closely related to surface waters, as rivers, streams, lakes, and ponds are the ultimate destination for precipitation and snowmelt on land and the primary source of flood flows. Surface waters are specifically discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. 3.7.1.1 Wetlands Wetlands are among the most productive environments in the world, comparable to rain forests and coral reefs. Many species of wildlife, including a large percentage of threatened and endangered species, depend on wetlands for survival. Wetlands are also important for scientific and educational opportunities and can provide open space for recreation where public access is available. Wetlands have unique characteristics that set them apart from other environments, providing the basis for wetland Wetlands are defined by the U.S. Army Corps identification and classification. These unique characteristics of Engineers as follows (40 CFR 230): Those include a layer of soil that is saturated or inundated with water areas that are inundated or saturated by for part of the growing season, soils that contain little or no surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under oxygen, and plants adapted to wet or seasonally saturated normal circumstances do support, a conditions. Wetlands serve many functions, including the storage prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for and slow release of rain, snowmelt, and seasonal floodwaters to life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands surface waters. Additionally, wetlands provide wildlife habitat, generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, stabilize and retain sediment, and perform an important role in and similar areas. nutrient (e.g., nitrogen and phosphorus) cycling. Wetlands also help to maintain stream flow during dry periods and provide groundwater recharge functions. Wetland types are often categorized using the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) document Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States. This classification system is used by the USFWS when categorizing wetland types to develop the National Wetland Inventory (NWI), a series of maps that show wetlands and deepwater habitats of the United States. The Illinois Wetland Inventory (IWI) classification was developed to facilitate the use and presentation of NWI data. The IWI uses spatial data provided by the NWI, but provides its own, more simplified classification system describing each area of NWI-mapped wetlands. The IWI data does not include any additional wetland mapping, but relies on NWI-mapped wetlands. Although the NWI classification provides valuable information, a relatively high level of detail makes data analysis cumbersome (e.g., there are 617 unique NWI codes used in Illinois) (Suloway and Hubbell 1994). In contrast, the IWI classification system is much less detailed, containing only 13 basic groups of wetland and deepwater classification codes. Certain wetland types in the IWI classification system may be characterized as a combination of 2 or more of the 13 basic groups. For simplicity and consistency with IDNR, the description of wetlands in this section utilizes the IWI classification system. The IWI classification systemcontains 13 wetland types (Suloway and Hubbell 1994; USFWS 2010a): 1. Bottomland Forests: Dominated by woody vegetation 20 feet tall or greater covering 30 percent or more of the area, which are temporarily or seasonally flooded, but which lack continuously standing water. 2. Swamps: Dominated by woody vegetation 20 feet tall or greater covering 30 percent or more of the area where water is present on a permanent or semi-permanent basis. 3. Scrub-Shrub: Characterized by woody vegetation less than 20 feet tall covering 30 percent or more of the area. 4. Shallow Marsh and Wet Meadow: Dominated by rooted, herbaceous vegetation. Characterized by standing water that is present for brief to moderate periods during the growing season. 5. Deep Marsh: Dominated by rooted, herbaceous vegetation. Characterized by standing water or soil saturation on a semi-permanent to permanent basis during the growing season. 6. Open Water: Unvegetated areas less than 20 acres that are covered by water less than 6.6 feet deep. This includes ponds, borrow pits, small reservoirs, and open water areas within a marsh or swamp. 7. Shallow Lake: Shallow open waterbodies that are 20 acres or more in area and less than 6.6 feet in depth that occupy topographic depressions or that are impounded river channels. 8. Lake Shore: Located along the edges of large rivers and the shores of wave-affected lakes. 9. Emergent Lake: Lake shore wetlands that have a zone of emergent vegetation extending from the shore to approximately 6.6 feet in depth. 10. Perennial Riverine: Characterized by flowing water throughout the year. Largely shallow (less than 6.6 feet deep) rivers and streams within unimpounded channels; they are either unvegetated or vegetated with nonpersistent emergent plants or aquatic plant beds. 11. Intermittent Riverine: Contain flowing water for only part of the year. Largely shallow (less than 6.6 feet deep) rivers and streams within unimpounded channels; they are either unvegetated or vegetated with nonpersistent emergent plants or aquatic plant beds. 12. Deepwater Lakes (Lacustrine): Waterbodies deeper than 6.6 feet that occupy topographic depressions or that are impounded river channels. 13. Deepwater Rivers (Riverine): Unimpounded channels containing flowing water greater than 6.6 feet in depth. Wetlands once covered more than 8 million acres in Illinois, or approximately 23 percent of the total land area. As a result of human modification of the environment, approximately 90 percent of those wetlands have been destroyed. Approximately 1.25 million acres of wetlands exist in the state, although approximately one-fourth of that total were modified or created by dikes, impoundments, or excavation activities. In Illinois, wetland loss is principally attributed to conversion of the land for agricultural purposes and to a lesser extent by land development associated with population growth (Suloway and Hubbell 1994). Over half of the counties in Illinois (53 counties) have less than 2 percent of their land area occupied by natural wetlands. Most of the state’s remaining natural wetlands (over 57 percent) are located in southern Illinois. Northern Illinois contains approximately 22 percent of the state’s natural wetlands, while the remaining 21 percent are located in central Illinois (Suloway and Hubbell 1994). 3.7.1.2 Floodplains Rivers and streams are part of nature’s system for carrying water from high ground down to lakes and oceans. The land areas adjacent to the streams, rivers, and lakes that are inundated when flooding occurs are floodplains. Flooding is a natural process and floodplains are a vital part of that process. Beneficial values of floodplains include the moderation of floods, water quality, groundwater recharge, fish and wildlife habitat, open space, and recreational value. A flood occurs when heavy rains or snowmelt send more water downstream than the carrying channel can handle. There are three primary types of flooding in Illinois: riverine flooding (a flood typically seen as water flowing over a stream’s banks), ponding (a flood occurring when low areas fill up faster than they can be drained), and sheet flooding (a flood when water flows along thesurface without a channel) (IDNR 2006). Flooding potential is generally described in terms of flooding recurrence intervals, such as the 100-year or 500-year flood. The 100-year floodplain is the area projected to be inundated by a storm that has a one percent probability of occurring in any year. The 500-year floodplain is the area projected to be inundated by a storm with a 0.2 percent probability of occurring in any year. The 100-year floodplain is the national standard on which floodplain management and the National FloodInsurance Program are based. Since flooding events can cause very costly natural disasters, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), through the National Flood Insurance Program, enables property owners to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. Floodplain management activities of the National Flood Insurance Program include the development of flood insurance rate maps for flood insurance rating purposes. A flood insurance rate map outlines flood risk zones within communities and is usually issued following a flood insurance study that summarizes the analysis of flood hazards within the subject community. FEMA provides flood insurance rate maps to a wide range of users including private citizens, community officials, insurance agents and brokers, lending institutions, and other federal agencies. A flood insurance study includes detailed engineering studies to map predicted flood elevations at specified flood recurrence intervals. Generally, the study is concerned with peak discharges in streams and rivers for 100-year and 500-year storm events and includes engineering analyses of predicted flood elevations for each flood recurrence interval. Based on the results of the engineering analyses, flood risk zones are assigned for insurance purposes. Illinois has one of the largest inland systems of rivers, lakes, and streams in the nation. Nearly 15 percent of the total land area in the state (or 7,400 square miles) is subject to flooding. As Illinois developed, the state’s waterways often served as the focal point for growth and commerce, because they provided needed water resources and transportation corridors. Homes, buildings, businesses, and, in some instances, entire communities now occupy floodplains across Illinois. This floodplain development has resulted in continual and, often, severe damage as well as loss of life. In Illinois, it is estimated that over 250,000 buildings are located in floodplains. Floods are by far the most common natural disaster in the state, accounting for well over 90 percent of the declared disasters. Annual damages due to flooding are estimated to average nearly $700 million (IDNR 2006). 3.7.1.3 Region of Influence The ROI for wetlands and floodplains includes the areas potentially affected by the construction and operation of the proposed project, consisting of the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 injection wells, and the proposed educational facilities. The ROI defines the extent of the areas where direct effects from construction and operation may be experienced, and it encompasses the areas where indirect effects from the proposed project would most likely occur. 3.7.1.4 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE assessed potential impacts to wetlands and floodplains primarily by using a GIS mapping application to calculate impact acreages for NWI-mapped (and IWI re-classified) or field delineated wetlands and FEMA-mapped floodplains. DOE overlaid baseline environmental data (i.e., wetland and floodplain locations) with potential project features to determine the locations and extents of potentially affected wetlands and floodplains. In locations where wetlands and floodplains would be impacted, qualitative assessments were made of what those impacts would be. DOE assessed the potential for impacts to wetlands and floodplains based on whether the proposed project would:   Cause filling of wetlands or otherwise alter drainage patterns that would affect wetlands;  Cause wetland type or classification conversions due to alterations of land cover attributes;  Alter a floodway or floodplain or otherwise impede or redirect flows such that human health, the environment, or personal property could be affected;  Conflict with applicable flood management plans or ordinances; or  Conflict with FEMA’s national standard for floodplain management (i.e., maximum allowable increase of water surface elevation of 1 foot for a 1 percent annual chance [100-year recurrence interval] flood event). With respect to wetlands, this section discusses the potential for impacts related to the loss of resources (i.e., filling impacts), type Fill material is defined by the applicable or classification conversions (e.g., converting a forested wetland regulatory agencies [USACE and USEPA] as, “material placed in waters of the U.S. where to an herbaceous wetland), and surface disturbances within the material has the effect of either replacing wetlands or their vicinities that would alter or affect the wetland any portion of a water of the U.S. with dry land or its hydrology or characteristics. Each such action would or changing the bottom elevation of any ultimately affect the functions and values of wetland resources portion of a water.” [67 FR 31129] (e.g., attenuating flood flows and providing habitat for wildlife). For wetlands, the following three types of potential impacts could occur:  Direct wetland loss by placement of fill material or structures;  Wetland type conversions caused by project activities; and  Wetland disturbances, which are generally considered temporary, construction-related impacts. DOE assessed potential floodplain impacts by determining the potential of the proposed project components to place fill material or structures in a floodplain in a manner that would expose people or structures to increased levels of flood hazards or violate FEMA’s national standard for floodplain management. 3.7.1.5 Regulatory Framework Wetlands Certain wetland features, called “waters of the U.S.,” are regulated by the USACE under the CWA because they are important for the preservation of navigable waterways and interstate commerce. Waters of the U.S. are subject to federal jurisdiction and permitting under Section 404 of the CWA and include all navigable waterways, their tributaries, as well as wetlands contiguous (connected) to and adjacent to those navigable waterways and tributaries. Isolated wetlands (those that have no physical, chemical, or biological connection to waters of the U.S.) are not regulated under federal jurisdiction unless they are adjacent to waters of the U.S. Isolated wetlands are not currently regulated by the state of Illinois. Throughout the ROI for wetlands and floodplains, federal wetland regulations are enforced by the USACE St. Louis and Rock Island districts. Under Section 404 of the CWA, a USACE permit would be required for the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S., which is authorized by a Nationwide Permit or an Individual Permit, depending upon the extent of the impact and the characteristics of the impacted wetland(s). Construction of utility lines (e.g., pipelines) that would affect waters of the U.S. can be permitted with a Nationwide Permit (Number 12 – “Utility Line Activities”) if less than 0.5 acre of wetlands or waters of the U.S. are disturbed, or an Individual Permit if more than 0.5 acre is disturbed. Both the Nationwide Permit and the Individual Permit require that certain conditions are met. In addition, construction within or alteration of (e.g., dredging activities, placement of fill material) a traditional navigable waterway (e.g., the Illinois River) below the defined ordinary high water mark requires USACE permitting under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act. This is discussed in greater detail in Section 3.6, Surface Water. Floodplains FEMA has adopted a maximum allowable increase of water surface elevation of 1 foot for a 1 percent annual chance (100-year recurrence interval) flood event as the national standard for floodplain management purposes. Many local ordinances have adopted this standard. The Morgan County Floodplain Ordinance states that no elevation in flood heights is permissible unless approved via permit by IDNR. IDNR requires permitting for construction in a floodway (i.e., the channel of a river, lake, or stream and that portion of the adjacent land area that is needed to safely store and convey the 100-year flood event without substantial increases in flood heights), which are sometimes defined on FEMA maps. When FEMA mapping in an area does not include a floodway delineation, IDNR generally requires permitting for any work in the floodplain. Since FEMA has not mapped floodways in the project area, IDNR must review all construction activities within the 100-year floodplain. The Illinois Floodplain Regulations enforced by IDNR (17 IAC 3700) state that the maximum water level increase within a floodway is 0.5 foot in rural areas and 0.1 foot in urban areas. The Morgan County Floodplain Ordinance also states that any non-residential buildings constructed in a 100-year floodplain must either be constructed such that the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to, at least, one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or flood-proofed (i.e., watertight and capable of withstanding the effects of a 100-year flood) below one foot above the base flood elevation (Morgan County 2009). 3.7.2 Affected Environment The entire proposed project would be located in Morgan County, Illinois. Morgan County contains approximately 6,170 acres of wetlands, which comprise approximately 1.7 percent of the county’s total land area. Of that acreage, approximately 4,210 acres are considered natural wetlands. The most abundant wetland type in the county is bottomland forest, which consists of temporarily or seasonally flooded forested wetlands that lack continuously standing water (Suloway and Hubbell 1994). Morgan County contains approximately 36,830 acres of 100-year floodplains, which comprise approximately 10 percent of the county’s total land area (IDNR 2009a). 3.7.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center Wetlands Based on a wetland delineation conducted in May 2011 at the Meredosia Energy Center property, two small wetlands were identified. Both wetlands are located near the eastern property boundary along Old Naples Road (see Appendix D, Wetlands Surveys [D1]). These two wetlands cover areas of 0.37 acre (Wetland Area PA) and 0.26 acre (Wetland Area PB), respectively. Representatives from the USACE performed a site visit at the Meredosia Energy Center on August 16, 2011, to conduct a Jurisdictional Determination. The USACE agreed with the results of the wetland delineation regarding the location and extent of each wetland feature. The USACE identified that the two onsite wetlands are both subject to USACE jurisdiction under Section 404 of the CWA. Although there is no surface hydrologic connection between these wetlands and the Illinois River (i.e., a navigable waterway), the USACE stated that the onsite wetlands are connected to the river via groundwater, rendering them waters of the U.S. The larger of the two wetlands is a low-lying area that appears to capture stormwater from other portions of the property, such as the main entrance and exit roads to the energy center. These wetlands are not mapped by NWI, and therefore have not been categorized by the IWI. However, based on field observations, these wetlands would be classified as scrub-shrub/shallow marsh/wet meadow in the IWI classification system. Vegetation in these wetlands consists primarily of cattail (Typha spp.), eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) seedlings, and grasses (Sedge spp.). These wetland areas, as well as other NWI-mapped wetlands in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center, are depicted in Figure 3.7-1. Floodplains The FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map covering the Meredosia Energy Center (Map Number 17137C0004D; effective date August 18, 2009) indicates that portions of the overall site and potentially affected offsite locations lie within the 100-year floodplain of the Illinois River. This 100-year floodplain has a mapped base flood elevation of 447 feet above mean sea level. Small areas of 500-year floodplain bordering this 100-year floodplain are also mapped (see Figure 3.7-2). The portion of the energy center where the main physical structure of the oxy-combustion facility is proposed to be located is outside of the mapped 100-year floodplain, indicating a minimal flood hazard in this specific location (FEMA 2009). 3.7.2.2 CO2 Pipeline  The proposed CO2 pipeline corridor from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area is approximately 26 miles in length (see Figure 2-16). DOE derived wetland spatial data from NWI digital mapping data obtained from USFWS (USFWS 2011a). However, DOE cross-correlated and renamed the NWI codes with their corresponding, simpler IWI codes as described earlier. DOE obtained floodplain information for Morgan County through FEMA digital Flood Insurance Rate Map data (FEMA 2011). Coon Run is located within the pipeline corridor. A levee has been constructed along a portion of Coon Run, from just east of the Illinois River until its intersection with US-67 (State Route 100), approximately 3 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center. This levee serves to control and direct flood flows in this vicinity. DOE = U.S.. Department of Ennergy; NWI = Nattional Wetland Invventory Wetlands An overview of wetlands in Morgan County is presented in Section 3.7.2. Figure 3.7-3 and Figure 3.7-4 present the extents of NWI-mapped wetlands within the pipeline corridor. Table 3.7-1 summarizes the wetland types (based on their corresponding IWI classifications; see Section 3.7.1.1) within the 4-mile wide pipeline corridor. Sources: USFWS 2010a; Suloway and Hubbell 1994 a. Acreage of NWI-mapped wetlands. CO2 = carbon dioxide; IWI = Illinois Wetland Inventory; NWI = National Wetland Inventory Within the pipeline corridor, several wetland types are present as indicated in Table 3.7-1. The majority of these wetlands (approximately 60 percent) are either bottomland forest or perennial stream. Refer to Figure 3.7-3 and Figure 3.7-4 for specific wetland locations, as well as the map view figures in Appendix C, Map Views of Pipeline. It should be noted that known wetland areas located within the pipeline corridor are based upon existing spatial data; no formal wetlands investigation or field surveys have yet been conducted. Therefore, additional wetland areas not mapped by NWI may exist within the pipeline corridor. A formal wetland delineation would be conducted prior to construction activities to identify any areas of wetlands or waters of the U.S. that would be considered jurisdictional by the USACE. Floodplains An overview of floodplains in Morgan County is presented in Section 3.7.2. Figure 3.7-3 and Figure 3.7-4 present the extents of mapped floodplains within the 4-mile wide pipeline corridor. Within the 4-mile wide corridor for the proposed CO2 pipeline, several major surface waters have associated floodplains along their banks. As shown in Table 3.7-2, these include the Illinois River, which has a wide floodplain in western Morgan County and is the only surface water in the ROI with substantial areas of 500-year floodplains. Other surface waters in the ROI with associated 100-year floodplains include: Willow Creek, Coon Run, Spring Run, Indian Creek, Lick Branch, Snake Creek, Conover Branch, Mauvaise Terre Creek, and Little Indian Creek (FEMA 2011). CO2 = carboon dioxide; NWI == National Wetlandd Inventory CO2 = carboon dioxide; NWI == National Wetlandd Inventory Table 3.7-2. Floodplains within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor Floodplain Associated Waters Acres 10,987.9 1,882.9 Source: FEMA 2011 CO2 = carbon dioxide 3.7.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area Tables 3.7-3 and 3.7-4 provide a summary of wetland features and floodplains that are located within the CO2 storage study area. DOE derived wetland spatial data from NWI digital mapping data obtained from USFWS (USFWS 2011a). However, DOE cross-correlated and renamed the NWI codes with their corresponding IWI codes as described earlier. DOE obtained floodplain information for Morgan County through FEMA digital Flood Insurance Rate Map data (FEMA 2011). Wetlands In April 2011, a wetland field investigation was conducted by the Alliance on two separate parcels within the CO2 storage study area. The field investigation was conducted to inspect for the presence of jurisdictional wetlands at two proposed locations for the stratigraphic well pad. The proposed locations included the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad and the Hoagland Characterization Pad. The Beilschmidt Pad is an approximately 11.25-acre area located on the south side of Beilschmidt Road (shown in Figure 3.7-4 as stratigraphic well); the Hoagland Pad is approximately 15.28 acres and is located on the north side of Beilschmidt Road (approximately 2,000 feet northwest of the stratigraphic well). Jurisdictional wetlands were not identified on either parcel during the investigation (SES 2011c; see Appendix D, Wetlands Surveys [D3]) and the USACE later concurred with these findings. The Beilschmidt Pad was eventually selected as the location for the stratigraphic well, which was installed during the period October to December 2011. Refer to Section 2.5.2.5 for additional details regarding the stratigraphic well. The Alliance also conducted a wetland delineation of the preliminary locations for soil gas monitoring within the CO2 storage study area (SES 2011a; see Appendix D, Wetlands Surveys [D2]). This wetland delineation was limited to seven monitoring sites comprising less than 50 square feet in total, all of which were located adjacent to county roads. No wetlands were observed during this survey. No other wetland delineation has yet been conducted elsewhere on the CO2 storage study area.  Elsewhere within the CO2 storage study area, three NWI-mapped wetland types have been mapped, totaling approximately 68.7 acres (see Figure 3.7-4 and Map View 3 in Appendix C, Maps Views of Pipeline [C1]). These wetland types include open water, shallow marsh/wet meadow, and bottomland forest (USFWS 2010a). These wetland areas represent approximately 1.3 percent of the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. As such, the NWI identifies relatively few wetlands in this area. Additional areas of wetlands outside of those mapped by NWI may be present elsewhere on the CO2 storage study area. Based upon the size of the site and the presence of forested (unfarmed) areas along streams within the site, it is possible that additional wetlands exist. A formal wetland delineation would be conducted prior to construction activities. IWI Wetland Type Acresa 7.0 47.2 0 0 0 0 0 14.5 0 0 Source: USFWS 2010a a. Acreage of NWI-mapped wetlands. CO2 = carbon dioxide; IWI = Illinois Wetland Inventory; NWI = National Wetland Inventory Floodplains Within the CO2 storage study area, 100-year floodplains are present along Indian Creek and associated branches or drainages (see Figure 3.7-4) (FEMA 2011). Table 3.7-4. Floodplains within the CO2 Storage Study Area Floodplain  Associated Waters  Acres   Indian Creek  234.0   NA  0  Sources: FEMA 2011; ISWS 1996 CO2 = carbon dioxide; NA = not applicable 3.7.2.4 Educational Facilities Visitor, research, and training facilities (also referred to as the educational facilities) would be provided at a suitable location in the Jacksonville area. These facilities would support public outreach and communication, and provide training and research opportunities associated with near zero emissions power and carbon capture and storage technologies. Wetlands Within Jacksonville and South Jacksonville, there are few wetlands, as these areas are heavily developed. The primary locations within each city that have wetlands occur around Mauvaise Terre Lake. Wetland areas around Mauvaise Terre Lake consist of the following wetland types: bottomland forest, scrub-shrub, shallow marsh/wet meadow, deep marsh, and lacustrine deepwater lakes (see Section 3.7.1.1). One other concentrated area of wetlands occurs in northern Jacksonville, near Mauvaise Terre Creek. This area contains the following wetland types: bottomland forest, shallow marsh/wet meadow, deep marsh, and open water (see Section 3.7.1.1). Most of the land area in the immediate vicinity of Jacksonville consists of agricultural land with few wetlands. The majority of wetlands outside of Jacksonville consist of farm ponds or wetlands adjacent to surface waters (USEPA 2011m). Floodplains Floodplains in the Jacksonville area consist primarily of 100- and 500-year floodplains associated with Mauvaise Terre Creek and associated branches and tributaries. Mauvaise Terre Creek runs roughly along the northern and eastern boundaries of Jacksonville and the eastern boundary of South Jacksonville. Town Brook runs in an east-west direction across Jacksonville, roughly paralleling Hoagland Boulevard. Town Brook, a tributary to Mauvaise Terre Creek, is bounded by narrow, mapped 100- and 500-year floodplains. Town Brook and its associated floodplains extend across the mid to southern portion of Jacksonville. The 500-year floodplains in the area are generally narrow and extend in narrow bands along the boundaries of the 100-year floodplains (USEPA 2011m). South of the town of South Jacksonville, mostly along the south side of US-72, 100-year floodplains occur along Big Sandy Creek, associated branches and tributaries, and Lake Jacksonville (USEPA 2011m). 3.7.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.7.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Wetlands Stormwater runoff not exposed to industrial pollutants would be directed to a stormwater management basin that would be constructed and managed by an Ameren company. Primary design and construction of the stormwater management basin would be completed by the new owner of the property (an Ameren company) with input from the Alliance. The Alliance would coordinate with the new owner on the design of the basin to ensure it is sized to accommodate stormwater runoff from the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The exact location, configuration, and design of the basin would be determined in the final design phase for the project. The basin is expected to be constructed within the area shown on Figure 2-13. This basin would store noncontact, non-industrial stormwater runoff (i.e., stormwater runoff not exposed to industrial pollutants). Construction of the stormwater management basin would most likely occur to the south of two small, delineated wetland areas (see Figure 3.7-1 and Appendix D, Wetlands Surveys [D1]). The construction of the basin in this area would not likely disturb or alter these wetland areas, since they could easily be avoided. Therefore, no direct impacts are expected and no permitting associated with these small jurisdictional wetlands would be required. Minor indirect impacts of sedimentation could occur as a result of construction activities; however, these impacts would be short term and minimized through the implementation of the SWPPP required for NPDES permitting, which would include BMPs to control eroded sediments. It is unknown at this time whether stormwater runoff would be conveyed through existing wetland areas that were delineated by DOE (see Figure 3.7-1) prior to entering the stormwater management basin (i.e., if the basin is placed south of these onsite wetland areas as proposed) or if the runoff would be diverted around these wetland areas, via a series of ditches, to the proposed stormwater management basin. If stormwater is allowed to flow through these wetlands, it is not anticipated to disturb or adversely alter the wetlands and could potentially serve to replenish and enhance the hydrology of these wetlands while avoiding excessive runoff or flooding potential. Any stormwater runoff exposed to coal storage or other industrial materials or processes (e.g., the bottom ash bunker and fly ash silo) would be routed to a lined settling basin for an appropriate amount of time to allow settling of suspended solids. The discharge from the lined settling basin would be routed to an onsite wastewater treatment system. While the exact location, configuration, and design of the lined settling basin has not yet been determined, it would not be located within or immediately adjacent to the onsite wetlands. Therefore, no direct or indirect impacts to wetlands are expected from the lined settling basin. No other project components are proposed within or immediately adjacent to the onsite wetlands. The majority of construction would occur in areas that are currently developed or have historically been disturbed. In addition, no other NWI wetlands have been mapped within the boundaries of the FutureGen 2.0 impact areas as identified in Figure 3.7-1. No other wetlands were observed within, or immediately adjacent to, these impact areas during the field investigation conducted from May 23 to 27, 2011. As such, direct and indirect effects to wetlands at the Meredosia Energy Center would be minor, and would be avoided through sensitive project siting and design, notably for the stormwater management basin. Floodplains As shown on Figure 3.7-2, portions of the Meredosia Energy Center property and potentially affected offsite properties are located within mapped 100-year and 500-year floodplains associated with the Illinois River. As described in Section 2.4.3, portions of the Meredosia Energy Center and nearby offsite areas are proposed for either permanent, temporary, or barge construction impacts as follows:  Proposed permanent impact areas include the areas that would contain the oxy-combustion facility and associated features (e.g., paved areas) as shown in Figure 2-14, as well as a lined (industrial stormwater) settling basin and an unlined stormwater management basin.  Proposed temporary and barge impact areas include construction laydown areas or other construction-related work areas. This could also include areas in the Illinois River and along the shoreline where temporary pilings for fill could be installed to support barge unloading during construction. These areas would only be used during the construction period. As shown on Figure 3.7-2, some of these proposed areas are located within mapped 100-year and 500-year floodplains. Overall, approximately 24 acres of proposed permanent impact areas are located within the 100-year floodplain, while an additional 13.6 acres of proposed temporary or barge impact areas are located in the 100-year floodplain. The structures associated with the proposed oxy-combustion facility would be constructed adjacent to the existing Meredosia Energy Center within an area that is outside of mapped floodplains. Thus, the proposed structures would not present obstructions to flood flows in a mapped floodplain. The preliminary area selected for siting the stormwater management basin intersects the 100-year floodplain. This structure would not adversely affect flood flows or the floodplain since it would not interfere with flood flows and would likely provide additional storage. The settling basin would be constructed in an area outside of any mapped floodplain. As such, these proposed basins should not adversely affect flood flows or the floodplain. Although no new permanent structures are proposed to be constructed in a mapped floodplain, associated features (e.g., paved areas) would be located within up to 24 acres of a mapped floodplain. These permanent impact areas would be developed in a manner that would not obstruct flood flows; however, specific plans have not yet been developed. Development of approximately 10 acres of impervious surfaces in areas that were previously pervious (e.g., grassy areas) would result in increased flow velocity and a reduction in infiltration rates in these areas. Certain beneficial aspects of floodplains, such as groundwater recharge and water quality maintenance, would also be reduced by an increase in impervious cover within the floodplain. However, these effects would be minor in terms of the size of the newly paved areas relative to the remaining unpaved areas. Should project planning ultimately propose additional buildings or structures within mapped 100-year floodplains, the Alliance would construct these buildings in accordance with the IAC and Morgan County Floodplain Ordinance as described in Section 3.7.1.5. As noted above, up to 13.6 acres of proposed temporary or barge impact areas are located in the 100-year floodplain. The temporary presence of construction equipment and materials in these areas could cause a minor temporary direct impact. Placing materials within the floodplain could redirect flood flows if a flooding event occurred during construction. Impacts would not endanger human health or property or conflict with any state, local, or federal floodplain ordinances, as equipment would represent relatively small obstructions compared to the overall area of the Illinois River floodplain. IDNR, Office of Water Resources, requires permits for various construction activities that occur in floodplains or floodways, under the Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act. Depending on the types and locations of proposed construction activities, the Alliance may be required to obtain either a Statewide Permit #6 (Minor, Non-Obstructive Floodway Construction Activities), Statewide Permit #8 (Underground Pipeline and Utility Crossings), or Statewide Permit #13 (Temporary Construction Activities) from IDNR prior to any construction activities. Emplacement and use of the proposed temporary barge unloading facility during construction would result in only negligible floodplain impacts. Two options have been evaluated for barge unloading operations that would involve some level of disturbance to the river bottom, as detailed in Section 2.4.3.2. Under the first option, the placement of three to five dolphins would add 54 to 89 cubic yards of fill to the 100-year floodplain and reduce the 100-year flood area by 553 to 922 square feet. In comparison, IDOT determined that the proposed Illinois Route 104 bridge project, which would require 18,800 cubic yards of fill in the Illinois River, would cause a less than 0.005-inch increase in flood height and a minimal increase in floodplain limits (IDOT 2011). Thus, placement of the dolphins would cause a negligible increase in flood hazards and would not exceed any regulatory standards. Under the second option, the placement of any riprap on the riverbed (assumed to be 1-foot thick over an area of 200 feet by 50 feet) would add 370 cubic yards of material (2 percent of the new bridge volume [IDOT 2011]) and decrease the flow area by 50 square feet (0.1 percent of the existing flow area). This reduction would also cause a negligible increase in flood hazards and would not exceed any regulatory standards. If either of these options were carried forward, hydrologic modeling would likely be required to support required permitting of such activities and to ensure that no unacceptable impacts would occur to the floodway. Development of the temporary barge unloading facility under either of these options would require a permit from IDNR for construction in a floodway, under IAC 17, Chapter I, Subchapter H, Part 3700. For a large waterbody such as the Illinois River, flash flooding is typically not a concern based upon the large volume of the streambed. However, large precipitation events or rapid snowmelt upstream within the watershed can result in significant riverine flooding. These types of flood events can typically be predicted hours to days ahead of time, based upon water levels within the river and known flood stage thresholds. The National Weather Service is the primary agency responsible for issuing flood advisories, watches, and warnings; such notices are often issued when flood conditions are anticipated within 48 to 72 hours or less. To avoid impacts from foreseeable flood events, the construction contractor would monitor official statements issued by the National Weather Service regarding flood potential in the project area. If such conditions are anticipated, the contractor would, to the extent possible, cease operations and move all equipment out of the floodplain prior to any flood occurrences. The Alliance is also evaluating options for unloading equipment from barges that would avoid potential impacts by using a combination of on-shore equipment, tugs, and temporary ramps so that there would be no disturbance to the bank or bottom of the Illinois River. However, these plans are still under development and being reviewed for their feasibility. CO2 Pipeline  Within the 4-mile wide pipeline corridor to the CO2 storage study area, there are two possible proposed routes: the southern route and the northern route (see Figure 2-17). Wetlands Table 3.7-5 summarizes the IWI-equivalent classification (see Section 3.7.1.1) for each NWI-mapped wetland within the construction ROW for each of the proposed routes to the CO2 storage study area. As shown in Table 3.7-5, no NWI-mapped wetlands exist within the construction ROW for the southern route, and only approximately 0.2 acre of open water is mapped within the construction ROW for the northern route. However, it is noted that additional, non-NWI-mapped wetlands may be present within the construction ROWs, since the absence of NWI-mapped wetlands does not conclusively indicate the absence of wetlands. Prior to construction, the Alliance would conduct a formal wetland delineation of the final CO2 pipeline route. Table 3.7-5. Wetlands within the Proposed Construction Right-of-Way for CO2 Pipeline Routes Routea Acresb 0 0.2d Source: USFWS 2010a a. Construction ROW would be 80 feet wide. b. Acreage of NWI-mapped wetlands. c. No NWI-mapped wetlands are located within pipeline route ROW. d. Only includes ‘open water’ wetland type. CO2 = carbon dioxide; NWI = National Wetland Inventory; ROW = right-of-way The Alliance sited the preferred southern pipeline route to minimize crossings of waterways (e.g., larger streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes) and wetlands. However, where water and wetland crossings are unavoidable for either route, the Alliance has committed to using trenchless technologies, such as horizontal directional drilling or jack and bore tunneling, to lay pipe beneath wetlands and surface waterbodies. Traditional trenching activities may still be used during pipeline installation across seasonally dry ephemeral or intermittent streams that are devoid of water at the time of construction. The only regulated waters of the U.S. that could be directly impacted by pipeline construction would be dry ephemeral and intermittent streambeds. The majority of pipeline construction impacts to these features would be temporary and minor, consisting of short-term disturbances during pipeline construction. For crossings of dry streambeds, the pipeline construction ROWs would be cleared of any woody vegetation and the ground surface disturbed, primarily by the movement of equipment, digging of trenches, and stockpiling of excavated soils. After pipeline installation has been completed across a dry streambed, the ground surface would be restored and regraded to pre-construction contours, including restoration of the streambed and banks, so that there would be no permanent impact to, or loss of, jurisdictional ephemeral or intermittent streams.  The only wetland areas that could be directly impacted by pipeline construction would be wetland areas encountered within agricultural lands; however, these areas are not expected to occur within the pipeline ROW. If any such features exist and are identified within the ROW they would be crossed using trenching. These types of wetland areas are not expected to be considered jurisdictional; however, the USACE would have ultimate discretion over which wetland areas are considered regulated or not. A formal delineation would be conducted in the pipeline route, and a Jurisdictional Determination would be submitted to the USACE, prior to construction. Many wetland features in agricultural fields are not considered jurisdictional since they typically lack the presence of sufficient hydrophytic vegetation due to the existence and maintenance of agricultural crops at these locations. To meet the criteria for a regulated (jurisdictional) wetland as defined by the USACE, a feature must possess each of the characteristics (hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrology) of the USACE’s three-parameter approach to wetland identification. Additionally, it is also probable that wetlands within a large farm field would be hydrologically isolated from waters of the U.S., which would also likely exclude them from regulation under the CWA.  Following trenching and pipeline installation in agricultural wetlands, excavated wetland soils would be backfilled into the trenches so that the deepest soils excavated are returned as the deepest soils backfilled. This method of wetland soil backfilling would help maintain pre-construction wetland soil characteristics. These areas would then be allowed to be revegetated with crops similar to pre-existing conditions. Horizontal directional drilling would be used for major waterbody crossings (i.e., waterbodies more than 100 feet wide). The minimum depth of cover for waterbodies requiring horizontal directional drilling would be at least 4 feet as required under 49 CFR 195.248(a). Jack and bore tunneling would be used for smaller surface water features and wetland areas. Additional trenchless technologies may be required due to environmental, land, or constructability requirements. Geotechnical investigations would be performed at proposed horizontal directional drilling locations, and contingency plans would be developed, as required, for completing waterbody crossings in the event of an unsuccessful horizontal directional drilling. By implementing trenchless construction techniques, impacts to waterbodies (such as the 0.2-acre open water area identified in Table 3-7.5) would be avoided and the waterways’ beds and banks would not be disturbed. See Section 3.6, Surface Water, for further discussion of impacts to these surface water features.  Based on NWI mapping, it is unlikely that any wetlands would be encountered by pipeline construction. However, as identified above, the Alliance would conduct a formal wetland delineation of the final CO2 pipeline route to identify all potential wetlands, including wetlands not mapped by the NWI that would be encountered within the proposed construction ROW. These features would be identified as areas where trenchless methods would be utilized. In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the preferred southern route or the northern pipeline route, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed. In the event that the final pipeline routing results in additional impacts to wetlands, or if the pre-construction wetland delineation of the final CO2 pipeline route identifies potential jurisdictional wetlands, trenchless construction methods would be used to avoid impacts to these areas; therefore, no direct impacts would be anticipated. Trenching would only be used within jurisdictional features if additional dry intermittent or ephemeral streams are encountered. In such cases, impacts would be similar to those described above. Based on current NWI mapping and proposed construction techniques, no wetlands would be impacted by the southern pipeline route and approximately 0.2 acre of open water would be avoided via horizontal directional drilling along the northern pipeline route. However, the actual amount of wetlands within each proposed route could change based upon completion of a formal, site-specific wetland delineation, which would occur prior to construction. Any wetlands identified by a wetland delineation would be avoided by using trenchless technologies, so that no direct impacts would result from pipeline installation. Potential indirect impacts to wetlands from construction would be consistent with those presented earlier in this section. At this time, it is assumed that construction of the CO2 pipeline would be authorized under a Nationwide Permit 12 (Utility Line Activities) issued by the USACE. A Nationwide Permit 12 authorizes the construction, maintenance, or repair of utility lines, including outfall and intake structures, and the associated excavation, backfill, or bedding for the utility lines, in all waters of the U.S., provided there is no change in pre-construction contours. Wetland mitigation is often required by USACE to allow activities to be performed in waters of the U.S. as part of the permitting process. Wetland mitigation offsets the loss of the benefits and functions of wetlands by providing an equivalent increase in benefits and functions in another area. There are five types of wetland mitigation: creation, restoration, enhancement, preservation, and the purchase of wetland mitigation credits from a wetland mitigation bank. If wetland mitigation is required, the magnitude and form of mitigation would be determined during the permitting process by USACE. Wetland mitigation would follow the USACE Rock Island District Compensatory Mitigation Policy for Illinois and would be determined through coordination with the USACE Rock Island District and St. Louis District, as needed and applicable. Floodplains Table 3.7-6 identifies the areas of mapped floodplains within the construction ROWs for the each of the proposed routes to the CO2 storage study area. Source: FEMA 2011 a. Construction ROW would be 80 feet wide. CO2 = carbon dioxide; ROW = right-of-way Construction of the proposed pipeline would result in minor direct temporary impacts to 100-year and 500-year floodplains. At any crossing of a perennial stream or waterbody (e.g., larger streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes), the Alliance would use trenchless technologies to construct the pipeline beneath the waterway and any associated floodplain, thereby avoiding impacts. For the largest crossings, such as beneath the Coon Creek Dike, soil boring may be required prior to horizontal directional drilling to characterize the underlying soils. These borings would likely be narrow-diameter, direct-push boreholes that would create negligible disturbance to adjacent waterbodies or floodplains. All boreholes would be properly closed in accordance with state regulations and restored to original grade. In areas where trenching occurs in floodplains, trenching would not be expected to increase flood hazards in the area or reduce the beneficial values of the floodplains. The installation of the pipeline through floodways would likely be covered under Statewide Permit No. 8 (Authorizing the Construction of Underground Pipeline and Utility Crossings), which authorizes the construction of pipelines beneath rivers, lakes, and streams. The temporary presence of construction equipment and soil piles in floodplains, however, could cause a minor temporary direct impact. By placing construction materials within the floodplain, flood flows could be impeded if a flooding event occurred during construction. It is not expected that this impact would reach a level of endangering human health or property or conflict with any state, local, or federal floodplain ordinances. Equipment and soil piles would be contained within the construction ROW and would represent relatively small obstructions for a short duration. As described earlier in this chapter, in order to avoid impacts from foreseeable flood events, the construction contractor would monitor official statements issued by the National Weather Service regarding flood potential in the project area. If such conditions are anticipated, the contractor would, to the extent possible, cease operations and move all equipment out of the floodplain prior to any flood occurrences. Following installation of the pipeline, excavated soils would be backfilled and all disturbed land areas would be returned to their original grade, to the extent practicable. Exposed soil areas would be reseeded with native vegetation. Although the pipeline itself would be buried, aboveground features would include meter stations and the launcher and receivers (start and end of the pipeline). Other aboveground features of the pipeline system would include:  Pipeline markers at all crossings;  Mainline block valve shelters;  Cathodic protection station markers; and  Temporary zinc anode site markers. Mainline block valves, used to isolate and contain any line leak, would be located approximately every 7.5 to 10 miles, on either side of major river crossings, at other waterbody crossings of more than 100 feet wide from high water mark to high water mark, and (optionally) at major road crossings. The Alliance has indicated that the mainline block valves would be located on high ground outside of floodplains to the extent possible. The Alliance has also indicated that the mainline block valves would be placed adjacent to existing roadways to the extent possible, to facilitate accessibility and avoid the need to construct access roads. Final placement of each mainline block valve and the need for access roads, if any, will not be determined until final design and siting are complete. Any aboveground features associated with the proposed pipeline would be small and widely-spaced along the operational ROW. If any aboveground features would be constructed in a floodplain, they would be constructed in accordance with the IAC and Morgan County Floodplain Ordinance as described in Section 3.7.1.5. This would minimize the potential for these structures to impede flood flows or reduce the beneficial value of these floodplains. Overall, minor impacts would be expected if structures are ultimately built within 100-year floodplains. The IDNR, Office of Water Resources, requires permits for various construction activities that occur in floodplains or floodways, under the Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act. Depending on the types and locations of proposed construction activities, the Alliance may be required to obtain either a Statewide Permit #6 (Minor, Non-Obstructive Floodway Construction Activities), Statewide Permit #8 (Underground Pipeline and Utility Crossings), or Statewide Permit #13 (Temporary Construction Activities) from IDNR prior to any construction activities. For both the southern route and northern route, the CO2 pipeline would cross underneath the portion of Coon Run that has been diked with a flood control levee. The Alliance would be required to obtain permission from USACE for this crossing. In addition, the Alliance would likely be required to consult with the Coon Run Levee and Drainage District prior to construction. The dike and the creek would be crossed using horizontal directional drilling and no direct impacts to the waterway would occur. However, it is important to ensure that construction beneath the dike does not adversely impact the stability of the dike. If the integrity of the dike were undermined, it could create a substantial flood hazard to the surrounding area. To obtain permission for this crossing, the Alliance would provide a construction plan, site layout plan, project schedule, communication plan, safety procedures, emergency procedures, company experience record, contingency plan, and drilling fluid management plan to the USACE. Should the Alliance receive USACE approval demonstrating adequate planning and design measures, negligible to minor impacts on flood hazards would be expected. In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the southern or northern pipeline routes, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed. In the event that the final pipeline routing results in additional impacts to floodplains, such impacts would be similar to those addressed above since any aboveground features associated with the proposed pipeline would be small and widely-spaced along the operational ROW. This section analyzed the impacts of the southern and northern pipeline routes, which end at the western border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area depends upon the final siting of the CO2 injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed in the next section, CO2 Storage Study Area. CO2 Storage Study Area The location(s) proposed for the CO2 injection wells and related facilities would occupy up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Approximately 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining acreage would be used for access roads to the well sites. See Section 2.5.2.2 for additional details about the proposed surface facilities. Approximately 28 acres would be utilized and disturbed during the construction of the injection and monitoring wells and associated facilities. In addition, up to 64 acres could be utilized and disturbed to support the construction of up to 7 miles of access roads. Wetlands Table 3.7-3 and Figure 3.7-4 identify the types, locations, and extents of NWI-mapped wetlands within the CO2 storage study area. For a more-detailed view of NWI wetlands, types, and locations, also refer to Figure C-6 in Appendix C, Map Views of Pipeline. Approximately 68 acres of wetlands are located within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area, representing 1.3 percent of this area. The majority of these wetlands are located immediately along Indian Creek on the north side of the study area, as well as along portions of Indian Creek’s largest tributaries. Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. In each of the siting scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have less impacts to wetlands and others would have greater impacts, while still representing reasonable paths. The Alliance would locate the injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1 such that they would avoid wetlands. Only realistic options were considered for the range of impacts to wetlands; a worst-case scenario was not developed, as this scenario would be unrealistic based on siting criteria described in Chapter 2. Even under various hypothetical scenarios, wetland impacts would be minimal. However, it is noted that wetland data used to support this analysis is based on NWI mapping and has not yet been field-verified through a formal wetland delineation. Therefore, it is possible that additional wetlands exist within the CO2 storage study area beyond those mapped by the NWI. Prior to construction, the Alliance would conduct a formal wetland delineation of all proposed construction areas. Based on NWI mapping, DOE estimates that the proposed end-of-pipeline spur from the terminus of either the proposed southern route or northern route (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) would not impact any wetlands. This conclusion would be validated through the completion of wetland delineations prior to the start of construction. Following the siting criteria detailed in Section 2.5.2.1, the Alliance would avoid regulated wetlands and waters of the U.S. during the formal design process of these proposed project components. Given the large area available within the study area compared to the relatively small size of proposed components, avoidance is feasible. Since no direct impact would occur to wetlands or waters of the U.S., no USACE wetland permitting would be required. While wetlands and waters of the U.S. would be avoided, it is possible that land-disturbing activities could occur near wetland areas. This could result in minor short-term indirect impacts of increased sedimentation to these features. Neither the USACE nor the state of Illinois regulates wetland buffer areas (i.e., those areas immediately adjacent to wetlands). Such indirect effects would be minimized through the implementation of a SWPPP required for NPDES permitting, which would include BMPs to control eroded sediments (e.g., use of filter fencing). Floodplains There are approximately 234 acres of FEMA-mapped 100-year floodplains within the CO2 storage study area as identified in Table 3.7-4 and Figure 3.7-4. The majority of these floodplains are located along and immediately adjacent to Indian Creek in the northern portion of the study area. The Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area; therefore, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. The Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1 such that they would avoid floodplains when practicable. A true, worst-case scenario for floodplain impacts was not analyzed, as this option would be unrealistic based on siting criteria described in Chapter 2. The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the southern route would not impact any 100-year floodplains. However, the hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the northern route would impact 0 to 0.87 acre of 100-year floodplains, a negligible floodplain impact due to pipeline construction. None of the hypothetical options would cross any 500-year floodplains. Following the siting criteria detailed in Section 2.5.2.1, the Alliance would avoid mapped floodplains during the formal design process of these proposed project components. The criteria stipulate that the entire proposed injection well site(s) must be above the floodplain to ensure low potential for flood damage to the well infrastructure. Given the large area available within the study area compared to the relatively small size and footprint of the proposed components, avoidance is feasible. Therefore, no impacts to floodplains would occur. Educational Facilities The educational facilities would be located either within existing structures or in proposed new structures on previously disturbed land with utility connections in or near Jacksonville. As such, it is unlikely that wetlands or floodplains would be present or affected. In the event that the educational facilities would require new construction, a wetland delineation and an analysis of floodplains on the proposed site would be conducted prior to construction. Since the location of the educational facilities is flexible within Jacksonville, it is anticipated that wetlands and floodplains would be avoided. 3.7.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center This section discusses potential effects to wetlands and floodplains that would occur during operation of the proposed project at and in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center. Wetlands Operation of the proposed oxy-combustion facility would not require the placement of fill material in or other disturbances to onsite wetland areas. Therefore, no effects to wetlands would be expected. Potential stormwater flows through onsite wetlands have been addressed in Section 3.7.3.1. These effects would be minor and could be beneficial to onsite wetlands. During operation and on lands it controls, the Alliance would permanently preserve onsite, delineated wetland areas with fencing and signage so that these areas are not inadvertently disturbed, mowed, or cleared of vegetation. Floodplains Operation of the oxy-combustion facility would not result in any additional floodplain effects beyond those discussed in Section 3.7.3.1. Therefore, no additional effects to floodplains would be expected. Over the operational life of the proposed project, the stormwater management basin could result in a slight reduction of potential flood hazards, as the basin’s purpose would be to infiltrate onsite stormwater and reduce surface water runoff entering the river. This impact would be considered positive or beneficial. CO2 Pipeline Wetlands Over the operational life of the proposed project, impacts to wetlands would be minimal. Minimal wetland impacts would result from maintenance activities, such as mowing, in close proximity to wetland areas. No mowing would be performed in wetland areas that occur within the operational ROW for the pipeline. Table 3.7-7 identifies NWI-mapped wetlands that are located within the operational ROWs associated with the southern and northern CO2 pipeline routes. Source: USFWS 2010a a. Operational ROW would be 50 feet wide. b. Acreage of NWI-mapped wetlands. c. No NWI-mapped wetlands are located within pipeline route ROW. d. Only includes ‘open water’ wetland type. CO2 = carbon dioxide; NWI = National Wetland Inventory; ROW = right-of-way In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from its preferred southern pipeline route, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed.  However, the Alliance has also indicated that trenching may occur in wetland areas encountered within agricultural lands, if any such features exist and are identified within the ROW. Although such areas are not anticipated to exist or are not expected to be considered jurisdictional, these areas would be re-contoured to their pre-construction states after construction activities were completed, and subsequently replanted with pre-existing crops. Therefore, wetlands affected during construction would continue to exist as functioning wetlands during the operational life of the proposed project (i.e., they would not be filled). The Alliance has indicated that maintenance activities within the operational ROW, such as mowing, would not be conducted in wetland areas. Therefore, no operational impacts would occur. Based on current NWI mapping and proposed construction techniques, no wetlands would be impacted by the proposed southern pipeline route and approximately 0.2 acre of open water would be avoided via horizontal directional drilling along the proposed CO2 pipeline northern route. However, the actual amount of wetlands within each proposed route could change based upon completion of a formal, site-specific wetland delineation, which would occur prior to construction. As stated earlier, the Alliance has indicated that maintenance activities within the operational ROW, such as mowing, would not be conducted in wetland areas. Therefore, no operational impacts would occur. Though not anticipated, if any wetlands are impacted by the final pipeline route, wetland mitigation may be required. Wetland mitigation is often required by USACE to allow activities to be performed in waters of the U.S. as part of the permitting process. Wetland mitigation offsets the loss of the benefits and functions of wetlands by providing an equivalent increase in benefits and functions in another area. There are five types of wetland mitigation: creation, restoration, enhancement, preservation, and the purchase of wetland mitigation credits from a wetland mitigation bank. If wetland mitigation is required, the magnitude and form of mitigation would be determined during the permitting process by USACE. Wetland mitigation would follow the USACE Rock Island District Compensatory Mitigation Policy for Illinois and would be determined through coordination with the USACE Rock Island District and St. Louis District, as needed and applicable. In the event that a pipeline in a wetland required maintenance that necessitated excavation to expose the pipe, wetland impacts would be minor and the same as those described for construction (see Section 3.7.3.1). Floodplains Over the operational life of the proposed project, impacts to floodplains would be negligible within the 50-foot wide operational ROW. Table 3.7-8 identifies floodplains that are located within the operational ROWs associated with the southern and northern routes. Source: FEMA 2011 a. Operational ROW would be 50 feet wide. CO2 = carbon dioxide; ROW = right-of-way Following construction, floodplain areas disturbed during pipeline installation would be restored to their original grades to the extent practicable. As identified in Section 3.7.3.1, if any aboveground features would be constructed in a floodplain, they would be constructed in accordance with the IAC and Morgan County Floodplain Ordinance as described in Section 3.7.1.5. As such, these features would result in negligible floodplain effects over the operational life of the proposed project. CO2 Storage Study Area No additional impacts to wetlands or floodplains, beyond those addressed in Section 3.7.3.1, would be anticipated during the operation of the pipeline across the CO2 storage study area to the injection wells. Wetlands No additional operational effects to wetlands beyond those discussed in Section 3.7.3.1 would be anticipated. Depending upon final siting of the proposed well sites, it is possible that the movement of vehicles on access roads and in parking areas in the immediate vicinity could impact adjacent wetlands. This activity would result in minimal amounts of additional sedimentation to wetlands if they occur nearby. Should they occur, these potential indirect impacts would be negligible. Floodplains No additional operational effects to floodplains beyond those discussed in Section 3.7.3.1 would be anticipated. Educational Facilities No additional operational effects to wetlands or floodplains beyond those discussed in Section 3.7.3.1 would be anticipated. 3.7.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to wetlands or floodplains. 3.8 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 3.8.1 Introduction This section describes the biological resources potentially affected by the construction and operation of all components of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. This section also analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of this project on these resources.  3.8.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for biological resources includes the areas within Morgan County potentially affected by the construction and operation of the proposed project. These areas include the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the injection wells, and the educational facilities. The ROI defines the extent of the areas where direct effects from construction and operation may be experienced, and it encompasses the areas where indirect effects from the proposed project would most likely occur. 3.8.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE reviewed a number of references to obtain information on the types of terrestrial and aquatic habitats and associated biological resources that could be affected by the proposed project. These included USFWS and state of Illinois lists and databases of protected species and habitats and state of Illinois ecological reports. In addition, DOE made observations of biological resources conditions at the Meredosia Energy Center and its vicinity during site visits in May 2011. DOE used this information to provide a description of the biological resources within the ROI in terms of the species and habitats present. DOE calculated quantitative estimates of potential direct terrestrial habitat loss utilizing GIS and land cover data. DOE made qualitative assessments of the overall direct and indirect effects to biological resources based on each component of the proposed project. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed project would:  Cause displacement of terrestrial or aquatic communities or loss of habitat;  Diminish the value of habitat for wildlife or plants;  Cause a decline in native wildlife populations;  Interfere with the movement of native resident or migratory wildlife species;  Conflict with applicable management plans for terrestrial, avian, and aquatic species and their habitat;  Cause the introduction of noxious or invasive plant species;  Diminish the value of habitat for fish species (including altering drainage patterns causing displacement of fish species or interfering with movement of native resident fish species);  Cause a decline in native fish populations;  Affect or displace endangered, threatened, or other special status species; or  Cause encroachment on or affect designated critical habitat of a federally-listed species. 3.8.1.3 Regulatory Framework Certain species, designated as threatened or endangered, are protected by the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, under the purview of the USFWS or NOAA Fisheries Service. While both agencies work to protect designated species, NOAA Fisheries Service has jurisdiction over marine resources within the United States’ Exclusive Economic Zone (i.e., water 3 to 200 miles offshore) (NOAA Fisheries Service 2012). Due to the nature and location of the proposed project, no marine offshore species would be affected. Any protected species present within the ROI would fall under the jurisdiction of the USFWS, and for this reason, DOE did not consult with NOAA Fisheries Service regarding this proposed project. The ESA prohibits the unauthorized “take” (i.e., harassment, harm, pursuit, hunting, shooting, wounding, killing, trapping, capture, collection, or the attempt to engage in any such conduct) of federally-protected species. Section 7 of the ESA requires all federal agencies to ensure that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by them is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a federally-protected species or adversely modify its designated “critical habitat.” Federally-protected species fall under one of two classifications:  Endangered, including species, subspecies, or varieties in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their range; and  Threatened, including species, subspecies, or varieties likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future. In addition, a species can be designated as “proposed” or “candidate.” This means that the species is being considered for protection as either endangered or threatened under the ESA. A proposed endangered or threatened species is one for which a proposed regulation, but not a final rule, has been published in the FR. A candidate species is one being considered for listing as endangered or threatened, but a proposed regulation has not yet been published in the FR. Until a final rule is published, a species designated as either proposed or candidate is not afforded any legal protection. To comply with Section 7 of the ESA, DOE sent a consultation letter to the USFWS Marion Illinois Ecological Services Office to request information on federally-listed species and their critical habitats within the ROI and to solicit comments on the proposed project. The USFWS responded with a letter dated August 16, 2011 and provided information about federally-listed species potentially occurring in Morgan, Christian, and Douglas counties that could be affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project (see Appendix B, Consultation Letters). Both the Alliance and DOE have continued dialogue with the USFWS regarding the proposed project and its potential effect on protected species. The Alliance also discussed the project with the IDNR to aid in project siting, determining the potential impacts to state-protected species, and determining the need to perform species-specific surveys. As all discussions between the Alliance and IDNR have been considered informal, Appendix B, Consultation Letters, does not include any consultation letters from this state agency. Under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940, both species are afforded certain protections. Should any bald eagle nests be found within the ROI during pre-construction nesting surveys, the Alliance and DOE would adhere to the following guidelines established by the USFWS (USFWS 2010b):  Maintain a buffer between proposed construction activities and active bald eagle nests. If the proposed construction includes the emplacement of linear utilities (e.g., the proposed pipeline) and the nest is visible from the site, this buffer should be at least 660 feet wide. This buffer should be at least 330 feet wide if the nest is not visible from the site. If a similar activity is currently ongoing within the preferred buffer distance, the proposed construction may maintain a similar buffer as the existing, tolerated activity.  Should construction occur within the recommended 660- or 330-foot wide buffer due to the existing presence of a similar activity, all clearing, construction, and landscaping would be limited to outside of the bald eagle nesting season (i.e., such activities should occur between early August and mid-July).  Maintain an established landscape buffer to screen an active nest from the proposed project. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 provides protection to approximately 1,017 migratory bird species. Migratory birds are defined as any bird species that lives, reproduces, or migrates within or across international borders during its annual life cycle. As such, migratory birds are present within the ROI at various periods throughout the year. The act prohibits the taking (i.e., hunting, wounding, killing, possessing, or transporting) of any migratory bird, their eggs, feathers, or nests (USFWS 2012a). The Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act of 1972 provides protection to species that are either in danger of becoming extinct in the state (designated as “endangered”) or are likely to become a state-endangered species (designated as “threatened”) as determined by the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board. Species designated as threatened or endangered are noted as being on the “Illinois List.” The Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act makes it unlawful to:  Possess, take (i.e., harm, hunt, shoot, pursue, lure, wound, kill, destroy, harass, spear, ensnare, trap, capture, collect, or attempt to engage in such conduct), transport, sell, offer for sale, give or otherwise dispose of any animal or the product thereof of any animal species that occurs on the Illinois List;  Deliver, receive, carry, transport or ship in interstate or foreign commerce plants listed as endangered by the federal government without an appropriate permit; or  Take (i.e., collect, pick, cut, dig up, kill, destroy, bury, crush, or harm in any manner) plants on the Illinois List without the express written permission of the landowner; or sell or offer for sale plants or plant products of endangered species on the Illinois List. 3.8.2 Affected Environment All components of the FutureGen 2.0 Project (i.e., at the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline corridor, CO2 storage study area, and the educational facilities) occur within the Interior River Valleys and Hills and the Central Corn Belt Plains Level III Ecoregions1 (Woods et al. 2006a; represented respectively by numbers 72 and 54 in Figure 3.8-1). The Interior River Valleys and Hills Level III Ecoregion consists of many wide, flat-bottomed terraced valleys, forested valley slopes, and dissected glacial till plains. Prior to settlement as a U.S. territory in the 1800s, bottomland forests, prairies, and marshes were common in the alluvial plain and the river channel, while mixed oak and oak hickory forests occupied the upland areas. Currently, the natural vegetation has largely been replaced by agriculture. Corn (Zea mays) and soybeans (Glycine max) are the major crops in this area (Woods et al. 2006b; USEPA 2010g). 1 Designed to serve as a spatial framework for research assessment and monitoring of ecosystems and ecosystem components, ecoregions denote areas within which lands and aquatic areas, vegetation communities, and habitats (and the type, quality, and quantity of environmental resources) are generally similar. For the purposes of this EIS, Omernik’s ecoregion classifications are used. This hierarchical system, also used by the USEPA, identifies distinct ecoregions on the basis of “the spatial patterns of both the living and non-living components of the region, such as geology, physiography, vegetation, climate, soils, land use, wildlife water quality, and hydrology” (National Atlas of the United States 2012). Phenomena generally used to make these differentiations between ecoregions include geology, physiography, vegetation, climate, soils, land use, wildlife, and hydrology. Different levels have been developed to describe ecoregions at varying scales. A Roman numeral classification scheme distinguishes between these levels. Level I is the broadest level, dividing North America into 15 ecological regions; Level II divides the continent into 50 levels; and Level III divides the continent into 85 levels. For most of the United States, the ecoregions have been further subdivided to Level IV, which includes hundreds of levels. Source: Woods et al.2006a Figure 3.8-1. Illinois Level III and IV Ecoregions Historically, the Central Corn Belt Plains Level III Ecoregion included extensive prairie communities intermixed with oak-hickory forests; however, European settlers replaced most of the native prairies with agricultural land. Extensive corn and soybean farms now dominate the dark, fertile soils of the Central Corn Belt Plains. Farms in this region also raise cattle, sheep, poultry, and especially hogs. Agricultural activities negatively affect stream chemistry, turbidity, and habitat throughout the area (Woods et al. 2006b). The ROI includes portions of four different Level IV Ecoregions. Moving from west to east, these include the Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain, River Hills, Western Dissected Illinoian Till Plain, and Illinois/Indiana Prairies (Woods et al. 2006a; see Figure 3.8-1). The presence of multiple Level IV Ecoregions in western and central Morgan County is primarily driven by proximity to the Illinois River, which is a major waterway with a large influence on the surrounding landscape. The following provides a brief description of each Level IV Ecoregion:  The Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain Level IV Ecoregion (Ecoregion 72d in Figure 3.8-1) encompasses the broad floodplains and low river terraces of the Mississippi River and its major tributaries upstream of the Mississippi’s confluence with the Missouri River, including much of the Illinois River. Both the alluvial plain and the river channel have been heavily modified in the last 100 years. Prior to 1800, bottomland forests, prairies, and marshes were common. Agricultural land uses have now largely replaced the natural vegetation (Woods et al. 2006b).  The River Hills Level IV Ecoregion (Ecoregion 72f in Figure 3.8-1) flanks the floodplains of the Mississippi, Illinois, and lower Sangamon Rivers in west central Illinois on dissected and forested hills, bluffs, cliffs, and ravines. Floodplain forests grow on bottomlands (Woods et al. 2006b).  The Western Dissected Illinoian Till Plain Level IV Ecoregion (Ecoregion 72i in Figure 3.8-1) is a well-dissected till plain with broad, nearly level ridges, and many forested slopes, ravines, and floodplains. In the early 1800s, forests covered well-drained slopes and sites capable of holding moderate amounts of moisture. Prairies were found on nearly level ridges. Marshes and wet prairie also occurred, but were not common. Agricultural land uses have now almost entirely replaced the native prairies. Steep slopes and ravines remain largely wooded, but forested acreage is considerably less than it was at the time of European settlement (Woods et al. 2006b).  The Illinois/Indiana Prairies Level IV Ecoregion (Ecoregion 54a in Figure 3.8-1) includes flat to rolling plains formed during the Wisconsinan glaciation. Naturally poorly drained, this area supported many ponds and swamps prior to European settlement. Settlers tiled, ditched, and drained the landscape to develop cropland. As dark, fertile soils characterize this ecoregion, farms flourished. Currently, croplands growing corn and soybeans and pastures supporting cattle, sheep, poultry, and hogs dominate the landscape (Woods et al. 2006b). Specific habitats occurring within the ROI include terrestrial and aquatic habitats. 3.8.2.1 Terrestrial Habitat Terrestrial habitats include agricultural land (including cropland and pastureland), developed land, forests (including deciduous forest and forested wetlands), and grassland. Agricultural Land Agricultural land is typically managed to support stands of a single plant species and is generally considered low-quality habitat. The lack of vegetative diversity leads to a lack of diversity in the species that inhabit these areas. Typical species encountered in agricultural areas include the following (IDNR 1997; IDNR 2001):  Vegetation: The inherent management of agricultural land precludes the establishment of native vegetation within cultivated areas. Native plants may still exist in fence rows, drainage ditches, or isolated forest islands.  Mammals: Mammal species found in such areas are generally limited to raccoon (Procyon lotor), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), coyote (Canis latrans), red fox (Vulpes vulpes) and various rodents.  Amphibians and Reptiles: Some amphibians (i.e., smallmouth salamander [Ambystoma texanum], American toad [Bufo americanus], western chorus frog [Pseudacris triseriata], and bullfrog [Rana catesbeiana]) can be found in agricultural areas if adequate breeding sites (e.g., ditches and flooded fields) are present. In addition, some reptile species, such as common garter snake (Thamnophis sirtalis) and fox snake (Elaphe vulpina), may also be present.  Birds: Agricultural land is generally considered poor-quality habitat for bird species, and such areas are generally utilized by many invasive species, including rock dove (Columba livia) and European starling (Sturnus vulgaris). A few native grassland species utilize agricultural land, including horned lark (Eremophila alpestris) and American crow (Corvus brachyrhynchos). Agricultural lands offer very little in terms of stopover habitat for migratory birds, but during migration and winter, a few species (e.g., American pipit [Anthus rubescens] and snow bunting [Plectrophenax nivalis]) forage over some fields. Developed Land Developed land, including “barren land,” predominates in areas disturbed by human action. The existing landscape, potentially including topography and vegetative communities, has been altered so that it no longer maintains its natural characteristics. Typical species found in developed areas include the following (IDNR 2001):  Vegetation: Plant species found in developed areas are typically those able to withstand human disturbance. These generally include weed species or invasive species, which provide low-quality habitat for animal species.  Mammals: The general low-quality nature of developed areas provides habitat for more common wildlife species that are capable of surviving near human activities and disturbances. Mammal species typically present in developed habitats include white-tailed deer, gray squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis), and raccoon; common smaller mammal species include house mouse (Mus musculus) and eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus). Certain bat species (e.g., big brown [Eptesicus fuscus] and little brown [Myotis lucifugus]) often roost in buildings and some can be present in developed habitats, foraging in areas with concentrations of flying insects (e.g., over stormwater drainage ditches).  Amphibians and Reptiles: Relatively few reptile and amphibian species are present in developed landscapes. Amphibians present could include western chorus frog, if adequate breeding sites are located in the area (e.g., ditches or other wet areas), and Fowler’s toad (Bufo fowleri). Reptile species present could include brown snake (Storeria dekayi) or others that can tolerate a wide range of ecological conditions.  Birds: Developed areas typically contain a mix of bird species due to artificial food sources provided by property owners and the overall variety of habitats that birds can exploit (e.g., maintained vegetation and buildings). Native bird species in developed areas include American crow, chipping sparrow (Spizella passerina), chimney swift (Chaetura pelagica), killdeer (Charadrius vociferus), and barn swallow (Hirundo rustica). Forests Forests typically provide diverse habitats for wildlife. Many species require forests to meet survival and breeding requirements. Overall, forests are the most biologically diverse terrestrial habitats in the ROI, particularly floodplain or wetland forests that offer nearby aquatic habitat. Examples of the types of wildlife generally associated with central Illinois forests include the following (IDNR 1997; IDNR 2000; IDNR 2001):  Vegetation: The plant species composition of each forest community is primarily driven by the soil moisture content, often related to relative elevation in the landscape and soil characteristics. Forested areas in the ROI, including deciduous forest and forested wetlands, contain a variety of tree species, such as: eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides), elm (Ulmus spp.), ash (Fraxinus spp.), silver maple (Acer saccharinum), northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa), red mulberry (Morus rubra), black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia), black oak (Quercus velutina), and sassafrass (Sassafras albidum). The understory, or shrubbery, of the forested areas contains species such as dogwood (Cornus spp.), multiflora rose (Rosa multiflora), and honeysuckle (Lonicera spp.). Herbaceous groundcover within the forested areas consists of species such as Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia), catchweed bedstraw (Galium aparine), giant ragweed (Ambrosia trifida), common pokeweed (Phytolacca americana), poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans), and greenbrier (Smilax spp.).  Mammals: Mammal species found in the ROI's forests include Eastern chipmunk (Tamias striatus), southern flying squirrel (Glaucomys volans), woodland vole (Microtus pinetorum), gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), gray squirrel, white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), raccoon, and white-tailed deer. Many bat species forage in forested habitats (e.g., little brown bat) and some roost under loose tree bark or in tree cavities (e.g., hoary bat [Lasiurus cinereus]).  Amphibians and reptiles: Amphibian and reptile species present in forested areas include slimy salamander (Plethodon glutinosus), eastern gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), spring peeper (Pseudacris crucifer), ground skink (Scincella lateralis), racer (Coluber constrictor), rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta), brown snake, and eastern hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos). Most amphibians also require aquatic habitats for breeding.  Birds: Overall, forest habitats are very important for migratory birds. For example, large concentrations of migratory birds may gather in forest habitats when bad weather forces them to stop in the area. Migrant bird species potentially encountered in forested areas include American woodcock (Scolopax minor), yellow-billed cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus), ruby-throated hummingbird (Archilochus colubris), great crested flycatcher (Myiarchus crinitus), red-eyed vireo (Vireo olivaceus), brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), wood thrush (Hylocichla mustelina), blue-gray gnatcatcher (Polioptila caerulea), and Kentucky warbler (Oporornis formosus). Resident bird species typically found in forested areas include blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata), black-capped chickadee (Poecile atricapillus), tufted titmouse (Baeolophus bicolor), Carolina wren (Thryothorus ludovicianus), and northern cardinal (Cardinalis cardinalis). Grasslands Grassland habitats typically consist of warm-season grasses, with tree species providing 10 percent cover or less. The majority of the existing grasslands represent disturbed areas; few remnants of original grassland habitat remain. Disturbance in these areas includes the alternation of the natural fire regime and fragmentation, which leads to increased susceptibility to invasion by exotic species, habitat degradation, and small isolated populations of native species (IDNR 2001).  Vegetation: Grassland/herbaceous (“open”) areas contain numerous species. Grasses consist mainly of Carex and Panicum species. Wildflower species present include false aster (Boltonia asteroides), Ohio spiderwort (Tradescantia ohiensis), violet (Viola spp.), goatsbeard (Tragopogon pratensis), and purple vetch (Vicia americana). Other herbaceous vegetation present in these areas includes species such as chive (Allium schoenoprasum), prickly pear cactus (Opuntia humifusa), common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), and milkweed (Asclepias spp.).  Mammals: Typical mammal species found in grassland habitats include the prairie vole (Microtus ochrogaster), woodland vole (Microtus pinetorum), and meadow jumping mouse (Zapus hudsonius).  Amphibians and reptiles: Amphibian and reptile species that typically inhabit grasslands include the prairie kingsnake (Lampropeltis calligaster), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and gopher snake (Pituophis menanoleucus).  Birds: A number of non-native bird species may utilize grasslands, such as European starling and rock dove. Native species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), grasshopper sparrow (Ammodramus savannarum), and northern harrier (Circus cyaneus). 3.8.2.2 Aquatic Habitat Wetlands, defined as “those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions” occur within the ROI. Specifically, a wetland delineation performed in 2011 identified two wetlands at the Meredosia Energy Center. Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, is dedicated to the discussion of wetlands and floodplains and provides additional details and analysis of these aquatic features within the ROI. The Illinois River is the largest surface water feature in the ROI, and lies adjacent to the northwest of the Meredosia Energy Center. The Illinois River begins at the point where the Des Plaines and Kankakee Rivers converge near the Will County and Grundy County lines in Illinois. The Illinois River flows for a distance of 273 miles, ultimately entering the Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois, approximately 40 miles north of St. Louis, Missouri. The Meredosia Energy Center is located between river miles 70 and 71 (i.e., between 70 and 71 miles from where the Illinois River meets the Mississippi River). The Illinois River is the largest tributary to the Mississippi River above the mouth of the Missouri River. Historically, waterways in the Illinois River Basin (or Illinois River watershed) have experienced loss of ecological integrity due to sedimentation of backwaters and side channels; degradation of tributary streams; increased water level fluctuations partially due to the operation of locks and dams; reduction of floodplain and tributary habitat and connectivity; and other adverse impacts caused by human activities. A dramatic loss in productive Illinois River Basin backwaters, side channels, and channel border areas due to excessive sedimentation is limiting ecological health and altering the character of the overall river system. In particular, the Illinois River has lost much of its critical spawning, nursery, and overwintering areas for fish; habitat for waterfowl and aquatic species; and backwater aquatic plant communities, limiting ecological health and altering the floodplain river system (USACE 2007). Section 303(d) of the CWA requires that states identify all waters where required pollution controls are not sufficient to attain or maintain applicable water quality standards and intended water uses, then implement appropriate measures to improve the water quality. As of 2012, the IEPA has identified 10 segments of the Illinois River (i.e., approximately 285 river miles) as impaired under Section 303(d). The USEPA approved each of these 10 impairments. One of these listed segments is the same portion of the Illinois River that forms the western boundary of Morgan County and is included in the ROI. Specifically, this river segment does not meet water quality standards for mercury, PCBs, and fecal coliform, rendering it unsuitable for fish consumption or primary contact recreation (IEPA 2012a). Refer to Section 3.6, Surface Water, for additional information regarding Section 303(d) waterways and the condition of this segment of the Illinois River. Despite this damage and degradation, the ecology of the Illinois River system remains relatively diverse and biologically productive. Fish diversity is relatively high, with 115 fish species present. Ninety-five (95) percent of these fish species are native. Many of these fish species require both riverine and backwater habitats as part of their life cycle (USACE 2007). The most abundant fish species in the Illinois River mainstem in the general vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center are gizzard shad (Dorosoma cepedianum) and emerald shiner (Notropis atherinoides). Several sport or commercially fished species are present, such as white bass (Morone chrysops), largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), and channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus). In addition, several non-native fish species are present, which have the potential to outcompete native fishes for resources. Examples of such non-native species include silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) and bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis), collectively referred to as “Asian carp”, as well as white perch (Morone americana) (Thomas 1999). A survey of mussel species in the Illinois River from 1993 to 1995, identified a total of 23 different species of Unionids (Family), as compared to 49 species present in the early 1900s. The most abundant species were threeridge (Amblema plicata), mapleleaf (Quadrula quadrula), deertoe (Truncilla truncata), fragile papershell (Leptodea fragilis), threehorn wartyback (Obliquaria reflexa), and giant floater (Pyganodon grandis). In addition, two non-native mussels were found between 1993 and 1995: zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) and Asian clam (Corbicula fluminea) (Whitney et al. 1997). Zebra mussel infestations have played a large role in declining native mussel populations. However, these infestations have subsided considerably since 1995 (USACE 2007). Other aquatic macroinvertebrate species of the Illinois River include mayflies (Order Ephemeroptera), fingernail clams (Pisidium spp.), midges (Family Chironomidae), and worms. Fingernail clams are a major food source for larger vertebrates (e.g., diving ducks). Fingernail clams suffered substantial population declines in the Illinois River in the 1950s (USACE 2007). Surface waters in the ROI support a large diversity of aquatic biota. Habitats range in size from small headwater streams to large lakes or reservoirs artificially created through impounding. Fish species may be specific to certain habitat types (e.g., small headwater streams). However, many fish species can be found in a variety of aquatic habitats, particularly fish species common in standing water (e.g., lakes and ponds). Examples of common aquatic species in the ROI (i.e., central Illinois) include the following (IDNR 1997; IDNR 2000; IDNR 2001):  Fish (streams) – creek chub (Semotilus atromaculatus), sand shiner (Notropis ludibundus), bluntnose minnow (Pimephales notatus), johnny darter (Etheostoma nigrum), and central stoneroller (Campostoma anomalum);  Fish (rivers) – channel catfish, bullhead minnow (Pimephales vigilax), gizzard shad (Dorosoma cepedianum), smallmouth buffalo (Ictiobus bubalus), and freshwater drum (Aplodinotus grunniens);  Fish (standing water) – largemouth bass, bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), green sunfish (Lepomis cyanellus), and white crappie (Pomoxis annularis);  Mussels – pimpleback (Quadrula pustulosa), plain pocketbook (Lampsilis cardium), fragile papershell, mapleleaf, and white heelsplitter (Lasmigona complanata);  Crustaceans – virile crayfish (Orconectes virilis), Caecidotea intermedia (isopod), and Hyalella azteca (amphipod); and  Other Macroinvertebrates – segmented worms (e.g., Aeolosoma hemprichi), leeches (e.g., Helobdella stagnalis), mayflies (e.g., Acentrella ampla), damselflies (e.g., Hetaerina titia), and snails (e.g., Micromenetus dilatatus). Aquatic habitats offer an important landscape feature for several species of birds – open, permanent water with a near-shore shallow water area (littoral zone). Species such as great blue heron (Ardea herodias), Canada goose (Branta canadensis), mallard (Anas platyrhynchos), and wood duck (Aix sponsa) often nest along forested streams and rivers. Species such as common grackle (Quiscalus quiscula), red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus), and song sparrow (Melospiza melodia) often nest on the shores of lakes and ponds. Species such as barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) and belted kingfisher (Ceryle alcyon) often forage over lakes and ponds. Overall, the most important role of lakes, ponds, and impoundments for birds are as resting habitat for migratory water birds (IDNR 1997; IDNR 2000; IDNR 2001). The Illinois River is a major component of the internationally significant Mississippi River Flyway, a route followed by migratory birds between Canada and the Gulf Coast. The Mississippi River Flyway is utilized by 40 percent of all North American waterfowl and nearly half of all North American bird species (Audubon Society 2012). While not classified as an Audubon Important Bird Area, a survey conducted in the fall of 1994 found that 81 percent of the fall waterfowl migration in the Mississippi Flyway utilized the Illinois River (USACE 2007). The USFWS established a refuge in 1973 to provide habitat and protection to migratory birds utilizing the Mississippi River Flyway, and specifically the Illinois River. The 3,582-acre Meredosia National Wildlife Refuge is located approximately 2 miles north of the Meredosia Energy Center and, when complete, will provide a range of vital habitats, including seasonal wetlands and permanent marsh (USFWS 2012b). 3.8.2.3 Protected Species Table 3.8-1 provides a summary of the federally- and state-protected species identified as potentially occurring in the ROI. As noted above, DOE determined these species using USFWS and IDNR county distribution lists, and the results of ongoing consultations with these agencies (USFWS 2012c; IDNR 2011). As requested by the IDNR, information regarding the specific locations of state-listed protected species is not included in this EIS. Four federally-listed species potentially occur in Morgan County: decurrent false aster (Boltonia decurrens), eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthera leucophaea), Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis), and sheepnose mussel (Plethobasus cyphyus) (USFWS 2012c). Each of these four federally-listed species receives its protected status from the USFWS based on the effects of habitat conversion. The decurrent false aster naturally inhabits wet prairies along the Illinois and Mississippi rivers, but wetlands in these areas are being drained and modified to serve agricultural purposes (53 FR 45858). The eastern prairie fringed orchid thrives in natural prairie habitat, but much of the species’ native range has been converted for crop fields or grazing, drained, or modified to reduce the risk of fires (54 FR 39857). The Indiana bat typically roosts under the loose bark of dead or dying trees and forage along edges of forested areas. Reasons for the bat's decline include disturbance of colonies by human beings, pesticide use and loss of summer habitat resulting from the clearing of forest cover (72 FR 19015). The sheepnose mussel has suffered a 67 percent decline in occupied rivers as many stretches of large river habitat has been impounded in recent years. Small remaining populations are now isolated from each other, leaving all sheepnose mussels at risk of extinction (USFWS 2012d). However, no critical habitat for these federally-listed species has been identified within Morgan County. Thirteen additional species protected under the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, listed by the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board and included in the Illinois Natural Heritage Database, have been identified in Morgan County: blue hearts (Buchnera americana), bunchflower (Melanthium virginicum), ebonyshell (Fusconaia ebena), Hall’s bulrush (Schoenoplectus hallii), Illinois chorus frog (Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis), lined snake (Tropidoclonion lineatum), loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus), ottoe skipper (Hesperia ottoe), pale false foxglove (Agalinis skinneriana), pink milkwort (Polygala incarnata), regal fritillary, starhead topminnow (Fundulus dispar), and upland sandpiper (Bartramia longicauda) (IDNR 2011; see Table 3.8-1). In addition to the species listed above, the state-endangered bent milkvetch (Astragalus distortus) is listed as occurring in some Illinois counties, but not currently within Morgan County. A qualified biologist identified a population of bent milkvetch at the Meredosia Energy Center during a field survey for other species. This population has been flagged, brought to the attention of the IDNR, and included in Table 3.8-1. Table 3.8-1. Federally- and State-Protected Species Potentially Occurring in Morgan County Suitable Common Habitat Scientific Name Statusa Typical Habitat Name Within ROI? X X X X X X Plants Blue hearts Bunchflower Decurrent false aster Hall’s bulrush Buchnera americana Boltonia decurrens Schoenoplectus hallii Polygala Pink milkwort incarnata Mussels SE ST ST FT, ST FT ST ST SE Insects Amphibians Fish Mammals Illinois chorus frog  Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis  ST  Sand prairies and cultivated fields, open sandy areas of river lowlands. Eggs and larvae develop in flooded fields, ditches, sloughs, small ponds, or other temporary bodies of water.  X  Table 3.8-1. Federally- and State-Protected Species Potentially Occurring in Morgan County Suitable  Common Name  Scientific Name  Statusa  Typical Habitat  Habitat Within  ROI?  Birds  Bald eagle   Pb  Loggerhead shrike  Lanius ludovicianus  SE    SE  Sources: Flora of North America, undated; IDNR 1997; IDNR 1998; IDNR 2000; IDNR 2001; Herkert and Ebinger 2002; IDNR 2003; Hill 2006; Minnis et al. 2006; NatureServe 2010; Battelle 2011a; IDNR 2011; Missouri Department of Conservation 2011;Smithsonian 2012; and USFWS 2012c. a FE = federally endangered; FT = federally threatened; P = protected; SE = state endangered in Illinois; ST = state threatened b. Although no longer protected under the ESA (USFWS 2012c), the bald eagle is still federally protected under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940. ESA = Endangered Species Act; ROI = region of influence; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 3.8.2.4 Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center and its vicinity are located in Morgan County, Illinois. The project ROI includes the entire 263-acre property. Of this total area, approximately 164 acres may experience direct impacts from construction of the proposed project. Table 3.8-2 provides a summary of the land cover types in the potential disturbance areas at the Meredosia Energy Center based on recent aerial photographs and data provided by the USDA/NRCS (2001). Land cover types typically indicate the habitat in the area and thus the wildlife or plant communities potentially present. Based on these data, the areas of proposed disturbance at the Meredosia Energy Center are primarily developed land or grasslands. Figure 3.8-2 depicts these areas. Table 3.8-2. Land Cover Types within Potential Areas of Disturbance at the Meredosia Energy Center Land Cover Type Acres Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 a. A wetland delineation conducted at the Meredosia Energy Center only identified less than 1 acre of emergent wetlands and did not identify any onsite forested wetlands (see Figure 3.8-2). This delineation encompassed only the Meredosia Energy Center; no delineation has yet been performed along the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor or at the proposed CO2 storage study area. See Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, for more information. CO2 = carbon dioxide Terrestrial Habitats The Meredosia Energy Center and its vicinity are located entirely within the Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain Level IV Ecoregion (Woods et al. 2006a; see Figure 3.8-1). As described in Section 3.8.2, this Level IV Ecoregion encompasses the broad floodplains and low river terraces of the Mississippi River and its major tributaries above the Mississippi’s confluence with the Missouri River, including much of the Illinois River. The terrestrial habitats of the Meredosia Energy Center and its vicinity consist of developed industrial land for the energy center infrastructure with areas of maintained grasslands and non-contiguous forested “islands” (see Figure 3.8-2). Aquatic Habitat While no natural aquatic features are present on the 263-acre Meredosia Energy Center property, a man-made bottom ash pond and a man-made fly ash pond exist along the western site boundary. The ponds were associated with energy center operations prior to the suspension of operations in 2011. Due to their man-made and industrial nature, coupled with regular disturbance, these aquatic features provide low habitat values. A wetland delineation performed in May 2011 identified two wetlands along the eastern property boundary of the Meredosia Energy Center (see Figure 3.7-1). As discussed in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, these two wetlands encompass approximately 0.37 acre and 0.26 acre, respectively, and, though not currently classified, would be described as scrub-shrub or shallow marsh or wet meadow by the IWI. A Jurisdictional Determination conducted by the USACE in August 2011 confirmed the results of this delineation and declared these two wetlands as waters of the U.S., subject to USACE jurisdiction under Section 404 of the CWA. No other wetlands have been identified within the potential impact areas at the energy center. Refer to Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains, for additional information regarding wetlands. In 2002, a mussel survey identified four mussel beds in the Illinois River in the area of the Meredosia Energy Center (IDOT 2011). In addition, the Illinois Natural Areas Inventory identifies five areas in the Illinois River within approximately 2 miles downstream of the Meredosia Energy Center that are classified as Category VI natural areas. Category VI denotes areas of “unusual concentrations of flora or fauna” (IDNR 2009b). Presumably, in this case, this designation identifies mussel beds. It is important to note that the federally-listed sheepnose mussel is extirpated from the Illinois River and the Category VI designation does not relate to protected species or specifically high-quality habitats. Protected Species Based on existing habitats and consultation with the USFWS, bald eagle, decurrent false aster, and Indiana bat are the only federally-protected species with the potential to occur at the Meredosia Energy Center. Similar habitat analyses and consultation with the IDNR identified that the bent milkvetch, Illinois chorus frog, regal fritillary, and ebonyshell are the only state-protected species with the potential to occur at the Meredosia Energy Center or within the adjacent segment of the Illinois River (Battelle 2011a; IDOT 2011). Refer to Table 3.8-1 for more information regarding protected species. The list below summarizes the federally- and state-listed species with the potential to occur at the energy center.  Bald eagle – federally protected. Although no longer protected by the USFWS under the ESA (USFWS 2012c), the bald eagle is still federally protected under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940 (see Section 3.8.1.3). The bald eagle has been documented perching in trees along the Illinois River in the area of the Meredosia Energy Center (IDOT 2011; Ong 2012). Bald eagles typically nest in larger trees within 0.5 mile of a body of water with an unobstructed view of the water, primarily in undeveloped areas with little human activity. Bald eagles feed on fish primarily and nest near waterbodies (USFWS 2011b). As such, while no bald eagle nests have yet been observed in the area, the bald eagle may be present at or near the Meredosia Energy Center.  Bent milkvetch – state endangered. The IDNR identifies bent milkvetch as a state-endangered plant species protected by the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act. This species has been observed on the grounds of the Meredosia Energy Center site in a survey conducted by the Alliance. The areas containing the observed plants have been flagged and reported to Ameren; no additional bent milkvetch populations have currently been identified within the ROI (Lagesse 2012a; see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E2]).  Decurrent false aster – federally threatened and state threatened. Decurrent false asters may be present to the west of the Meredosia Energy Center site in an area that is periodically submerged within the Illinois River channel. During a March 2012 site visit, several asters were observed in this area; however, the specimens were dead and dried and could not be identified to the species level. It is unknown if these specimens were decurrent false aster. During a site visit in May 2011, several false asters (Boltonia asteroides), a non-listed, common species, were observed in the same general area. This may indicate that the dead specimens were the same common species and not the federally-listed species. However, this is not known, and this species may be present to the west of the Meredosia Energy Center.  Ebonyshell – state threatened. While not located within the proposed barge unloading area, the ebonyshell have been identified within the Illinois River. This species may be present in one of the five mussel beds identified within 2 miles downstream of the energy center in 2002 (IDOT 2011). Although this species has not been found onsite, it may occur within the immediate vicinity.  Illinois chorus frog – state threatened. During a site visit in May 2011, DOE personnel delineated two relatively small wetland areas in a low area near the site boundary along Old Naples Road containing standing water at the surface (see Figure 3.8-2). These small wetland areas could provide Illinois chorus frog breeding habitat, as the Illinois chorus frog has been documented at a larger wetland located directly across Old Naples Road to the east (IDOT 2011). Considering the close proximity to the documented occurrence, it is possible that Illinois chorus frog may occur in these small, onsite wetland areas. While no Illinois chorus frogs were found on the site during a spring 2012 survey of the potential impact areas, there is still potential that they could be present on the site (LaGesse 2012b; see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E1]). It is important to note that the lack of observations could also be a result of the unusually high temperatures and drought conditions present during the 2012 survey period.  Indiana bat – federally threatened. Although not listed by the USFWS as occurring in Morgan County, the Alliance has consulted with the USFWS and determined that suitable summer habitat may exist within the ROI. The USDA/NRCS identified approximately 35 acres of forested land cover at the Meredosia Energy Center in 2001. Indiana bats roost under the loose bark of dead or dying trees and forage along edges of forested areas. As such, though no Indiana bats have yet been observed in the area, individuals may be encountered in the forested areas at the Meredosia Energy Center.  Regal fritillary – state threatened. Onsite grasslands could provide habitat for the regal fritillary butterfly. Regal fritillaries require large numbers of violet plants (on the order of hundreds of plants per square yard) for population viability as violets serve as the sole food plants for regal fritillary larvae. DOE performed a survey for violet plants and regal fritillaries in potential disturbance areas at the Meredosia Energy Center in the spring of 2012. The state-threatened butterfly and its habitat were both identified onsite during this survey (LaGesse 2012a; see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E2]). 3.8.2.5 CO2 Pipeline The ROI associated with the CO2 pipeline includes the entire CO2 pipeline corridor, which includes approximately 69,875 acres in Morgan County, Illinois. The CO2 pipeline corridor includes portions of three different Level IV Ecoregions, including the Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain, River Hills, and Western Dissected Illinoian Till Plain (Woods et al. 2006a). Refer to Section 3.8.2 for a discussion of each of these ecoregions. DOE has not performed site-specific surveys to document biological resources present within the CO2 pipeline corridor. DOE would be able to initiate any required surveys after the Alliance determines the final pipeline route and is granted site access from the appropriate land owners. This section provides a general summary of the land cover occurring within this corridor based on data provided by the USDA/NRCS (see Table 3.8-3). As this data dates from 2001, the specific acreages of each land cover type may have changed over time. Table 3.8-3. Land Cover Types within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor and CO2 Storage Study Area CO2 Pipeline Corridor CO2 Storage Study Area Land Cover Type (acres) (acres) Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 CO2 = carbon dioxide Terrestrial Habitat Agricultural Land The majority (74 percent) of the terrestrial landscape within the CO2 pipeline corridor is agricultural, comprised of cropland and pastureland. Primary crops cultivated in this area include corn and soybeans. Forests Forested lands comprise approximately 19 percent of the CO2 pipeline corridor. Most forested habitats within the ROI exist along streams and rivers where the terrain is too steep to plow or in areas set aside by government agencies for conservation and recreation. Aquatic Habitat Aquatic habitats, including herbaceous wetlands and open water, comprise approximately 1 percent of the CO2 pipeline corridor. Aquatic habitats in the ROI include several surface waters, the most prominent of which include: Willow Creek, Coon Run, Spring Run, Mud Creek, Indian Creek, Lick Branch, Snake Creek, Conover Branch, and an upper tributary to Indian Creek (Battelle 2011a). Refer to Section 3.6, Surface Water, for additional information regarding surface water features within the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor. Protected Species Federally- and state-listed species known to occur or potentially occurring within the CO2 pipeline corridor include the following (Battelle 2011a; LaGesse 2012a; see Table 3.8-1):  Decurrent false aster – federally threatened. According to the IDNR, this species is known to occur approximately 1.5 miles northwest and approximately 2.5 miles south of the proposed southern pipeline route (Battelle 2011a). No other populations of this species have been identified within the CO2 pipeline corridor (i.e., no decurrent false asters have been observed within the proposed southern or northern pipeline routes). However, this species has potential to occur on streambanks and lake shores in the ROI.  Eastern prairie fringed orchid – federally threatened. It is possible that this species could occur in lowland or wetland areas in the ROI. The primary habitat of the eastern prairie fringed orchid consists of moist to wet prairies and meadows. Based on land cover data, relatively limited grassland/herbaceous and emergent herbaceous wetland land cover exists within the CO2 pipeline corridor (see Table 3.8-3). However, this species has potential to occur in lowland or wetland areas in the ROI.  Pale false foxglove – state threatened. This plant species has been found by IDNR approximately 0.75 mile north of the proposed southern pipeline route in the vicinity of the Northeast Meredosia Nature Preserve (Battelle 2011a). This sighting represents the only known occurrence of this species within the CO2 pipeline corridor. However, this species has potential to occur in moist to wet sandy prairies and on loess hill prairies in the ROI.  Regal fritillary – state threatened. This species is known to occur approximately 2 to 3.5 miles from the proposed southern pipeline route, according to the IDNR (Battelle 2011a), as well as at the Meredosia Energy Center (see Section 3.8.2.4). A survey for individuals and habitat performed in spring 2012 identified 14 populations of violets, this species' sole larval food source, within the CO2 pipeline corridor. In addition, emergent male and female adult regal fritillary butterflies were observed within the CO2 pipeline corridor during the 2012 survey (see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E2]).  Illinois chorus frog – state threatened. While past surveys observed this species adjacent to the proposed southern pipeline route, a more recent survey, conducted in March 2012, did not identify any Illinois chorus frogs in the ROI (LaGesse 2012b). However, this species has potential to occur in wetland areas in the ROI.  Loggerhead shrike – state endangered. This bird has been observed in the northern portion of the CO2 pipeline corridor, approximately 1.3 miles from the southern pipeline route. There have been no additional reported occurrences in the ROI. However, this species has potential to nest in scattered shrubs and trees in the ROI. 3.8.2.6 CO2 Storage Study Area The 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area is entirely located within the Western Dissected Illinoian Till Plain Level IV Ecoregion (Woods et al. 2006a). Refer to Section 3.8.2 for a description of this ecoregion and a list of the land cover types (including associated flora and fauna) expected to occur there. Table 3.8-3 presents a summary of land cover types within the CO2 storage study area, which is dominated (91 percent) by agricultural lands. There are no known occurrences of federally- or state-protected species in the CO2 storage study area (Battelle 2011a). The Alliance performed site-specific surveys for federally- and state-protected species to support development of the stratigraphic well. These surveys identified no federally- or state-protected species or their habitats in the area (SES 2011b; see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E4]). The Alliance also conducted a survey for federally- and state-protected species at the preliminary locations for soil gas monitoring within the CO2 storage study area (see Appendix E, Biological Surveys [E3]). This survey was limited to seven monitoring sites comprising less than 50 square feet in total, all of which were located adjacent to county roads. No federally- or state-protected species were observed during this investigation. No other biological surveys have been conducted elsewhere on the CO2 storage study area.  3.8.2.7 Educational Facilities Educational facilities are proposed to be located in or near Jacksonville, Morgan County, Illinois on up to 2.3 acres of land. Land cover in Jacksonville consists primarily of developed land, while the majority of the surrounding area consists of agricultural land with small, interspersed areas of forests, mostly around surface waters. The developed lands within Jacksonville and nearby agricultural lands offer limited habitat for wildlife, while wooded riparian areas likely offer the highest quality and most diverse habitat. There are numerous streams in the area, including Mauvaise Terre Creek and Big Sandy Creek, which feed Mauvaise Terre Lake and Lake Jacksonville, respectively. Generalized descriptions of terrestrial and aquatic habitats and the types of species anticipated to be present are described in Section 3.8.2. 3.8.3 Impacts of Proposed Action The ROI for the FutureGen 2.0 Project consists of the 263-acre Meredosia Energy Center and its vicinity, the 69,875-acre CO2 pipeline corridor, the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area, and the educational facilities in or near Jacksonville. Of the approximately 75,500 acres included in the ROI, up to approximately 512 acres would be disturbed during construction, of which a potential maximum of approximately 174 acres would be permanently disturbed or lost for operation of the project. Table 3.8-4 identifies the acreages of each land cover type that could be temporarily and permanently lost at the Meredosia Energy Center and within the ROW for each of the two proposed CO2 pipeline routes. In addition to the totals shown in Table 3.8-4, construction of the proposed CO2 injection wells, monitoring wells, and associated facilities would require the disturbance of approximately 28 acres of unknown land cover (most likely agricultural land). Up to an additional 64 acres would be disturbed for construction of access roads to these injection well site(s). Of these totals, 10 acres would be permanently lost for the operational footprint for the injection and monitoring wells and surface facilities, while 15 acres would be permanently lost for the operational footprint of associated access roads. The construction of the proposed educational facilities would require 3.5 acres and result in the permanent loss of approximately 2.3 acres of most likely developed land. As shown in Table 3.8-4, agricultural land would experience the greatest impact from the proposed project. However, the potential maximum of 309 impacted acres of agricultural land (i.e., 217 acres along the proposed northern CO2 pipeline route and 92 acres at the injection well site[s]) represents only 0.4 percent of the total ROI. With the exception of the 25 acres permanently dedicated for the siting of the injection wells and associated infrastructure, all agricultural lands could be returned to their current, productive use after construction. The following subsections discuss potential impacts to land cover types and the species that inhabit them for each of the project components. Table 3.8-5 presents the likelihood of the proposed project to affect federally- and state-protected status species potentially occurring within the ROI. By conducting further consultation with the USFWS and IDNR and implementing appropriate conservation measures (potentially including conducting preconstruction surveys; developing and implementing a conservation plan; and obtaining required permits), the proposed project would not be expected to adversely affect any federally- or state-protected species. Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 a. The source data used to calculate the acreages included in this table identified approximately 26 acres of water features; however, an examination of aerial photographs and a site visit confirmed that these water features were a coal storage area. The only onsite water features located within the proposed impact areas at the Meredosia Energy Center are the two wetlands totaling 0.63 acre described in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains. As discussed in Section 3.7, construction of the proposed project would avoid impacts to these wetlands. CO2 = carbon dioxide Table 3.8-5. Potential for Effects to Protected Species Potentially Occurring within the Region of Influence DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 3.8-20 Potentially Occurring Within: Common Meredosia Statusa Potential for Effect CO2 Pipeline CO2 Storage Educational Name Energy Corridor  Study Area Facilities Center  Plants Decurrent FT, ST false aster The proposed project may result in minor effects to the decurrent false aster. Appropriate habitat exists within the ROI and individuals have been observed within the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor; however, no individuals have been observed in areas that would be directly impacted by the proposed project. The Alliance and DOE would perform a pre-construction survey for this species X X  within suitable habitat found at the Meredosia Energy Center and along the finalized CO2 pipeline route. If this species is identified, the Alliance and DOE would consult with the USFWS and IDNR to develop and implement appropriate conservation measures to minimize potential impacts. X The proposed project may result in minor adverse effects to the  pale false foxglove. This species has been sighted within the CO2  pipeline corridor. If suitable habitat would be impacted by project  Pale false foxglove  ST  activities, the Alliance and DOE would perform a pre-construction survey within the proposed final CO2 pipeline route prior to initial  X   land clearing. If this species is identified, the Alliance and DOE  would consult with the IDNR to develop and implement appropriate  conservation measures to minimize potential impacts.  Table 3.8-5. Potential for Effects to Protected Species Potentially Occurring within the Region of Influence DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 3.8-21 Potentially Occurring Within: Common Meredosia Statusa Potential for Effect CO2 Pipeline CO2 Storage Educational Name Energy Corridor  Study Area Facilities Center  Mussels Ebonyshell ST X Insects Regal fritillary  ST  The proposed project may result in minor adverse effects to the regal fritillary. The Alliance and DOE have surveyed grasslands at the Meredosia Energy Center and within the CO2 pipeline corridor. Adult regal fritillaries and appropriate habitat were observed (LaGesse 2012a). The Alliance and DOE would continue to consult with the IDNR to develop and implement appropriate conservation measures to minimize potential impacts.  X  X  Amphibians X X DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 3.8-22 Table 3.8-5. Potential for Effects to Protected Species Potentially Occurring Within the Region of Influence (continued) Potentially Occurring Within:  Common Name  Statusa  Potential for Effect  Meredosia Energy Center  CO2 Pipeline CO2 Storage Corridor Study Area  Educational Facilities  Reptiles  Lined snake ST X Birds Pb Bald eagle X X Table 3.8-5. Potential for Effects to Protected Species Potentially Occurring Within the Region of Influence (continued) Birds (continued) DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 3.8-23 SE X X Mammals Indiana bat  FE  The proposed project may result in minor adverse effects to the Indiana bat. This species roosts beneath loose bark of dead and dying trees. The Alliance and DOE would survey forested areas in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center and within the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor. If any individuals are encountered, the Alliance and DOE would consult with the USFWS to develop and implement appropriate conservation measures to minimize potential impacts.  X  X  a. FE = federally endangered; FT = federally threatened; P = protected; SE = state endangered in Illinois; ST = state threatened in Illinois. b.  Although no longer protected under the ESA (USFWS 2012c), the bald eagle is still federally protected under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940. CO2 = carbon dioxide; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; ESA = Endangered Species Act; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; ROI = region of influence; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 3.8.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center This section analyzes impacts of the construction of the proposed project at the Meredosia Energy Center. A maximum of 33 acres of forested land could be lost as a result of construction in this area. If it is determined that any special status species or their habitat could be affected by the proposed project, the Alliance and DOE would work with IDNR and USFWS to develop and implement appropriate conservation measures to minimize potential impacts to these species. Vegetation and Habitats – Meredosia Energy Center Table 3.8-4 identifies the amount of each land cover type that could be either temporarily disturbed or permanently displaced with implementation of the proposed project at the Meredosia Energy Center. As shown in that table, implementation of the proposed project could disturb approximately 33 acres of forested habitat, which would effectively be permanently lost due to the long period required for regeneration of the forested habitat. Construction would also temporarily disturb up to 30 acres of grassland vegetation and permanently impact up to 17 acres of grassland (USDA/NRCS 2001). Refer to Figure 3.8-2 for the current locations of these land cover types at the Meredosia Energy Center. Within permanent impact areas, vegetation and habitats would be permanently converted to a non-vegetated state (i.e., industrial facilities, pavement, etc.). Within temporary disturbance areas, vegetation would be removed during construction, but the areas would be re-vegetated with native grassland species following construction. Overall, potential impacts to vegetation and wildlife habitats within the boundaries of the Meredosia Energy Center site would be minor. This area is a heavily developed, industrial landscape that provides low-quality wildlife habitat. During earth-disturbing activities, some smaller, less-mobile species, such as rodents, may perish, most likely due to collisions with equipment. However, these species are common, and losses would not be expected at a magnitude that would have population-level effects. Vegetation and Habitats – Immediate Vicinity The temporary barge unloading facility that would be used during construction, would be located near the eastern bank of the Illinois River, to the north of the Meredosia Energy Center site. Two options are being evaluated for barge unloading operations: (1) using mooring dolphins, or (2) grounding the barges on the river bottom. Both options would require disturbance to the riverbed. Section 3.6, Surface Water, describes the potential impacts of these options on local aquatic conditions. The use of mooring dolphins would require installation of support piles driven into the riverbed. This would consist of a single disturbance during installation of three to five mooring dolphins (pilings) no greater than 48 inches in diameter (less than 100 square feet of disturbance in total). All mooring dolphins emplaced during this process would be removed after all modules have been delivered to the Meredosia Energy Center, expected to occur in early 2016. The emplacement and subsequent removal of mooring dolphins would disturb the riverbed and cause a slight increase in downstream sedimentation. The use of mooring dolphins could result in potential indirect, less-than-significant adverse effects to biological resources. Grounding the barges on the river bottom would result in greater disturbance to the riverbed. Approximately 18,360 square feet (0.4 acre) of riverbed would be directly affected during each grounding and unloading event. The river bottom would be prepared by removing any large objects that may puncture the barge. If necessary, rip-rap or other suitable material would be placed on the river bottom to provide a foundation for the barge, prevent damage, and minimize riverbed impacts. All rip-rap emplaced during this process would be removed after all modules have been delivered to the Meredosia Energy Center. The emplacement and removal of rip-rap would disturb the Illinois River riverbed and increase downstream sedimentation. While the sedimentation in and of itself would be considered a minor impact, this segment of the Illinois River has been designated as impaired under Section 303(d) of the CWA (see Section 3.6, Surface Water). The impaired designation is due, in part, to the presence of heavy metals (i.e., mercury and PCBs). When released into water, such heavy metals settle out of the water column and into the riverbed sediments. The emplacement or removal of rip-rap or grounding of a barge could disturb these contaminated sediments and re-suspend heavy metals into the water column. The re-suspension of mercury and PCBs could result in an indirect adverse impact to biological resources. The concentrations of buried contaminants within the sediment and the area potentially affected by re-suspension remain unknown at this time. However, increased exposure to or intake of these contaminants could result in a moderate adverse impact to local species within the in-water construction area. Re-suspended contaminants would disperse and dilute after entering the water column, possibly resulting in minor adverse effects downstream. The Alliance and DOE would coordinate with the USFWS, IDNR, and USACE to determine the potential extent of such impacts; develop and implement appropriate conservation measures; and determine the permits required to perform this work. Through this consultation and the implementation of appropriate conservation measures, potential adverse effects could be further reduced. More mobile species (e.g., fish) would likely avoid the area of impact as barges approach, although it is possible that fish species could incur inadvertent mortality as barges are grounded or mooring dolphins are driven into the riverbed. Adverse mortality impacts to other less-mobile aquatic species would be expected to be minor, considering that a relatively small area would be disturbed over a short period of time and that the Alliance and DOE would survey the affected length of the Illinois River and local downstream areas to ensure no protected species are present. Minor benthic habitat modification would occur as a result of the proposed riverbed disturbances, although the effect would likely be short term, as aquatic life would be expected to re-colonize the area relatively quickly. The Alliance is also evaluating options for unloading equipment from barges that would avoid potential impacts by using a combination of on-shore equipment, tugs, and temporary ramps so that there would be no disturbance to the bank or bottom of the Illinois River. However, these plans are still under development and being reviewed for their feasibility. Overall, proposed construction activities at and in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center would increase the potential for sedimentation in the Illinois River. In accordance with NPDES construction permitting requirements, the Alliance would develop and implement appropriate erosion controls and stormwater management plans to minimize the potential for erosion and sedimentation, reducing the potential for adverse impacts to aquatic species during construction activities (see Section 3.6, Surface Water). Protected Species As discussed in Section 3.8.2.4, and shown in Table 3.8-1, special status species may occur at the Meredosia Energy Center or within the immediate vicinity. The potential of the proposed project to impact these species is discussed in Table 3.8-5. While not a special status species currently identified as occurring in Morgan County, bent milkvetch is listed as a state-endangered plant species in four Illinois counties. Individuals of this species have been observed, mapped, and flagged within a proposed permanent impact area on the grounds of the Meredosia Energy Center site. However, Ameren Transmission Company of Illinois is planning to purchase this portion of the Meredosia Energy Center and construct an electrical substation and overhead electrical transmission lines. Ameren is aware of these plants and has agreed to make every feasible effort to avoid impacts to the protected bent milkvetch. Should avoidance not be feasible, Ameren would coordinate with the IDNR to mitigate impacts as needed through the incidental take permitting regulatory process. Regardless of the plans of a future landowner, implementation of the proposed project by the Alliance would have no adverse impacts to bent milkvetch.  Forested areas in the vicinity of the Illinois River would be disturbed for construction. Such areas could provide nesting habitat for federally-protected bald eagles, although there are no documented nest sites on the Meredosia Energy Center. DOE and the Alliance would consult with USFWS to determine necessary surveys in this area prior to any land clearing or construction activities. DOE and the Alliance would comply with the guidelines established by the USFWS (see Section 3.8.1.3), thereby minimizing potential adverse effects to bald eagles. Migratory Birds In order to comply with the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (see Section 3.8.1.3), the Alliance would perform initial land clearing activities either outside of the migratory bird nesting season (April 1 to July 31) or would conduct a survey for migratory bird nests immediately prior to land clearing activities. Should any nests be found, the Alliance would either re-design the appropriate project component or alter the construction schedule to avoid the take of any individuals. As such, no impacts to migratory birds or their nests or eggs would be anticipated, and no violations of the Act would occur. CO2 Pipeline This section analyzes the impacts of the southern and northern pipeline routes, which end at the western border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area depends upon the final siting of the injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed under the CO2 Storage Study Area section. Once the Alliance finalizes the CO2 pipeline route, construction of the proposed CO2 pipeline would require the clearing of vegetation within the 80-foot wide construction ROW. This clearing would temporarily remove vegetated habitats from use by wildlife from the construction ROW and permanently remove up to 21 acres of forested habitat within the 50-foot operational ROW. This would result in minor biological resources effects. In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the southern or northern pipeline routes analyzed in this EIS, it is expected that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed. In the event that the final pipeline routing results in additional impacts to biological resources, the Alliance would continue to consult with regulatory agencies, including the USFWS and IDNR, to develop appropriate conservation measures to minimize impact to species and habitats. As a result, impacts to biological resources along the final pipeline route are expected to be minor. The construction ROW would generally be 80 feet wide, but a 100-foot wide construction ROW may be required under certain circumstances, such as for pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain (see Section 2.5.1.3). Following construction, the temporarily disturbed land areas (i.e., the portions of the construction ROW outside of the 50-foot operational ROW) would be re-contoured and re-seeded with native plants appropriate to the area in order to restore the lands to their previous conditions; lands previously in agricultural production could return to agricultural production. The Alliance would implement measures to avoid the spread of invasive plants, such as washing construction equipment prior to its delivery to the construction site to minimize the potential for introduction of invasive seeds that may have been picked up at other locations. Disturbed agricultural land would be returned to agricultural production within the entire ROW (see Section 2.5.1.4), such that no long-term loss of agricultural lands would be anticipated. Table 3.8-4 presents the land cover types within both the proposed CO2 pipeline southern route and northern route (see Figure 2-17). Terrestrial Habitat As shown in Table 3.8-4, the vast majority of affected land areas (80 percent along the proposed southern route and 86 percent along the proposed northern route) consist of agricultural land, including cropland and pastureland. As noted above, no long-term loss of agricultural lands would be anticipated. These areas provide low-quality habitat for wildlife. Higher-quality habitats, providing overall greater biodiversity, include wetlands and forested areas, which mainly occur adjacent to stream corridors and other surface waters. During construction in areas where horizontal directional or jack and bore drilling is not utilized, habitats within the proposed construction ROW would be disturbed. Clearing of forested areas within the proposed construction ROW would cause a small degree of habitat fragmentation. Although the cleared ROW would not necessarily create an impassable barrier to wildlife movement, some species may not cross a location because the area was disturbed and the habitat altered. However, these effects would be localized and minor as there is relatively little forested habitat in the proposed construction ROWs (an approximate maximum of 8 acres along the proposed southern route and 21 acres along the proposed northern route). Accidental mortality of wildlife could occur due to collisions with construction vehicles and equipment. Impacts to forested areas and associated wildlife habitat along either the proposed southern route or northern route would be minor. Aquatic Habitat For either of the potential routes, the CO2 pipeline would cross streams, ponds, and lakes (see Section 3.6, Surface Water, for more detailed information on water crossings). To avoid or reduce potential adverse impacts to wildlife habitat (i.e., especially to the high-quality habitats of wetlands and surface waters), the Alliance has committed to adhering to a SWPPP (see Section 3.6, Surface Water) and performing trenchless drilling beneath all perennial surface water features without disturbing the bed or banks. Sedimentation could occur from construction activities in the general area of surface waters; however, this would likely be at small magnitudes and cause negligible, short-term impacts. Section 3.6, Surface Water, describes the horizontal directional and jack and bore drilling techniques in detail; based on that description, this process would not disturb the surface water feature being crossed. Trenching could be employed for crossing narrow intermittent and ephemeral stream channels that were devoid of water at the time of construction, such as when a stream feature is seasonally dry or is frozen to the bottom. A field assessment would be made prior to construction at each crossing to determine the presence of water, and weather forecasts would be monitored to evaluate the potential for precipitation events that could lead to temporary water flow within the stream channel. Dry trenching would consist of excavating a trench through the stream channel, laying the pipe down, and then burying the pipe with the spoils removed during trench excavation. The pipeline crossing would be as nearly perpendicular to the stream channel as possible to minimize overall linear disturbance to the stream channel. Aquatic habitat, including streambanks and streambed substrate, would be restored to original grade following trenching activities. Streambanks would be restored using appropriate stabilization measures and revegetated following specifications outlined in Section 404 permitting. Aquatic habitats would likely recover shortly after construction activities, resulting in short-term, minor adverse impacts. Section 3.6, Surface Water, further discusses BMPs used during construction for protection of surface waters and required construction permitting. Disturbance of the dry stream channels could cause some degree of temporary downstream sedimentation when flow returns to the channel, which could have negative effects to aquatic life primarily because the sediments can fill in open spaces within the steam bed that provide habitat for aquatic macroinvertebrates (e.g., insects). Therefore, construction activities across dry stream channels could cause a localized and temporary decline in insect populations downstream of the crossing, reducing available food resources for larger species (e.g., fish) within the affected segment of the stream. Since the stream channel would be stabilized and revegetated immediately following construction, these types of impacts would be significantly reduced and only minor impacts to aquatic species would be expected. Protected Species As discussed in Section 3.8.2.5 and shown in Table 3-8.1, multiple protected species may potentially occur within the CO2 pipeline corridor. After finalizing the CO2 pipeline route, the Alliance and DOE would consult with the USFWS and IDNR to determine where pre-construction surveys should be conducted and for which species. The Alliance would then conduct surveys, in suitable habitats, for all protected species and their associated habitat known to occur in or along the CO2 pipeline route. In consultation with USFWS and IDNR, as appropriate, conservation measures (potentially including implementing a conservation plan and obtaining any required permits) would be developed and implemented to reduce or avoid any potential impacts to these species arising from the proposed project. The potential for effects to federally- and state-protected species to arise within the CO2 pipeline route is summarized in Table 3.8-5. Conservation measures that would or could be implemented are described in Section 4.2, Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts. Migratory Birds In order to avoid violating the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the Alliance would perform initial land clearing activities either outside of the migratory bird nesting season (April 1 to July 31) or would conduct a survey for migratory bird nests immediately prior to land clearing activities (see Section 3.8.1.3). Should any nests be found, the Alliance would either re-design the appropriate project component or alter the construction schedule to avoid the take of any individuals. As such, no impacts to migratory birds or their nests or eggs would be anticipated, and no violations of the Act would occur. CO2 Storage Study Area Terrestrial and Aquatic Habitats Table 3.8-3 presents the land cover types within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. Collectively, development of the proposed wells, buildings, and access roads would require the disturbance of up to approximately 92 acres of land, most of which (91 percent) is currently under agricultural production. Minor terrestrial and no aquatic habitat effects would be anticipated. The construction of the injection wells and supporting facilities would require an area of up to 28 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Approximately 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining acreage would be temporarily disturbed during the construction phase of the proposed project. Up to an additional 64 acres would be utilized and disturbed to support the construction of access roads, of which approximately 15 acres would be permanently developed and 49 acres would be temporarily disturbed during the construction phase. See Section 2.5.2.2 for additional details about the proposed surface facilities. Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. In each of the siting scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have lesser impacts to physical resources while others would have greater impacts, while still representing reasonable paths. The Alliance would locate the injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1 such that they would avoid impacts to protected species and other sensitive biological resources, such as wetlands and surface waters.  The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the southern route would likely impact up to 0.5 acre of forested habitat and between 22 and 32 acres of agricultural land. The hypothetical siting scenarios that DOE developed for the end-of-pipeline spurs from the northern route would likely impact between 1.0 and 1.2 acres of forested habitat and between 18 and 26 acres of agricultural land. Since agricultural land disturbed during construction would be returned to agricultural production, these effects would be minor. In addition, the additional potential loss of 0.5 to 1.2 acres of forested lands would be minor, and would be greater along the northern proposed route. Approximately 91 percent (i.e., 4,804 acres) of the 5,300-acre storage study area is classified as agricultural land and provides low-quality wildlife habitat. Wildlife effects would be minor. Initial land clearing would result in habitat loss for species that may be utilizing affected agricultural lands. Accidental mortality of wildlife could occur due to collisions with vehicles and equipment associated with land clearing and construction activities associated with well development. Protected Species Because the Alliance intends to follow its established siting criteria (see Section 2.5) to avoid protected species, no federally- or state-protected species would be affected by the construction of the proposed injection or monitoring wells. While loggerhead shrikes may forage in agricultural lands, this species nests in shrubs or small trees. Such areas would not be affected by proposed injection or monitoring well development. Educational Facilities The proposed educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The facilities may be co-located, or there may be one location for the visitor and research center and another for the training facility. Specific locations for these facilities have not yet been determined; however, it is expected that they would be located in existing buildings or occupy areas that have been previously disturbed and have existing utility connections onsite or immediately adjacent. Once the Alliance identifies a potential site, pre-construction surveys would be conducted to verify that no protected species would be impacted by the development of the facilities. It is likely that any habitat affected by the construction of the educational facilities would be in a developed setting and of low quality for wildlife use. Overall, minor habitat loss could occur during construction of this proposed project component and is not expected to adversely affect any federally- or state-listed species. 3.8.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Overall, minor biological resources impacts would be expected from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility. Any potential habitat losses arising from the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be incurred during the construction phase. The site is located within a disturbed industrial setting with high levels of human activity offering low-quality wildlife habitat. No additional long-term noise, light, glare, or air quality impacts to biological resources would be anticipated as compared to existing conditions. As described in Section 3.6, Surface Water, the Meredosia Energy Center would use the existing intake to withdraw water from the Illinois River at a maximum velocity of 0.5 feet per second. This rate represents a reduced rate compared to that used prior to the suspension of facility operations at the end of 2011. At a withdrawal rate of 0.5 feet per second, most fish would be able to swim away from the intake structure without becoming trapped within the intake current, pinned against intake screens, and ultimately dying. Such a low velocity would also reduce the risk to fish eggs and newly-hatched fish. None of the species potentially affected by the intake structure are likely to be protected at either the state or the federal level, as the most proximate protected aquatic species (the ebonyshell) may occur two miles downstream from the Meredosia Energy Center (see Section 3.8.2.4). As such, operation of the intake structure under the FutureGen 2.0 Project would only have a minor adverse effect on aquatic life in the immediate vicinity. The Meredosia Energy Center would utilize existing outfalls for the discharge of approximately 9.0 mgd of treated effluent and cooling water to the Illinois River. Of this, approximately 8.3 mgd would be thermal discharges from the cooling towers. Depending on the amount and temperature, the discharge of artificially-warmed water to the Illinois River could result in reduced levels of dissolved oxygen, increased algal growth, or a change in the composition of the local fish community, including a potential increase in non-native species (USEPA 2011n). As operations at the Meredosia Energy Center were suspended at the end of 2011, the discharge rate proposed under the FutureGen 2.0 Project represents an increase over current levels. However, the proposed discharge represents an approximately 95 percent reduction in both overall and thermal discharges to the Illinois River over the historical operation of the energy center. As a result, operation of the Meredosia Energy Center under the proposed project would result in fewer adverse impacts to biological resources within the Illinois River than operation of the facility prior to suspension of the energy center’s operations, reducing impacts to a minor level. However, the thermal discharge rates would increase in comparison to the current conditions where there is no discharge to the Illinois River. No appreciable effect on overall habitat quality of the Illinois River would be expected. Refer to Section 3.6, Surface Water, for additional details regarding proposed discharges and potential impacts to the Illinois River. No impacts related to the temporary barge unloading facility would occur during operations, as the area would be returned to its pre-existing condition following construction. CO2 Pipeline During operations, impacts to biological resources within the final pipeline ROW would be limited to permanent habitat conversions during construction, potentially removing these areas as viable habitat for species utilizing the pre-existing land covers. These impacts would occur during construction as described in Section 3.8.3.1, but would persist in currently forested areas within the operational ROW throughout the life of the project. Agricultural lands would be returned to agricultural production following construction, including within the operational ROW. As such, no long-term loss of agricultural lands would be anticipated. Table 3.8-4 presents the land cover types within the proposed operational ROWs of the southern and northern pipeline routes from the Meredosia Energy Center to the western border of the CO2 storage study area. Agricultural land accounts for the vast majority of potentially affected land covers. However, some natural forested habitat and developed or barren areas would be affected. The proposed southern route would result in the loss of up to 8 acres of forested lands (see Table 3.8-4). The proposed northern route would result in the loss of up to 21 acres of forested lands within the operational ROW.  Throughout the life of the project, the 50-foot wide operational ROW would be kept free of woody vegetation to permit access for inspection and maintenance activities. This would leave the vegetation in the operational ROW in a persistent herbaceous state, creating a long-term (during the life of the project) habitat conversion in areas that were previously forested. Clearing of forested areas would cause a small degree of habitat fragmentation. Although the cleared corridor would not necessarily create an impassable barrier to wildlife movement, some species may not cross a location because the area was disturbed and habitat altered. The vast majority of potentially affected land areas consist of agricultural land, including cropland and pastureland. Affected agricultural lands would be returned to agricultural uses following construction of the proposed CO2 pipeline route. It is anticipated that the proposed project would have no long-term impact on agricultural land. Vegetation maintenance (e.g., mowing and herbicide treatments) would be performed outside of the migratory bird nesting season (April 1 to July 31) in order to avoid potential long-term impacts to migratory birds and violating the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (see Section 3.8.1.3). As identified in Section 3.8.1.3, bald eagles receive protection under the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940 and the conservation measures recommended by the USFWS (2010b). The Alliance would comply with these guidelines; therefore, no impacts to bald eagles are anticipated as a result of the operation of the proposed project. The potential release of CO2 from the pipeline as a result of either a puncture or rupture is considered to be highly unlikely. If a leak or rupture of the proposed CO2 pipeline were to occur, respiratory effects to biota due to increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations would be limited to the immediate vicinity where the rupture or leak occurred. This may impact individuals in the specific populations, but would not have an effect on the species populations. Refer to Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, for additional information about the potential for pipeline leakage or rupture. Should the CO2 be released into a stream or waterbody, it would dissolve in the water up to its solubility, given the pH, total dissolved solids, and temperature of the water at the time of the release. The CO2 concentration in the water is unlikely to reach 2 percent (which is when injuries to aquatic life can occur), since the solubility of CO2 at typical atmospheric conditions would keep the concentration less than approximately 0.2 percent. The maximum temperature of the CO2 proposed to be transported through the pipeline would be 90°F, although a normal operational temperature would be approximately 70°F. While the presence of the pipeline could cause some degree of warming of the surrounding soils, particularly during the winter months, the pipeline would be placed at least 5 feet beneath the ground surface in agricultural areas in accordance with IDOA pipeline construction standards and policies and the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement signed by the Alliance (see Section 2.5.1.3). At this depth, the proposed pipeline would have little effect on the root zone temperature of agricultural crops. The U.S. Department of State conducted a study of the effects of soil temperature increases as a result of pipeline operations for the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline. In the Pipeline Temperature Effects Study, included in Appendix L of the Keystone XL Draft EIS, the pipeline temperature was expected to be warmer than the proposed CO2 pipeline (i.e., approximately 95°F to 130°F). The study modeled anticipated heat flux to the surrounding ground, studied the existing literature, and consulted land management experts to determine potential effects to vegetation and crops. The study concluded that positive effects on vegetation and crops have been documented in terms of spring emergence and plant growth, while negative aspects on plant growth have not been documented for the potential temperature range associated with the pipeline (U.S. Department of State 2011). DOE received a scoping comment asking if the proposed “warm” pipeline could cause mold or insects to proliferate during the winter months. DOE researched the issue and was unable to find any literature regarding potential growth of mold or insects, although it appears unlikely that such impacts would result. Although the Pipeline Temperature Effects Study included from the Keystone XL Draft EIS did not specifically address the potential effects of molds and insects, the study identified that temperature fluxes would be directed downward and, in the winter, root zone temperatures would be affected by the ambient temperature as opposed to the proposed pipeline (U.S. Department of State 2011). Soil molds and insects would most likely occur near the plant root zone and close to the ground surface. Considering the many miles of existing pipelines in the United States, studies regarding the ecological impacts of pipeline development, and the lack of literature on effects of molds, insects, or other pests due to pipeline-caused thermal variations, there is no evidence that the operation of the proposed pipeline could result in the potential issues raised by the commenter. Thus, DOE has no reason to conclude that thermal impacts to vegetation or crops due to operation of the proposed pipeline would occur. CO2 Storage Study Area Overall, minor impacts to biological resources would be expected during operation of the injection and monitoring well sites as any potential habitat losses resulting from the proposed project would occur during the construction phase. It is important to note that, for the injection and monitoring well sites, agricultural lands are the most likely to be affected, and these are generally considered low-quality wildlife habitat. Following construction, approximately 25 acres would be permanently converted to developed uses due to placement of facilities and infrastructure (approximately 10 acres for the proposed injection and monitoring wells and associated surface facilities and approximately 15 acres for access roads). Operation of the proposed wells would generate noise, light, and glare, which may cause avoidance of the area by wildlife. Should there be any surface waters in the immediate vicinity of the selected well sites, it is possible that surface disturbances, such as vehicular movements, could indirectly contribute small amounts of sedimentation to those waterways, which would cause negligible aquatic habitat degradation. However, these potential effects would likely be avoided with implementation of BMPs (see Section 3.6, Surface Water) and adherence to the Alliance’s well siting criteria. The driving force behind siting the injection wells is suitable geology, which includes the presence of a suitable impermeable caprock of at least 200 feet in thickness to prevent the upward migration of CO2 to the surface. Thus, it is highly unlikely that the injected CO2 would migrate to the surface and cause any impacts to aquatic or terrestrial habitats. The injection of CO2 into the deep subsurface has the potential to affect subsurface organisms. Microbial life in the deep subsurface was discovered approximately 20 years ago. Until recently, the deep subsurface has been considered a place where only single-celled organisms could exist due to temperature, energy, oxygen, and space constraints. However, species of multicellular roundworms (phylum Nematoda) have been discovered in South Africa, from water at a depth of approximately 2 miles (Borgonie et al. 2011). In general, these subsurface biological communities are poorly understood and may be more complex than previously thought. DOE/NETL is funding a study with the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign at a carbon capture and storage project near Decatur, Illinois in order to improve the understanding of subsurface ecology and impacts of CO2 storage. The study is being performed in the Mt. Simon Formation and includes identifying sets of subsurface microbes before and after CO2 injection. The total set of observations would allow characterization of the subsurface microbial community in a CO2 storage reservoir in the context of the local reservoir environmental conditions, sedimentary substrate, and pore-water environment (NETL 2010b). Although this study is in the preliminary stages, results would likely further aid in the understanding of the effects of CO2 injection on subsurface microbial communities in the general area of the proposed injection well site(s) (DOE 2011b). DOE would continue to monitor this study and apply new information from this study to the FutureGen 2.0 Project, if warranted. In general, microbial communities and activity can be influenced by changes in pH value, pressure, temperature, salinity, and other factors, which can all be influenced by CO2 injection into the deep subsurface. A study in Germany analyzed the response of the microbial community to CO2 storage in a saline aquifer. The study revealed a shift in the microbial community composition following CO2 injection; however, after 5 months of CO2 storage, enhanced activity of the microbes indicated that the community was able to adapt to the changed conditions (Morozova et al. 2010). Until further research has been conducted, the effects of CO2 storage on microbial communities remain uncertain. It is also unclear how widespread multicellular organisms, such as roundworms, may be in the deep subsurface and how they may be affected by CO2 storage. Operation of the CO2 injection wells would likely affect subsurface organisms; however, whether those effects would be considered adverse and the magnitude of impact is currently unknown (DOE 2011b). Educational Facilities Because the potential 2.3-acre educational facilities would occupy existing structures or be constructed within previously developed areas, the operation of this proposed project component is not expected to cause any adverse impacts to biological resources. Any minor habitat losses related to the educational facilities would be incurred during the construction phase and are not likely to cause long-term effects. Due to the proposed disturbed nature of the potential locations for facilities, no federally- or state-listed species would experience long-term impacts during operation of these facilities. 3.8.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. The project would not be constructed, and there would be no change to biological resources. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK` 3.9 CULTURAL RESOURCES 3.9.1 Introduction This section describes cultural resources potentially affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project as well as the potential direct and indirect effects of the proposed project on these resources.  3.9.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for cultural resources is the Meredosia Energy Center, a 4-mile corridor for the CO2 pipeline, and a 5,300-acre ROI for the CO2 storage study area. The ROI was used to identify areas containing cultural resources and to help guide the siting process. The Area of Potential Effect (APE) is a smaller geographic area The Area of Potential Effect (APE) is the within which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause geographic area or areas within which an alterations in the character or use of historic properties. Adverse undertaking may directly or indirectly n the character or use of effects to archaeological, paleontological, and cemetery resources cause alterations i historic properties, if such properties exist are generally the result of direct impacts from ground disturbing (36 CFR 800.16[d]). activities. The APE for such resources therefore coincides with those areas where direct impacts from the construction and operation of the proposed facility would occur. Adverse effects to historic resources (i.e., standing structures) may occur through direct impacts that could change the character of a property’s use or the physical features within a property’s setting that contribute to its historic significance, or through indirect impacts that could introduce visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that diminish the integrity of the property’s significant historic features. Traditional cultural properties may be subject to both direct and indirect impacts. Project APEs for the different project components would be defined in an iterative process involving DOE, SHPO, and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) as needed, pursuant to a Programmatic Agreement (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F1]). Because the proposed project involves potential effects to historic properties on a regional scale, which cannot be fully determined prior to approval, a Programmatic Agreement would be developed in accordance with 36 CFR 800.14(b). The proposed Programmatic Agreement is discussed further in Section 3.9.1.3. 3.9.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered To determine the extent to which archaeological and historic resources are known to exist or may exist within the ROI for this project, DOE reviewed the Illinois Archaeological Survey site files and the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency’s Historic Architectural and Archaeology Resources Geographic Information System. In addition, Phase I Cultural Resources Surveys (see Table 3.9-1) were prepared for the CO2 storage study area (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F2]), the Meredosia Energy Center1 (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F3]), the Bluff Area segment located within the CO2 pipeline corridor (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F4]), and the soil gas monitoring locations located within the CO2 storage study area (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F5]). APEs were defined for these studies and are described further in Section 3.9.2. These studies served as reconnaissance level research to gain a better understanding of cultural resources in the ROI and to guide the siting process. Table 3.9-1 presents all studies conducted thus far and their SHPO concurrence status. Further studies would be necessary once the exact locations of the various project components are decided. The Programmatic Agreement, when executed, would outline additional steps to be taken by the appropriate parties to identify, evaluate, and treat historic properties in the context of the proposed project. 1 The Phase I Cultural Resources Survey at the Meredosia Energy Center surveyed the area planned for impact, which amounted to 147 acres of the 263-acre energy center property. Table 3.9-1. Cultural Resources Surveys Completed within the Region of Influence Submitted Date of SHPO Study Name Project Component to SHPO Concurrence CO2 = carbon dioxide; SHPO = State Historic Preservation Office; TBD = to be determined The FutureGen 2.0 Project would not affect any lands designated as Native American tribal reservations or otherwise known to be tribal lands. However, to determine whether any federally-recognized tribes have a cultural or historic affiliation with the proposed project site, DOE contacted several tribal organizations after reviewing the National Park Service’s Native American Consultation Database of tribes to be contacted in conformance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. In addition, the SHPO and the IDOT provided input into which tribes to contract. DOE contacted the following tribal organizations:  Citizen Potawatomi Nation  Delaware Nation, Oklahoma  Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma  Forest County Potawatomi Community  Hannahville Indian Community  Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin  Iowa Tribe of Kansas & Nebraska  Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma  Kaw Nation  Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas  Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas  Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma  Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians of Michigan  Miami Tribe of Oklahoma  Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi, Michigan  Osage Nation  Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma  Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians  Prairie Band of the Potawatomi Nation  Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska  Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma  Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa  Shawnee Tribe   Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Copies of the letters sent by DOE, which conveyed information about the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project and invited the tribes to request additional information, are included in Appendix B, Consultation Letters. Two tribal organizations, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas and the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, responded to the letters and did not have any comments or concerns regarding the project. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would cause the loss, isolation, or alteration of:  Archaeological resources listed or eligible for NRHP listing;  Historic sites or structures listed or eligible for NRHP listing, either directly or by introducing visual, audible, or atmospheric elements that would adversely affect the historic resource;  Native American resources, including graves, remains, and funerary objects, either directly or by introducing visual, audible, or atmospheric elements that would adversely affect the resource’s use;  Paleontological resources listed or eligible for listing as a National Natural Landmark; or  Cemeteries. 3.9.1.3 Regulatory Framework Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and its implementing regulations at 36 CFR 800 (incorporating amendments effective August 5, 2004) require federal agencies to take into account the effects of their undertakings on historic properties, and to afford the ACHP a reasonable opportunity to comment on such undertakings. Under NHPA Section 106, a historic property is any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the NRHP maintained by the Secretary of the Interior. Historic properties can include artifacts, records, and remains related to and located within such properties. Properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to an Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization that meet NRHP criteria (36 CFR 800.16[l][1]) are also historic properties. For purposes of this EIS, cultural resources are the following:  Archaeological resources, including prehistoric and historic archaeological sites;  Historic resources, including extant standing structures;  Cultural or historic landscapes or viewsheds;  Native American resources, including Traditional Cultural Properties important to Native American tribes; and  Other cultural resources, including extant cemeteries and paleontological resources. 36 CFR 800 outlines procedures to comply with NHPA Section 106. Under 36 CFR 800(a), federal agencies are encouraged to coordinate NHPA Section 106 compliance with any steps taken to meet the requirements of NEPA, and to coordinate their public participation, review, and analysis in such a way that they can meet the purposes and requirements of both the NEPA and the NHPA in a timely and efficient manner. The Section 106 process has been initiated for the FutureGen 2.0 Project with the intent of coordinating that process with DOE’s obligations under NEPA regarding cultural resources. Participants in the Section 106 process include an agency official with jurisdiction over the undertaking, the ACHP, consulting parties, and the public. Consulting parties include the SHPO; Indian tribes; representatives of local government; applicants for federal assistance, permits, licenses, and other approvals; and additional consulting parties that include individuals and organizations with a demonstrated interest in an undertaking due to the nature of their legal or economic relation to the undertaking or affected properties, or their concern with the effects of the undertakings on historic properties. In Illinois, the Director of Historic Preservation within the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency serves as the SHPO. The NHPA Section 106 process is conducted in parallel with the Illinois Section 707 process. The Section 707 process is embodied in the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act (20 Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) 3420) governing projects under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of a state agency, or licensed or assisted by a state agency. The Illinois Archaeological and Paleontological Resources Protection Act (20 ILCS 3435) applies to all public lands in Illinois and contains criminal sanctions for those who disturb burial mounds, human remains, shipwrecks, and other archaeological resources or fossils on public lands. Human burials are afforded additional protection under the Illinois Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act (20 ILCS 3440), which forbids disturbance of human skeletal remains and grave markers in unregistered cemeteries, including isolated graves and burial mounds, that are at least 100 years old. Younger graves and registered cemeteries are protected under the Illinois Cemetery Protection Act (765 ILCS 835). The Illinois Historic Preservation Act (20 ILCS 3410) establishes and maintains the Illinois Register of Historic Places (IRHP) with listing criteria based on the NRHP. Under the Illinois Historic Preservation Act, a Comprehensive Statewide Historic Preservation Plan was prepared in 1995, and updated in 2005, that broadly outlines a framework for historic preservation in the state. As described in Section 3.9.1.1, because the proposed project involves potential effects to historic properties on a regional scale, which cannot be fully determined prior to approval, the Illinois SHPO suggested that DOE work with the Alliance to draft a Programmatic Agreement in accordance with 36 CFR 800.14(b). This agreement would cover the scope of the entire DOE action for the FutureGen 2.0 Project and implementation of NHPA Section 106 throughout the course of the proposed project. The SHPO suggested the following signatories for this Programmatic Agreement: ACHP, SHPO, DOE, and the Alliance. The SHPO asked DOE and the Alliance to take the lead on drafting the Programmatic Agreement for SHPO review. On January 26, 2012, DOE sent a letter to the SHPO notifying them that they would be contacting them regarding entering into a Programmatic Agreement. A draft Programmatic Agreement was submitted to the SHPO on August 28, 2012 (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F1]). The Programmatic Agreement outlines steps to be taken by the appropriate parties to identify, evaluate, and treat historic properties in the context of the proposed project. The goal of the Programmatic Agreement is to implement a consistent approach to the identification, evaluation, and treatment of historic properties throughout the project’s various elements (Battelle 2011b). In support of Section 106 Consultation activities, DOE met with the SHPO on March 31, 2011, June 24, 2011, and December 6, 2011, to discuss the project and specific project areas of concern. Communication and consultation with the SHPO is ongoing. 3.9.2 Affected Environment 3.9.2.1 Regional Cultural Context Humans have inhabited the state of Illinois for at least 12,000 years (Battelle 2011b). Paleo-Indians appeared after the retreat of the last glacier. The archaeological record indicates prehistoric occupation of the state as follows: Paleo-Indian (10,000 B.C. to 8000 B.C.), Archaic (8000 B.C. to 800 B.C.), Woodland (800 B.C. to 1100 A.D.), and Mississippian (900 A.D. to 1500 A.D.). Illinois’ prehistoric sites document the interaction of small foraging band societies and the evolution of tribal and chiefdom societies. Throughout prehistory, west central Illinois, where portions of the FutureGen 2.0 Project are located, was one of the most intensively occupied regions in the midwestern United States. The eastern floodplain of the Illinois River in Scott, Cass, and Morgan counties near Meredosia possesses a particularly rich archaeological record (Battelle 2011b). The Meredosia Lake drainage includes more than 100 prehistoric and historic sites. Archaeological material found at the sites contains records of how specific cultural groups—from the Archaic Period through the Mississippian Period—used this specific area and how settlement and subsistence strategies changed over time. Beginning in the 1600s, when American Indians first came into contact with Europeans, the Illinois (or Illiniwek) Nation, a group of 12 tribes, occupied most of what today forms the state of Illinois (Battelle 2011b). In the 1700s and 1800s, the Illinois Nation’s territory shrank and other tribes moved into the state. Five main tribes survived into the 1700s. Only two, the Kakaskia and Peoria, existed in the early 1800s, and by the mid-1800s they had ceded their lands to the U.S. Government. No federally-recognized tribe occupies the state of Illinois today. In 1673, French explorers, Father Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet, became the first Europeans to explore Illinois (Battelle 2011b). Rene-Robert Cavalier, Sieur de La Salle arrived in 1679, and claimed the entire Mississippi River Basin for France. This led to the French establishing colonial missions and outposts in the state. In 1717, Illinois became part of the French colony of Louisiana and in 1783, became United States territory through the Treaty of Paris. The first European settlers came to the Morgan County area in approximately 1823. 3.9.2.2 History of the Meredosia Energy Center and the Central Illinois Public Service Company The Meredosia Energy Center was constructed in the 1940s and was operated by the Central Illinois Public Service Company (CIPSCO). As a private business enterprise, CIPSCO began in 1902, as the Mattoon City Railway Company, which was organized to provide streetcar service in Mattoon, Illinois. Between 1903 and 1904, Mattoon City Railway quickly diversified its services and assets to include an electric generating plant and distribution system supplying both Mattoon and the surrounding region. By 1914, CIPSCO was operating 8 generating stations and serving 232 communities, including over 100,000 electric customers (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). In addition to its electric, gas, and heat utility businesses, the company’s service included supplying water, selling ice wholesale to some communities, and operating retail ice businesses in select cities. Business expanded rapidly in the 1920s, and in spite of the impending national Great Depression, CIPSCO continued acquiring minor electric and ice properties and extended both electric and gas service to previously un-served communities and rural areas during the late 1920s. By 1931, however, the impact of the economic decline brought on by the Depression resulted in significant reductions in profit, and CIPSCO reduced most classes of service to its customers (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). In 1941, preliminary construction began on a steam electric generating plant on the Illinois River south of the village of Meredosia in Morgan County, Illinois (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). However, due to the United States entering into World War II, construction was brought to a quick halt in 1942 by a directive of the War Production Board. As a matter of national safety, the War Production Board effectively suspended all construction at facilities not vital to the war effort, including the Meredosia Energy Center. Construction materials originally intended for the energy center were redirected to support America’s military needs. Specifically, the turbo-generator and related equipment initially destined for the energy center were shipped by the War Production Board to assist the United States’ World War II ally, Russia. Construction resumed at Meredosia Energy Center following the war, and the station's first generating unit was completed in 1946, and went into service in 1948 (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). CIPSCO continued operating and expanding the energy center through the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. In 1995, shareholders of CIPSCO and the Union Electric Company approved the merger of the two companies, which were combined as Ameren Corporation. Ameren continued power generation at Meredosia Energy Center until operations were suspended at the end of 2011. 3.9.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center As described in Section 3.9.1.2, various studies were completed as reconnaissance level research to identify cultural resources within the ROI. The Phase I Cultural Resource Survey - 147-acre FutureGen 2.0 Power Plant Site Near the Village of Meredosia (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F3]) was conducted to identify cultural resources on the Meredosia Energy Center site. The APE was defined as 100 acres of previously disturbed and developed areas, 18 acres of woods, 24 acres of agricultural areas, and 5 acres of grassy or fallow areas on the Meredosia Energy Center site. This study included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, a computer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, a review of the NRHP, and a review of the Illinois Register of Historic Sites maintained by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). In addition to archival records and database examination, the subject property was examined by archaeologists utilizing shovel-probe reconnaissance at approximately 50-foot (15-meter) intervals within wooded areas and pedestrian reconnaissance at approximately 16-foot (5meter) intervals within agricultural fields and grassy or fallow areas.  The records review revealed that a portion of the project area was previously surveyed by the Center for American Archaeology in 1991 (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012a). The records review also indicated that an unknown survey was conducted in the southern portion of the project area. One site, 11Mg473, was reported within the northeast portion of the project area. Archeological site 11Mg473 represents the subsurface remains of the extant Meredosia Train Depot. The site was reported in 2010. The site database indicates that 60 artifacts were recovered from the site and date from 1850 through the 1870s. Currently, the site is situated in a public park and includes the remains of a circa 1850s cut-stone bridge pier, a small track segment, a late 19th to early 20th century caboose, and the late 19th century depot. The depot is located adjacent to the Northern Cross Railroad line, one of the first rail lines constructed in the state of Illinois during the late 1830s. A second site, 11Mg22, was reported by A. Berkson in 1976. Dating to the Early Woodland (circa 1000 B.C.) based on temporally-diagnostic artifacts, the site was described as a light density artifact scatter exposed along the cutbank of the Illinois River and adjacent to the developed portion of the Meredosia Energy Center. Collected from the eroded shoreline, a total of four artifacts, including a chert blade, a small dart point fragment, and two small and eroded pottery shards were recovered. The vertical extent of the archaeological site is unknown; however, the archaeologist who identified the site suspected that up to 90 percent of the site may have been compromised by construction and use of the energy center. The shovel-probe reconnaissance revealed that the entire campus has experienced dramatic ground disturbance due to construction and continued operation and expansion over the last 60 years. Investigations failed to identify the presence of archaeological resources. In addition, examination of the standing structures occupying the facility did not document any existing structures greater than 50 years in age that are of architectural or historical merit. 3.9.2.4 CO2 Pipeline  Seven cultural resource surveys have been conducted within close proximity to the southern and northern pipeline routes. These studies were evaluated to better determine the presence of cultural resources within the ROI. A larger portion of the southern route has been examined previously due to its path traversing the proposed expansion of US-67. This highway corridor was surveyed by the Center for American Archaeology in 1996. Survey #3411 was a 40-mile electrical transmission line survey conducted in 1990 by the Center for American Archaeology (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). The survey corridor ran south out of Meredosia along Old Grace Road. No cultural, archaeological, or historical resources were identified within the pipeline ROW during this survey. Survey #10129 extended east at the intersection of Old Grace Road and Yeck Road and continued northward away from the pipeline corridor (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). It ran parallel and within close proximity to the proposed pipeline routes but did not actually intersect the routes at any point. This survey was conducted in 2000 by American Resources Group for the construction of Yeck Road. No cultural, archaeological, or historical resources were identified within the pipeline ROW by this survey. Survey #972 is a flood control study survey conducted in 1985 by the Center for American Archaeology (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). The survey area consisted of numerous noncontiguous land tracts throughout the Illinois River valley floodplain in Scott, Cass, and Morgan counties. The southern and northern routes intersect a portion of this survey just southeast of Meredosia along the eastbound section of Yeck Road as it curves northbound. In total, this survey identified 57 prehistoric and 52 historic sites. None of the identified sites were within the surveyed portion intersecting the proposed pipeline corridor. Survey #9344 is the US-67 survey conducted in 1996 by the Center for American Archaeology (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). As mentioned earlier, the southern route follows this survey from its entrance near the bluffs to its departure approximately 3.5 miles to the southeast. The northern route intersects a very small portion of this survey as it crosses US-67 near the bluffs. As the southern and northern routes meet up to the east, the routes would again intersect the portion of this survey located south of Concord and west of Joy Lane. The over 10,000-acre survey identified 174 prehistoric and 163 historic sites. Over 100 sites were recommended for Phase II investigations. IDOT is in the process of completing the Phase II investigations for these sites. Site 11Mg281, an early historic site dating to the late 1800s, was identified during this survey. Remains of structures, a well, and a cistern were noted at this location as well as piles of brick. The site is within the proximity of a 19th century school appearing on historical atlases. The school was reported to have burned down in 1905. Further evaluation of the bluff area was determined necessary through discussions with the SHPO and the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Bluff Area Pipeline Right-of-Way Segment was conducted in January 2012 (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012c). The APE was composed of a 75-foot wide corridor approximately 3,250 linear feet (990 linear meters) in length in wooded, grassy, and fallow areas, just south of the intersection of IL-100 and IL-104. Due to the APE’s location along the bluff and uplands of Morgan County, deep burial of cultural deposits or remains were deemed unlikely. Survey #17765 represents a corridor survey intersected by the northern route (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). This survey was conducted by the Illinois Transportation Archaeological Research Program in 1999 for IL-78. The northern route would intersect perpendicularly to the survey corridor and thus encounter only a very small portion. No cultural, archaeological, or historical resources were identified within the pipeline ROW by this survey. Survey #18092 is a corridor survey covering various roadways in rural Morgan County (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2012b). Both routes would cross perpendicularly to this survey. No cultural, archaeological, or historical resources were identified within the pipeline ROW by this survey. 3.9.2.5 CO2 Storage Study Area Two Phase I Cultural Resources Surveys have been conducted within the CO2 storage study area to identify cultural resources within the ROI, the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey- FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Site Characterization Locale (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F2]) (Prairie Research & Archaeology 2011a) and the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Soil Gas Monitoring Locations (see Appendix F, Cultural Surveys [F5]) (Prairie Research & Archaeology 2011b).  The Alliance conducted a detailed geological stratigraphic analysis to characterize and verify the viability of the proposed CO2 storage study area. In support of this analysis, the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Site Characterization Locale was completed for the CO2 storage study area in April 2011 (Prairie Research & Archaeology 2011a). The APE consisted of approximately 15.3 acres of agricultural fields within the CO2 storage study area. This inventory was completed to identify cultural resources within the ROI and included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, a computer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, reviews of the NRHP and Illinois Register of Historic Sites, and field investigations utilizing a pedestrian reconnaissance at approximately 16-foot (5-meter) intervals (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2011a). Based on the results of field investigations and information collected during archival and background research, the area that was surveyed for the stratigraphic well contained no significant historic, architectural, and archaeological resources.  The Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Soil Gas Monitoring Locations (Prairie Archaeology & Research 2011b) was completed within the CO2 storage study area in November 2011. The APE for this study included 5 acres of agricultural fields and 1 acre of fallow fields within the CO2 storage study area. The same resources were evaluated as for the Site Characterization Locale. Based on the results of field investigations and information collected during archival and background research, the area that was surveyed for the stratigraphic well contained no significant historic, architectural, and archaeological resources.    3.9.2.6 Educational Facilities  The location of the educational facilities in Jacksonville, Illinois has not yet been determined. Once the locations are selected, and prior to construction, steps described in the Programmatic Agreement would be undertaken to characterize the presence of cultural resources in areas that have not been disturbed or surveyed previously, as well as to assess and resolve adverse effects to historic properties, if necessary. 3.9.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.9.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center As described in Section 3.9.2.3, the entire Meredosia Energy Center has experienced extensive ground disturbance during construction, continued operations, and expansion over the last 60 years. No cultural resources were identified directly on the site; however, as described in Section 3.9.2.3, the Phase I Cultural Resource Survey - 147-acre FutureGen 2.0 Power Plant Site Near the Village of Meredosia identified two archeological sites in close proximity to the Meredosia Energy Center, 11Mg473 (the Meredosia Train Depot) and 11Mg22 (a light density lithic scatter) (see Table 3.9-2). As currently conceptualized, the proposed project would not result in an adverse impact to cultural deposits that may be present at archaeological site 11Mg473 (the Meredosia Train Depot), nor would this archeological site likely contain sufficient integrity with potential to yield significant scientific or historical information to be considered eligible for inclusion on the NRHP. Currently, the existing energy center is adjacent to the physical boundaries of site 11Mg473 and is visible from the resource. As such, the proposed project would not result in an adverse visual intrusion to the setting or viewshed of any extant structures (such as the depot, caboose, rail track segment, or bridge pier) that may contain sufficient historical, architectural, or engineering value which would render such structure as eligible for inclusion on the NRHP. With regard to site 11Mg22 (a light density lithic scatter), construction, use, and repeated land modifications associated with the energy center has not only compromised the integrity of the site but also removed any evidence that archaeological site 11Mg22 extended into the project’s APE. Archaeological investigations in the vicinity of site 11Mg22 failed to produce evidence of intact cultural deposits, failed to generate artifacts, and failed to provide scientific information regarding prehistoric use by past inhabitants at the site. The current investigation has demonstrated that prehistoric archaeological site 11Mg22 lacks a degree of significance and a level of integrity that would render the site eligible for nomination or listing on the NRHP. Investigations have demonstrated that the proposed activities would not result in an adverse impact to a significant resource and that archaeological site 11Mg22 is ineligible for nomination to the NRHP.  In addition, the shovel-probe reconnaissance for the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey (completed on a 147-acre portion of the Meredosia Energy Center) failed to identify the presence of archaeological resources. Examination of the standing structures occupying the facility did not document any existing structures greater than 50 years in age that are of architectural or historical merit. Based on the findings included in the Phase I Cultural Resource Survey - 147-acre FutureGen 2.0 Power Plant Site Near the Village of Meredosia, additional cultural resource investigations are neither warranted nor recommended. No impact to historic resources is anticipated as a result of construction for the oxycombustion facility. To date, the SHPO has not concurred with these findings. Prior to construction, the SHPO must concur with these findings. In addition, steps described in the Programmatic Agreement would be undertaken to characterize, assess, and resolve any adverse effects to cultural resources that have not been disturbed or surveyed previously. CO2 Pipeline  As described in Section 3.9.2.4, seven cultural resource surveys have been conducted in areas along the southern and northern pipeline routes. Review of the surveys conducted in the area identified one historic site, 11Mg281, in close proximity to a portion of the southern route (see Table 3.9-2). This site is currently being mitigated by IDOT for a roadway-widening project. Therefore, it is not anticipated that the southern route would have an adverse effect on this resource. The cultural resources survey for the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Bluff Area Pipeline Right-of-Way Segment did not identify any cultural resources within the APE for the study. Due to the APE’s location along the bluff and uplands of Morgan County, deep burial of cultural deposits or remains were deemed unlikely. To date, SHPO concurrence has not been received.  Many areas along the southern and northern pipeline routes have not been surveyed. Therefore, the potential for the discovery or disturbance of an unknown cultural resource during construction on either the southern or northern route exists, particularly in areas where there has been no prior land disturbance. Once a route is selected, and prior to construction, steps described in the Programmatic Agreement would be undertaken to characterize the presence of cultural resources in areas that have not been disturbed or surveyed previously and assess and resolve any adverse effects to cultural resources, if necessary. In addition, procedures are in place should cultural resources be discovered inadvertently during construction (inadvertent discovery procedures). Where possible, the CO2 pipeline would follow existing road and utility ROWs to reduce impacts to cultural resources. Table 3.9-2. Cultural Resources Identified within the Region of Influence Impacted as a Result Site Project Resource Type Description of the Project Number Component (Yes or No) Subsurface remains of the extant CO2 = carbon dioxide CO2 Storage Study Area As described in Section 3.9.2.5, the area surveyed for the stratigraphic well does not contain evidence for the presence of archaeological, historical, or cultural resources, sites, areas, or artifacts. The SHPO concurred with the findings of the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Site Characterization Locale in a letter dated June 1, 2011 (IHPA 2011a). Therefore, should the CO2 injection wells and monitoring wells be located in this previously surveyed area, no impacts to cultural resources would be anticipated.  The area surveyed for the soil gas monitoring locations also does not contain evidence for the presence of archaeological, historical, or cultural resources, sites, areas, or artifacts. The SHPO concurred with the findings of the Phase I Cultural Resources Survey - FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Soil Gas Monitoring Locations in a letter dated November 29, 2011 (IHPA 2011b). Therefore, should the CO2 injection wells and monitoring wells be located in this previously surveyed area, no impacts to cultural resources would be anticipated.  The potential for the discovery or disturbance of an unknown cultural resource during construction exists in areas where there has been no prior land disturbance. Prior to construction, steps described in the Programmatic Agreement would be undertaken to characterize the presence of cultural resources in areas that have not been disturbed or surveyed previously as well as to assess and resolve adverse effects to historic properties. Educational Facilities The location of the educational facilities in Jacksonville, Illinois, has not yet been determined. The potential for the discovery or disturbance of an unknown cultural resource during construction exists, particularly in areas where there has been no prior land disturbance. Prior to construction, steps described in the Programmatic Agreement would be undertaken to characterize the presence of cultural resources in areas that have not been disturbed or surveyed previously as well as to assess and resolve adverse effects to historic properties. 3.9.3.2 Operational Impacts Once the FutureGen 2.0 Project is operating, there would be no additional subsurface disturbance, other than for occasional pipeline repairs, which would limit the potential to disturb or harm buried cultural resources. The oxy-combustion facility would be located on the existing Meredosia Energy Center property and would not introduce new operational noise or stack emissions that would represent substantial changes to the activities historically conducted at the site. Therefore, impacts to cultural resources during the project’s operational phase would be negligible to minor. Best management procedures would be implemented, including inadvertent discovery procedures. 3.9.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no impact to cultural resources as a result of the no action alternative. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.10 LAND USE 3.10.1 Introduction This section describes existing land use within the proposed project’s ROI. Additionally, this section analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects of the construction and operation of the proposed project on the existing land uses and addresses the compatibility of the proposed project with current and future land uses in the ROI.  3.10.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for land use includes the areas proposed for the construction and operation of the proposed project (direct effects) and their adjacent properties (indirect effects), including the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 injection wells, and the educational facilities. 3.10.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered In order to describe the affected environment for land use and analyze potential impacts, DOE considered current and future plans for land use based on available county and city zoning ordinances, GIS data, comprehensive plans, and interviews with county and city officials (e.g., the Morgan County Regional Planning Commission, city of Jacksonville). DOE obtained further details about site-specific land use characteristics from USDA/NRCS land cover data and information gathered during site visits. DOE used such information to supplement existing land use data for Morgan County. For the purposes of this analysis, DOE used the following land use groupings:  Agricultural Land – Includes farmland, cropland, pasture/hay, and land used for cultivated crop and livestock production.  Developed Land – Includes urban areas (cities or towns) as well as rural developments including farm-related residential properties, rural commercial and industrial facilities, cultural and recreational facilities, barren land, and other structures and developed uses.  Vegetated Land – Includes forests (deciduous, evergreen, and mixed forest), scrub-shrub, and grasslands.  Water Features – Includes open water such as permanent surface waterbodies including lakes, rivers, reservoirs, ditches, and permanent and intermittently exposed open water areas. Wetlands include bogs, marshes, and fens characterized by a high water table, standing or slow-moving water, and hydrophytic vegetation. DOE assessed the potential impacts on land use based on whether the proposed project would:  Be compatible with land use adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center and within and adjacent to the CO2 pipeline corridor, CO2 storage study area, and associated components and facilities;  Result in land use restrictions on adjacent properties; or  Conflict with regional or local land use plans and zoning. 3.10.1.3 Regulatory Framework Based on information obtained from the Morgan County Regional Planning Commission, the unincorporated county does not have zoning information or current land use plans (Douglas 2011). The city of Jacksonville has a comprehensive plan but it is not applicable to areas of Morgan County outside of Jacksonville city limits. The Illinois Pollution Control Board’s 35 IAC 901 Appendix B, Land-Based Classification Standards and Corresponding Land Classes includes classifications of land according to use, which are applied to noise emissions regulations (IPCB 2007). The Code categorizes land use into Land Classes A, B, and C depending on type (i.e., developed, agricultural, vegetated, etc.). See Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, for additional details. DOE used GIS data, obtained from the County GIS Coordinator in combination with the county online parcel website, to evaluate land use types and land ownership information to infer the current land uses in the ROI. The Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act (7 USC 4201 et seq.) established guidelines to minimize the extent to which federal programs contribute to the unnecessary conversion of farmland to nonagricultural uses. The Act assures that federal programs are administered in a manner that, to the extent practicable, would be compatible with state, local, and private efforts to protect farmland. Additionally, the IDOA reviews federal agency programs, projects, and activities for compliance with the Farmland Preservation Act (8 IAC 700) and the Federal Farmland Protection Policy Act. See Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils, for additional details about the Farmland Protection Policy Act and the IDOA requirements. 3.10.2 Affected Environment The FutureGen 2.0 Project would be located in west central Illinois in Morgan County. Regional land use is largely agricultural and rural with small areas of developed land. The existing Meredosia Energy Center is located south of the village of Meredosia, which has a population of approximately 1,044 (USCB 2010b). The most heavily developed land in Morgan County is within the city of Jacksonville, approximately 17 miles southeast of the energy center. Jacksonville encompasses approximately 10 square miles of low, medium, and high-density developed land and has a population of 19,446 (USCB 2010c). The land outside of the city of Jacksonville in Morgan County is predominantly agricultural. Morgan County encompasses approximately 366,617 acres, of which 279,840 acres or 76 percent are agricultural. The balance of land in Morgan County is mainly vegetated. Table 3.10-1 provides a detailed breakdown of the existing land use acreages in Morgan County and the state of Illinois, based on the land use groupings identified in Section 3.10.1.2. Acreage data is based on USDA/NRCS land cover data. Table 3.10-1. Land Use Acreage by Type Agricultural Developed Vegetated Water Features Total Land Affected Area (acres)a (acres)a (acres)a (acres)a (acres)b 25,019,220 4,178,294 5,819,236 2,217,849 Illinois 37,234,599 (67%) (11%) (16%) (6%) Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 a. Percentage values are approximations due to rounding. b. Total percentage is 100 percent. % = percent Land use in Morgan County is generally consistent with state-wide land use, which is dominated by agricultural land. Comparatively, Morgan County has a greater percentage of agricultural land and subsequently a lesser percentage of the other land use types than the remainder of the state. 3.10.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center property is a heavily developed industrial site, typical of a coal-fired power plant. This property includes generating units, cooling towers, a coal barge unloading area, storage areas for coal and coal combustion by-products, chimneys (stacks), substations, and multiple warehouse buildings (see Chapter 2 for further details). Additionally, there are fields and open space areas (e.g., trees and grassy areas) within the property. Approximately 164 acres of the Meredosia Energy Center property would be disturbed from construction of the proposed project. Table 3.10-2 provides a summary of the land use types in the potential disturbance areas at the Meredosia Energy Center based on recent aerial photographs and data provided by the USDA/NRCS (2001). Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 At the end of 2011, operations were suspended at the Meredosia Energy Center. Although all operational activities stopped (e.g., no coal consumption or energy generation), the existing land use remains unchanged.  The Meredosia Energy Center is surrounded by a variety of land uses, including developed land (i.e., residential and manufacturing facilities) and agricultural land. Adjacent to the northern border of the property is a wooded area with an access road (Front Street) leading to a public boat ramp area that includes two boat ramps, which are owned and controlled by the village of Meredosia. An area beyond the boat ramps was used as a small camping area in previous years but is no longer in use (Salinger 2013). The area north of the boat ramps is occupied by the Cargill, Inc. (Cargill) grain elevator facility and the Meredosia Bridge. The bridge (IL-104) provides a connection between Pike County and Morgan County. North of the Meredosia Energy Center is the village of Meredosia, which is surrounded by predominately agricultural land. Old Naples Road borders the eastern boundary of the Meredosia Energy Center. Properties to the east of Old Naples Road consist of mostly developed residential properties but also include a few parcels of land that involve industrial activities. The adjoining land to the south of the Meredosia Energy Center is occupied by the Celanese Emulsions (National Starch & Chemical) plant and Norfolk & Western Railway. Additional chemical plant facilities, including TA Terminals Inc. and Agrium Inc., lie to the east of the Celanese Emulsions plant, generally southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center. The Illinois River borders the western boundary of the Meredosia Energy Center. Pike County is across the Illinois River to the west of Morgan County. Land use in Pike County is also mostly agricultural, but Pike County has a higher proportion of vegetated land (28 percent) compared to nearby counties, including Morgan County. 3.10.2.2 CO2 Pipeline  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would include a CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection wells centrally located in Illinois and entirely within Morgan County. The Alliance identified two possible pipeline routes from the Meredosia Energy Center to the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. The two pipeline route options are located within the 4-mile wide corridor shown in Figure 2-16. Table 3.10-3 provides a detailed breakdown of land use acreage by project component, based on the land use groupings identified in Section 3.10.1.2. Acreage data is based on USDA/NRCS land cover data. Table 3.10-3. Land Use within the CO2 Pipeline Corridor and Storage Study Area Agricultural Developed Vegetated Water Features Affected Areas (acres)a (acres)a (acres)a (acres)a 4,804 167 366 4 CO2 Storage Study Area (90%) (3%) (7%) (0.1%) Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 a. Percentage values are approximations due to rounding. CO2 = carbon dioxide; % = percent Agricultural land is the most abundant land use type found within the ROI. Substantially smaller areas of vegetated and developed land are also present. The CO2 pipeline route options from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 injection wells traverse approximately 30 miles west to east within the northern portion of Morgan County. As the land between the Meredosia Energy Center and the storage study area is not owned by the Alliance, legal ROW easements must be obtained from land owners when a final route is identified. The pipeline would be sited in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations, including 49 CFR 195.210; 49 CFR 195.210 states that pipeline ROWs would avoid, to the extent practicable, areas containing private dwellings, industrial buildings, and places of public assembly. Additionally, regulations require CO2 pipelines to be located no closer than 50 feet from residences. The Alliance proposes to locate the pipeline no closer than 150 feet from residences. It is possible that a distance less than 150 feet would be needed in order to avoid a sensitive environmental resource or at the request of an affected landowner but the distance would not be less than the 50 feet required by federal regulations. The 4-mile wide pipeline corridor avoids the city limits of Jacksonville and includes predominantly agricultural land (74 percent). Other land use types within the corridor consist of vegetated land (17 percent), water features (3 percent), and small areas of developed land such as farm-related residential properties and residential neighborhoods (6 percent), including areas near the villages of Concord and Meredosia. 3.10.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 injection wells and associated surface facilities would be located on up to 25 acres within the approximately 5,300-acre study area in the northeastern portion of Morgan County (see Figure 2-16). This portion of Morgan County is mostly agricultural. As shown in Table 3.10-3, the CO2 storage study area consists of approximately 4,804 acres of agricultural land, 366 acres of vegetated land, and 4 acres of water features. During early project planning, the Alliance selected the CO2 storage study area to avoid developed areas to the extent practicable. Farm-related properties account for the majority of the 167 acres of developed land within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. 3.10.2.4 Educational Facilities  The Alliance anticipates that the visitor and research center and the training facility would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve the functions of these facilities. The city of Jacksonville is an approximately 10-square mile area that includes a variety of land uses. Land uses in the city of Jacksonville include developed land ranging from open space to high-density development, open water and wetlands such as the Mauvaise Terre Lake and Lake Jacksonville, and agricultural lands surrounding the city. Jacksonville has a comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance that delineates boundaries for land use within the city. The zoning ordinance applies to all land within the corporate limits of Jacksonville and contiguous territory within 1.5 miles beyond the corporate limits (City of Jacksonville 2012b). The comprehensive plan includes a future land use plan (City of Jacksonville 2002). Additionally, the Jacksonville Regional Economic Development Corporation provides economic development services that focus on business retention, expansion, and attraction. 3.10.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.10.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would have negligible to minor short-term impacts on land use. Approximately 164 acres would be impacted during construction at the energy center. The vast majority of construction of the oxy-combustion facility would occur on the Meredosia Energy Center property, although additional land area outside of the energy center would be needed for construction staging and equipment laydown. Construction of the proposed oxy-combustion facility would not conflict with any designated zoning plans, since there is no local or county-wide zoning ordinance that applies to the energy center. The Meredosia Energy Center is characterized as previously disturbed, industrial land use, with areas of open space (i.e., grass areas). Construction activities at the Meredosia Energy Center would be consistent with the industrial nature of the property and would not result in conversion of land use within the energy center property; therefore, impacts would be negligible. Adjacent properties are mostly occupied by industrial land uses, but a few residential properties are located to the east and north. The nearest residences are located approximately 1,300 feet from the proposed location of the oxy-combustion facility. Construction of the oxy-combustion facility would have a short-term, minor impact on land use compatibility in the immediate area and on neighboring property owners due to temporary increases in traffic and noise levels. Potential impacts to nearby residential and other properties during construction of the oxy-combustion facility are further described in Section 3.11, Aesthetics; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration. Construction staging would primarily occur on the Meredosia Energy Center property, but a few parcels of vacant and/or industrial land outside of the energy center would be utilized for additional laydown areas. The parcels outside of the Meredosia Energy Center being considered for use during construction include the following (USDA/NRCS 2001):  Approximately 28 acres of land to the southeast of the energy center: This land is owned by the Norfolk & Western Railway Company and is primarily agricultural cropland with a segment of ROW for a rail line. It would be used as a staging area, which would result in a temporary loss of this area from agricultural use during the duration of construction.  Approximately 1.5 acres of land to the east of the energy center: This land is a gravel parking area owned by Celanese Ltd, which would be used for parking during the construction period.  A small portion of open space to the north of the energy center: This land is undeveloped city-owned ROW. Construction activities would utilize the ROW for temporary parking and would revert back to its original use upon completion of the construction phase. The areas for construction staging would primarily experience temporary impacts. Although the land would not be available to the owners during the construction period, once proposed construction is completed, the land would revert back to its original use. Additionally, the properties adjacent to the potential construction staging areas are mostly industrial and, therefore, construction staging would not have a substantial land use impact on these properties and would not conflict with surrounding land uses. The existing public boat ramp area located northeast of the Meredosia Energy Center would be used as a temporary facility for unloading barges delivering modules of oxy-combustion equipment during construction. The boat ramp area has two boat ramps and is owned by the village of Meredosia. It is not anticipated that both of the boat ramps would be shut down during barge unloading since only one ramp would be needed to offload the materials; however, additional phases of project engineering and coordination with the village of Meredosia would be required to determine further access arrangements. It is anticipated that impacts to the boat ramp area would be short term, lasting between 1 to 3 months during each of several construction unloading timeframes. Properties adjacent to the temporary barge unloading facility include ROW and developed residential properties. Impacts to the adjacent properties due to barge unloading activities would be minor and primarily associated with noise and visual impacts (see Section 3.11, Aesthetics, and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). Such activities would be short term and similar to activities at other nearby properties that are industrial in nature (e.g., the Cargill grain elevator to the north of the boat ramp and the Meredosia Energy Center to the south). The use of the boat ramp area to support barge unloading operations would result in a temporary shutdown or closure of one of the boat ramps during offloading activities, which could result in temporary impacts to the boat ramp area. Even though it is not anticipated that public access to the river would be blocked by barge unloading activities, there is the potential to cause a temporary increase in residential and boat travel at alternate facilities. Details about the temporary barge unloading facility are provided in Section 2.4.3.2. Permanent impact areas would be limited to land within the Meredosia Energy Center boundaries and would not change the current industrial land use. In general, impacts to the energy center and adjacent properties during construction would be negligible to minor and temporary, as no major conflicts to land use compatibility are expected to occur. CO2 Pipeline Construction of the pipeline would involve land clearing and trenching within the 80-foot wide construction ROW for approximately 30 miles to the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area. These activities would have both short-term and potentially long-term impacts on land use. All impacts on land use during construction of the pipeline would be minor. Short-term impacts would result from temporarily restricting access and disrupting the ability to use the land for existing purposes (e.g., agricultural crops); land would be returned to its original condition after construction to the extent practicable. Long-term impacts could result from land cover changes to small areas of vegetated land (i.e., forests) due to land-clearing activities during construction and from the conversion of vegetated land to permanent 50-foot wide ROWs and access roads. To reduce land use impacts, access to construction ROWs would be provided from existing roads crossing the pipeline route to the extent practicable. Because the pipeline would be installed underground, the aboveground ROWs could be restored to their prior uses after construction with minimal aboveground features (i.e., pipeline markers at crossings and mainline block valve shelters). This would result in negligible to minor impacts on adjacent lands. To the extent practicable, the pipeline would be located along existing ROWs. In such cases, there would be short-term and negligible impacts, because land use within the original easement would remain the same. For example, approximately 4 miles of the pipeline for the southern route to the CO2 storage study area would be located within an existing US-67 ROW, which would not change the land use within the ROW. For portions of the pipeline that would be unable to return to existing conditions (i.e., forested land), impacts would be long term and permanent. Table 3.10-4 presents the potential land use acreages temporarily and permanently lost as a result of construction of the pipeline route options from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area. The two CO2 pipeline route options from the energy center to the storage study area would require similar acreage for construction ROW (approximately 252 acres for the southern route and 251 acres for the northern route). As discussed in Section 3.10.2, agricultural land is the most prevalent land use in the ROI. Therefore, agricultural land would be encountered most frequently during construction. Agricultural land accounts for an average of approximately 84 percent of land use within the construction ROW of the two pipeline route options. Agricultural land affected by construction of the pipeline would be temporarily unavailable and then restored after construction; resulting in no permanent loss of agricultural land. While the soils within the construction ROW could be returned to production if farmed, they may be less productive in the short term due to increased compaction and some loss from soil erosion. To help preserve the integrity of any agricultural land that would be impacted by pipeline construction, the Alliance would adhere to mitigative actions specified in construction standards and policies set forth in an Agricultural Impact Mitigation agreement with the IDOA; this agreement is discussed in greater detail in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils. Table 3.10-4. Potential Pipeline Route Construction Disturbances to Land Use Land Cover Type  Proposed Southern CO2 Pipeline Route Temporarily Lost Permanently Lost (acres) (acres)  Proposed Northern CO2 Pipeline Route Temporarily Lost Permanently Lost (acres) (acres)  Agricultural DevelopedVegetated Water Features  203 0  15 26 0 8 0 0  217 0 5 8 0 21 0 0  Total  218 34  222 29  Source: USDA/NRCS 2001 Note: Pipeline acreages presented in this table represent the pipeline right-of-way; not the 4-mile wide corridor. See Table 3.10-3 for details about the 4-mile wide pipeline corridor. CO2 = carbon dioxide Developed land accounts for an average of 11 percent of the construction ROW within the pipeline route options. The southern route would result in a greater amount of developed land temporarily lost (approximately 15 acres) as compared to the northern route (approximately 5 acres) (see Table 3.10-4). However, most of this is open land associated with rural development (e.g., farm-related properties).  Although farm-related residential properties (i.e., developed land) are located within the 4-mile wide pipeline corridor, it is unlikely that residential structures would be directly impacted by the route selected for the proposed project. Regulations require CO2 pipelines to be located no closer than 50 feet from residences (49 CFR 195). The Alliance proposes to locate the pipeline at least 150 feet from residences. It is possible that a shorter distance would be deemed necessary in order to avoid a sensitive environmental resource or at the request of an affected landowner, but the distance would not be less than the 50 feet required by federal regulations. The Alliance is in the process of securing easements for both temporary (for construction) and permanent (for operation and maintenance) ROWs on private lands. If it is necessary for the pipeline to bisect a private property, the design would include a suitable crossing of the pipeline to support vehicle access by the property owner throughout construction. Conformance to pipeline siting regulations would reduce potential impacts to nearby residences. It is expected that construction of the pipeline would not place any restrictions on a landowner’s ability to sell or transfer ownership of a property during or after construction. In general, construction impacts to developed (i.e., rural residential) land use would be driven by concerns related to temporary impacts from dust, aesthetics, traffic, and noise (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.11, Aesthetics; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). If necessary, and only after receiving a certificate of authority from the Illinois Commerce Commission for the CO2 pipeline, the Alliance could use the right of eminent domain under Illinois law to obtain ROWs and temporary work areas in the event that an easement could not be negotiated with the affected landowner. As would be the case for all landowners, the Alliance would compensate the landowner for the ROW and for any damages incurred during construction; however, the level of compensation may be determined by the court. Construction for pipeline crossings of roads and railroads would be accomplished using horizontal directional drilling or jack-and-bore technology, which allows for portions of the pipeline to be buried beneath lands without disturbing the surface directly above the pipeline. Any potential traffic lane closures to roadways would be temporary; safety measures such as the use of flaggers and signage would be used to minimize traffic delays and hazards. Therefore, impacts to traffic flow during pipeline construction are expected to be minor (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation). There are no major recreational areas along either pipeline route; therefore, access restrictions to public areas are not expected to occur during construction. In the event that the Alliance finds it necessary for the pipeline route to deviate from either the southern or northern pipeline routes analyzed in this EIS, DOE expects that impacts would be consistent with those addressed in this section, since the same siting criteria would be followed. In the event that the final pipeline routing results in additional impacts to land use resources, the following potential impacts would apply. In cases where existing ROW is unavailable and the land is unable to revert back to original use (i.e., vegetated), long-term impacts would result from conversion of land to operational ROW. Agricultural land impacted during construction would be managed in accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation agreement with the IDOA and would result in short-term impacts. As a result, construction impacts to land along the final pipeline route are expected to be minor. This section analyzes the impacts of the southern and northern pipeline routes, which end at the border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area depends upon the final siting of the CO2 injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed in the CO2 Storage Study Area discussion below. CO2 Storage Study Area Construction of the CO2 injection well site(s) would have temporary and permanent impacts on land use on up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Since the locations of the injection wells and associated monitoring wells are currently unknown, the Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria detailed in Section 2.5.2.1, such that they would not conflict with zoning requirements, if applicable. The Alliance would continue its dialog with landowners within the 5,300-acre storage study area to acquire the subsurface pore space and aboveground land area needed for the injection wells, monitoring wells, and surface facilities. The geologic formations considered for CO2 injection are not used for any other purposes and contain no minerals and no water suitable for drinking or irrigation. Other than on the specific sites for wells and aboveground facilities, landowners would be able to use their surface property for existing purposes, such as agriculture. Refer to Section 3.4, Geology, and Section 3.5, Groundwater, for additional details. Construction activities would require up to 28 acres for the injection and monitoring wells and associated facilities; and up to 64 acres for the construction of access roads. Construction at the CO2 injection well site(s) would disturb mostly agricultural land use, which accounts for 91 percent of the entire CO2 storage study area. Impacts on land use during construction activities would result from clearing of vegetation, construction of the injection wells and surface facilities, equipment movement, and construction equipment laydown. Once construction is completed, the areas not used for the wells and surface facilities would be regraded and revegetated to the extent practicable, with temporary and minor land use impacts. Permanent impacts due to conversion of land use would occur within the approximately 25 acres that would encompass the roads, surface facilities, and wells (see Section 3.10.3.2 for discussion of permanent impacts). Arrangements would be made with landowners to reduce the long-term impacts on agricultural land use or other activities around the facilities. Potential impacts to prime farmland are discussed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils. To reduce impacts on agricultural land, the Alliance would adhere to mitigative actions specified in construction standards and policies set forth in an Agricultural Impact Mitigation agreement with the IDOA (see Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils). Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. DOE developed hypothetical siting scenarios for the injection wells and the end-of-pipeline spurs that would connect the injection wells to the main pipeline route. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have fewer impacts to physical resources while other routes would have more impacts, while still representing reasonable routes. The Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1 such that they would, to the extent practicable, locate the pipeline along existing ROWs, site the pipeline no less than 150 feet from residences, and maintain consistent zoning (if applicable). Impacts would be consistent with those already described above for the pipeline routes, including short-term impacts during construction and potentially long-term impacts following construction. DOE estimates that the end-of-pipeline spurs from where the southern route adjoins the western edge of the CO2 storage study area to the hypothetical injection well sites would likely impact between 23 and 32 total acres during construction, including between 22 and 32 acres of agricultural land. The end-ofpipeline spurs from where the northern route adjoins the western edge of the CO2 storage study area to the hypothetical injection well sites would likely impact between 20 and 28 acres for the construction ROW, including between 18 and 26 acres of agricultural land. The acreage impacted during construction of the spurs is in addition to the maximum of 92 acres of land required for construction of the injection well site(s) within the CO2 storage study area.  Developed land is present within the construction ROW of the hypothetical pipeline spurs analyzed, but accounts for less than approximately 1 acre for the southern and northern end-of-pipeline routes. As previously discussed, impacts would be minor since the Alliance proposes to construct the pipeline a minimum of 150 feet from residential properties, in addition to conforming with all pipeline siting regulations. Educational Facilities Construction of the educational facilities would have short-term, negligible impacts. As discussed in Section 2.5.3, the specific locations of the educational facilities are currently unknown, but would be located in the Jacksonville area. The site or sites for the educational facilities would be in areas that have been previously disturbed. This proposed component would require approximately 3.5 acres of land and could involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination of both types of construction activities. The Alliance would abide by stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance that applies to all land within the corporate limits of Jacksonville and contiguous territory within 1.5 miles beyond. Additionally, the Jacksonville comprehensive plan and future land use plans would be used during site coordination and selection, and the Alliance would coordinate with the Jacksonville Regional Economic Development Corporation during the site identification process. Since the facilities would be constructed on previously disturbed and/or developed land, construction impacts to land use are anticipated to be negligible. 3.10.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center The operation of the oxy-combustion facility would have a negligible impact on the previously developed, industrial land use within the Meredosia Energy Center as it would not change the existing industrial use of the energy center. Since there are no land use and zoning plans for unincorporated Morgan County, no impacts to zoning would be anticipated. The proposed oxy-combustion facility represents a return to the former land use and would be compatible with land use of the industrial facilities adjacent to the energy center. Since the oxy-combustion facility would be consistent with the current land use at the energy center, nearby residential properties would not be substantially impacted by operation of the facility. Adjacent offsite properties used for construction staging would be converted back to their original use; therefore, no operational land use impacts are anticipated for these adjacent properties. Potential land use compatibility impacts on nearby residential properties would result from changes to the viewshed and increased traffic and noise levels during operation and are described in Section 3.11, Aesthetics; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, respectively. CO2 Pipeline Long-term impacts to land use along the pipeline ROW would occur from the permanent conversion of land cover, including vegetated land (i.e., forests), to permanent pipeline ROW. As shown in Table 3.10-4, the amount of land permanently lost due to the pipeline would vary according to which pipeline route option would be selected (southern or northern). As such, the impact analysis focuses on the comparison of the two pipeline route options. Any potential impacts to agricultural land would be mitigated by restoring the land to its original condition to the extent practicable and allowing the current land use to resume after construction. Adherence to ROW restrictions would be required to allow access for maintenance and limit construction of permanent structures within the permanent pipeline easement. Impacts on potential crop production would be further minimized if maintenance activities within the pipeline ROWs could be performed outside the planting and growing seasons. Therefore, operation of the pipeline would have negligible to minor long-term impacts on agricultural land use. To further reduce impacts on agricultural land, the Alliance would adhere to mitigative actions specified in construction standards and policies set forth in an Agricultural Impact Mitigation agreement with the IDOA (see Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils). Per the Agricultural Impact Mitigation agreement, the Alliance would provide a monitoring and remediation period of no less than two years immediately following initial operation of the pipeline or the completion of initial ROW restoration, whichever occurs last. The two-year period would allow for the effects of climate cycles, trench settling, crop growth, drainage, soil erosion, etc. to be identified through monitoring. Essentially, this period would be used to identify any remaining impacts associated with the pipeline construction that would need correction and follow-up restoration, and would allow time for the Alliance to effect necessary restoration (IDOA 2012). Pipeline construction that coincides with existing ROWs would have no long-term impacts on land use since the land would remain as operational ROW. Areas of vegetated land (e.g., forested) permanently impacted by the pipeline would account for 8 acres of land along the southern route and 21 acres along the northern route. Vegetated land in the operational ROW would be cleared, and the new ROW would be subject to restrictions within the pipeline easement regarding allowable vegetation. New ROW that would be created would have a minor long-term impact. In cases where a new pipeline would bisect a property, impacts may occur if the pipeline would obstruct current or future access within the property (i.e., road crossings and vehicle access). This impact would be avoided as the pipeline would be placed underground and engineered to withstand the weight of typical rural or residential vehicles (i.e., cars, trucks, tractors). The southern route would impact a greater amount of developed land than the northern route and potentially result in a permanent loss of approximately 26 acres of developed land in the southern route and approximately 8 acres in the northern route (see Table 3.10-4). However, most of this is open land associated with rural development (e.g., farm-related properties). Since the Alliance proposes to locate all pipeline at least 150 feet from the nearest residences, and the land would revert back to its original use, it is unlikely that residential land or residential structures would be directly impacted; therefore, impacts would be negligible. Potential public safety impacts to residential land use during operations are discussed in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety. CO2 Storage Study Area Operation of the CO2 injection well site(s) would permanently remove up to 25 acres of mostly agricultural land from existing use, a minor long-term impact. Specifically, the CO2 injection wells and supporting facilities would occupy up to 25 acres within the CO2 storage study area. Approximately 10 acres would be needed for the permanent operational footprint of the injection and monitoring wells and associated infrastructure and buildings, while the remaining 15 acres would be used for access roads to the well sites. Arrangements would be made with landowners to reduce the long-term impacts on agricultural land use or other activities around the proposed facilities. To the extent practicable, the Alliance would avoid net reductions in agricultural land. This would include designating land that is currently not farmed for use as agricultural land to replace acreages of land that would be removed from agricultural use because of the project. Land potentially placed into new agricultural use would be in the immediate vicinity of land taken out of agricultural use. Potential impacts to prime farmland are discussed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils. The CO2 storage study area includes predominately agricultural land but also includes areas of vegetated land that could be permanently lost if it were used for the CO2 injection wells and related facilities. Since agricultural land is the dominant land use, long-term, minor impacts are anticipated. Immediately adjacent land surrounding the CO2 injection well site(s) would remain unchanged and current uses would continue. For instance, agricultural activities would continue up to the fence line of the CO2 injection well site(s); therefore, no impacts to land use adjacent to the proposed facilities would occur. No additional impacts, beyond those addressed in Section 3.10.3.1, would be anticipated due to the operation of the end-of-pipeline spurs across the CO2 storage study area to the injection wells. The 25-acre area required for the CO2 injection wells and associated facilities would be owned or leased by the Alliance, which would include the surface and deep subsurface mineral rights. Because the Alliance would own the surface and deep subsurface mineral rights of the CO2 injection well site(s), it is unlikely that future drilling of wells for water, oil, or gas would occur in the 25-acre operational area. Given the small area involved, this would be a negligible impact. Additionally, the Alliance would own the deep pore space (about 4,000 to 4,500 feet underground) for the CO2 plume radius (approximately 4,000 to 5,000 acres), which would be contained within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. As discussed in Section 3.4, Geology, the Alliance identified a preliminary AoR of 25 miles centered on the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. The AoR contains a variety of existing wells, including oil and gas wells, shallow water wells, and a few deep wells (three wells at 1,000 feet bgs); however, since gas, oil, and water are relatively close to the surface (e.g., groundwater at approximately 200 feet), drilling for those resources would not be precluded by the presence of CO2 stored in the Mt. Simon Formation within the 5,300-acre area. Therefore, the mineral rights for the adjacent land with respect to the shallow well horizon (i.e., water, oil, and gas) at similar depth to existing wells in the area would not be impacted. Since no zoning plans or ordinances exist in unincorporated Morgan County, there would be no impacts to zoning. Land use adjacent to the CO2 injection well site(s) would not change, and would remain in agricultural use. Educational Facilities Operation of the educational facilities would have negligible or no impacts on land use, because it is anticipated that these proposed facilities would be located in areas already zoned for these types of uses. As discussed in Section 3.10.3.1, the Alliance would abide by requirements of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan. 3.10.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to existing land use. 3.11 AESTHETICS 3.11.1 Introduction This section describes existing aesthetic resources in the area that may be affected by implementation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and the corresponding direct and indirect impacts that would occur. Aesthetic resources are considered to have inherent natural or manmade scenic properties that give a landscape its character and value as an environmental factor. For the purpose of this analysis, aesthetic resources include scenic areas such as public lands (e.g., national parks or forests), nature preserves, viewsheds (i.e., the land, water, cultural, and other aesthetic elements that are visible from a fixed vantage point), and other resources preserved and managed by federal, state, and local governments. Aesthetic resources can be affected by changes in the visual landscape, increased glares or lighting, elevated noise levels, or other factors diminishing the physical value of these resources. Existing conditions that may also affect aesthetic qualities are addressed in other chapters of this document, such as Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.9, Cultural Resources; Section 3.10, Land Use; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration. 3.11.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for aesthetic resources includes the areas that would be impacted from construction and operation of the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline, storage study area, and supporting facilities (i.e., access roads and the educational facilities). Generally, the ROI would extend to the distances from which the project components are visible and would thus impact the viewshed. Because of the relatively flat topography, it is anticipated that the new energy center emissions stack, cooling towers, and associated emissions plumes would be visible from several miles away. For the purposes of this assessment, the ROI for the energy center is defined as a fixed 5-mile radius around the center point of the Meredosia Energy Center (39.8224° North, 90.5643° West). DOE assumed a ROI for the pipeline routes and injection wells to be a 0.5-mile distance from the border of the pipeline ROW and a 1-mile radius from the injection wells. The ROI for the educational facilities is defined generally as the town identified for potential siting of the facilities, as specific sites have not yet been selected. The oxy-combustion facility would be constructed and operated at the existing, but now suspended, Meredosia Energy Center site co-located with other industrial facilities. The CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s) would be constructed and operated in a rural, primarily flat portion of central Illinois (see Figure 3.11-1). The landscape is predominately row-crop farmland (i.e., corn and soybeans) during the growing season, and barren, fallow fields during the remainder of the year. Additional features within the viewshed include minor stream drainages characterized by dense deciduous forest cover and shrubbery, as well as other waterbodies (e.g., ponds, lakes, and rivers). Small towns are located throughout the region, as are scattered single-family homes and agricultural structures (e.g., grain silos). Small portions of the region, specifically within the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor and storage study area, include vistas of varied topography with scattered patches of thickets and forest, and rolling open farmland characterized by visibility ranging from a few feet to many miles in all directions. On the horizon, widely spaced infrastructure is visible, including industrial grain elevators located at rail access points and other groupings of buildings. See Section 3.10, Land Use, for further discussion of land use in the region. Because of the rural nature of the landscape and associated lack of large urban centers in close proximity, light pollution is minimal throughout the region in which the proposed project would occur. The nighttime views include very widely spaced outdoor lights at farms and more significant light domes associated with small towns within the horizon. From some vantage points along the pipeline corridor and within the storage study area, the light domes of Jacksonville and Springfield are visible over the horizon. DOE is not aware of any current light pollution regulations in the affected areas. 3.11.1.22 Method of Analysiis and Facttors Consiidered Aesthetic resources in the ROI weree identified thhrough aerial photographyy, zoning mapps, site visits, and a review off local publishhed resourcess (i.e., countyy zoning mapps, aerial phottography, lannd use cover mmaps, county annd town compprehensive plaans). The evaluuation of potenntial impacts to aesthetic rresources connsidered whethher the propoosed project wwould:  BBlock or degraade a scenic vvista or viewshhed;  DDegrade or dimminish a federral, state, or loocal scenic reesource;  CChange the areea’s visual ressources;  CCreate glare orr illuminationn that would bbe obtrusive oor incompatible with existing land use; oor  CCreate visual intrusions or vvisual contrassts affecting thhe quality of a landscape. Specificallly, these immpacts weree consideredd relative tto the proxximity of seensitive receeptors (e.g., residdences). 3.11.1.33 Regulatoory Framework 49 CFR 1195.210 (“Pippeline Locatioon”) specifiess that pipelinne ROWs shoould be sited to avoid, as far as practicablle, areas conttaining privatte dwellings, industrial buuildings, andd places of puublic assembbly. In addition, ppipelines should not be sitted within 50 feet of any pprivate dwelliing, industriall building, or place of public assembly in which personns work, conggregate, or asssemble, unless the pipelinne is providedd with at least 122 inches of ssoil cover in addition to thhat prescribedd in 49 CFRR 195.248 (“CCover Over BBuried Pipeline”)). No appliccable regulatiions have beeen identifiedd that would restrict the hheight of the  proposed prroject. Regulations regarding the opacity and visibilityy of emissionns are discusssed in Sectionn 3.1, Air Quuality. Regulations pertainingg to noise are ddiscussed in SSection 3.14, Noise and Vibration. 3.11.2 Affected EEnvironmeent 3.11.2.11 Meredossia Energyy Center The Mereedosia Energyy Center is llocated in ann industrial arrea typical of power plannts and consiists of abovegrouund storage ttanks, chimneey stacks, traansmission linnes, barge unnloading faciilities, and vaarious operationaal buildings. NNearby indusstrial facilitiess include the aadjoining prooperty to the ssouth of the eenergy center sitee which is deeveloped andd occupied byy the Celanesse Emulsions  (National Sttarch & Chemmical) plant and Norfolk & WWestern Railwway. Additionnal chemical pplant facilitiees, including TA Terminalls Inc. and Agrium Inc., lie to the east of the Celanese Emulsions plant, essentially southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center. These facilities utilize similar industrial structures (e.g., aboveground storage tanks). A 526-foot chimney stack at the Meredosia Energy Center is the tallest visible structure within a 5-mile radius of the energy center. Additional structures include two smaller chimney stacks measuring 301 feet and 184 feet in height, components of the oxy-combustion facility buildings ranging in height from 24 to 209 feet, and various transmission towers. Blinking aviation beacon lights on the stack are visible during nighttime hours. Historically, during operations of the energy center, a water vapor plume emanated from the facility and was visible from several miles depending on weather conditions. At the end of 2011, operations at the Meredosia Energy Center were suspended. All major structures remain in place; however, no emissions or vapor plumes emanate from the stacks. In addition, the energy center has a limited staff and traffic and noise are minimal (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, respectively). The area surrounding the Meredosia Energy Center has a landscape similar to the overall region. The village of Meredosia is located directly north of the energy center. The village has a population of approximately 1,044 and is of moderate density. Views of the Meredosia Energy Center from within the village are partially obstructed by existing buildings from certain vantage points. The tallest structures in Meredosia include a grain elevator and the IL-104 Bridge over the Illinois River, which has been determined eligible for listing on the NRHP. Height for the grain elevator is unavailable, but would be equivalent to that of a four story building (Hull 2012a). There are multiple tree lines in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center, many of which block the oxy-combustion facility structures from outside visibility. The Illinois River is located directly west of the Meredosia Energy Center and is used for fishing, boating, canoeing, and other recreational activities (IDNR 2012). Nearby public lands or potentially scenic areas include the Meredosia National Wildlife Refuge located approximately 1 mile north of the energy center, and the Meredosia Hill Prairie Nature Preserve located approximately 5 miles to the northeast. Boyd Park, a small recreation area, is also located within the village of Meredosia. Figure 3.11-2 depicts the surrounding area with the Meredosia Energy Center in the background. 3.11.2.2 CO2 Pipeline  The CO2 pipeline corridor would begin in Meredosia and traverse a portion of northern Morgan County. The Alliance has identified two possible pipeline routes from the Meredosia Energy Center to the injection wells in Morgan County. The two pipeline route options (i.e., the southern and northern route) are located within the 4-mile wide corridor shown in Figure 2-16. The corridor has a similar landscape to the overall region (see Figure 3.11-2) and encompasses the small communities of Concord and Sinclair. There are no national parks, state parks, forests, recreation areas, or wildlife refuges within the corridor. 3.11.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 storage study area has a similar agricultural landscape to the overall region. There are no existing communities, national parks, state parks, forests, recreation areas, or wildlife refuges within the proposed area. Figure 3.11-3 depicts a typical viewshed within the storage study area. 3.11.2.4 Educational Facilities The visitor and research center and the training facility are expected to be located in a city or town near the CO2 storage study area. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve the functions of the facilities. The facilities are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois, which is the county seat and largest city in Morgan County. Jacksonville has a large historic district with well-preserved architecture, in addition to multiple historic sites listed on the NRHP (see Section 3.9, Cultural Resources). Public parks and potentially scenic areas within Jacksonville include Duncan Park, Central Plaza Park, Barr Park, Kiwanis Park, Foreman Park, Nichols Park, and the Jacksonville Community Park. The Jacksonville Municipal Airport is located approximately 3 miles north of the city center. 3.11.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.11.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center During construction, neighboring properties would have a partial or unobstructed view of the construction site and equipment. Figure 2-14 shows the temporary and permanent impact areas within the Meredosia Energy Center property. Temporary impact areas are those that would be restored to their original condition to the extent practicable after construction of a project is completed. This restoration could take place in the near term or years after the areas are initially impacted, depending on the nature of the impact. Permanent impact areas are those that would be changed permanently from their prior conditions as needed for oxycombustion facility infrastructure. The barge impact area may have shorter temporary impact durations, with impacts to aesthetics occurring only during periods of barge unloading activities. Aesthetic impacts to the estimated 27 residences located directly adjacent to the northeast of the energy center and laydown areas would be greatest, mainly attributable to fugitive dust and noise (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration) during construction. Sensitive receptors with a direct view of the construction would experience temporary, minor adverse impacts as a result of increased visibility of construction operations. However, the site is in an existing industrial area, and construction of the proposed project would not represent a significant change in current aesthetic conditions or land use (see Section 3.10, Land Use). The majority of residents within the ROI would experience negligible impacts, as views of the Meredosia Energy Center would be obstructed by tree lines and existing structures. Certain tree lines may be temporarily deforested, which would increase visibility of construction activities. To the extent practicable, deforested areas near the northeastern site boundary would be reforested following construction; however, it may take considerable time for the vegetation to reach existing density and height (see Section 3.8, Biological Resources, for further discussion on vegetative impacts). Other wooded areas may be permanently deforested, specifically on the southern end of the site area. An increase in truck traffic would occur during construction, resulting in temporary minor adverse impacts to aesthetics for the residences along the truck routes (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation). The temporary barge unloading facility would be located directly adjacent to and completely visible to an estimated nine residences. During construction, increased visibility of construction activities, noise, and increases in truck and barge traffic would adversely affect the aesthetics of the region (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration); however, these impacts would be short term and minor as the barge unloading facility would be decommissioned following the completion of the construction phase. Other nearby public lands or potentially scenic areas would experience negligible impacts. CO2 Pipeline  Aesthetic impacts from construction activity along the pipeline ROW would be related to increased fugitive dust, truck traffic, and noise (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, respectively). Temporary visual impacts from increased visibility of construction equipment and activity would occur to sensitive receptors located adjacent to the CO2 pipeline route, as this activity would represent a considerable change from primary current agricultural uses. The alternative pipeline routes (i.e., southern and northern) were both sited to maximize the use of existing ROWs. In addition, the southern pipeline route was sited to address constructability criteria such as terrain, location criteria such as maintaining a minimum distance from residences and other occupied buildings, and environmental criteria such as avoiding sensitive environmental features. The Alliance would select a final route that would avoid, to the fullest extent possible, sensitive environmental resources and would be sited at a minimum distance of 150 feet from occupied structures, which is 100 feet further than what is federally mandated under 49 CFR 195.210. This would further reduce aesthetic impacts from construction noise and traffic and the visible impact of pipeline construction along the southern route. Overall, minor temporary impacts to adjacent property owners would be anticipated during construction activities. CO2 Storage Study Area Impacts from construction activity at the injection well site(s) would be related to fugitive dust, truck traffic, and noise (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, respectively). Since the locations of the injection wells and associated monitoring wells are currently unknown, the Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria detailed in Section 2.5.2.1. The Alliance is continuing a dialog with landowners within the study area to acquire subsurface pore space and aboveground land area for the injection and monitoring wells and surface facilities. There are an estimated 13 residences within the study area. Construction activities would require construction of surface facilities and land clearing. Once construction is complete, the areas not used for the wells and surface facilities would be regraded and revegetated to the extent practicable, with temporary minor aesthetic impacts to sensitive receptors located near the CO2 injection well site(s). Traffic increases would adversely impact the viewshed with additional vehicles on the roads and associated engine noise; however, the Alliance would install pull offs and provide other upgrades to transportation infrastructure to reduce traffic congestion in the area and thereby reduce the adverse aesthetic impacts along the transportation routes (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation).  Drilling of the injection wells would occur 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. DOE assumes the injection wells would have noise mitigation measures similar to those used at the stratigraphic well, which is currently surrounded by an earthen berm that mitigates the visual impacts and noise permeation (see Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). The drill rig operation would be illuminated by bright lights 24 hours a day. Typical nighttime construction is depicted in Figure 2-25. Use of earthen berms and other lighting BMPs would reduce the amount of direct light visible to the nearest residence; however, it is likely that a small light dome would be visible to those residences closest to the injection well site(s), resulting in temporary moderate impacts to these receptors. In addition to the injection wells, the Alliance expects to construct approximately 10 monitoring wells for the MVA program. Related aesthetic impacts would be similar to those described for the construction of the injection wells. If electrical poles are required to bring electricity to the injection and monitoring well sites (see Section 3.15, Utilities), aesthetic impacts would occur during construction activities from equipment and noise. The Alliance would place the poles along existing or new access roads to the extent practicable. The overall construction impacts to aesthetic resources at the injection well site(s) property would be temporary and moderate; however, the property is isolated from sensitive receptors such that these impacts would be mitigated due to distance. Educational Facilities The educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville. As discussed in Section 2.5.3, the specific locations of the educational facilities are currently unknown. The site or sites for the educational facilities would be in areas that have been previously disturbed. The project may involve new construction, rehabilitation of existing structures, or a combination of both activities. Impacts from construction activity would be related to fugitive dust, truck traffic, and construction noise (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration, respectively). Although a specific site has not been selected, it is assumed that temporary visual impacts would occur to sensitive receptors located adjacent to the educational facilities as a result of increased visibility of construction operations. As Jacksonville contains a number of cultural resources, including a historic district (see Section 3.9, Cultural Resources), any new construction would be coordinated with the local government to best incorporate building design within the existing features of the city. Impacts from the construction of the educational facilities would be temporary and minor. 3.11.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Long-term direct effects to existing viewsheds would occur from the introduction of new industrial structures at the Meredosia Energy Center. New features to the viewshed would include a stack no taller than 450 feet, a 180-foot oxy-combustion boiler building, and three new cooling towers ranging in height from approximately 30 to 65 feet. Additional buildings would be constructed associated with the oxycombustion process. The existing onsite transmission towers would be demolished; in addition, four new towers of comparable height would be constructed to re-route the existing transmission lines. While some of these structures would be visible within a 5-mile radius, existing structures at the energy center exceed the height of the proposed tallest structures (i.e., the existing 526-foot stack). Moreover, the new structures would be consistent with the current infrastructure at the energy center. Large structures are also located within the village of Meredosia (e.g., grain elevator). Overall, the introduction of new structures to the viewshed would not considerably alter existing aesthetic conditions. The new stack and cooling towers would emit plume clouds that could be visible (potentially beyond the ROI) depending on weather conditions. The stack would have aviation beacon lighting, including two levels of three medium intensity strobe lights that would be visible at night. The lighting would not result in significant adverse impacts from light pollution, even when combined with the existing lighting infrastructure on the 526-foot stack. Operational truck traffic would increase due to increased hauling of feedstock (mainly coal and limestone) and wastes (mainly fly ash and bottom ash); however, truck traffic would be routed to avoid the village of Meredosia and most sensitive receptors. This would result in minor aesthetic impacts to nearby residences along the truck routes (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation). CO2 Pipeline  The CO2 pipeline would be located underground and thus not visible from the surface; however, the 50-foot wide operational ROW would be permanently maintained free of woody vegetation to preserve access for inspection and maintenance activities; agricultural crops could continue to be grown within the pipeline ROW in agricultural areas. The areas outside the operational ROW, but that were disturbed as part of the 80- to100-foot wide construction ROWs, would be replanted after construction to reestablish pre-existing conditions to the extent practicable. It would take time for these plants to grow to their prior heights and densities, particularly in forested areas (see Section 3.8, Biological Resources, for further discussion on the vegetative impacts in the ROWs). Removal and disposal of trees and brush would be consistent with the IDOA Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement, including consultation with the landowner to determine whether there are trees of value to the landowner that should be retained. Along the operational ROW, there would be aboveground pipeline-related structures visible to receptors in close proximity. These structures would include meter stations, launchers and receivers (i.e., the start and end of the pipeline), pipeline markers at all crossings, mainline block valve shelters, cathodic protection station markers, and temporary zinc anode site markers (see Section 2.5.1.2 for further discussion of these structures). These structures would be close to the ground and thus not expected to significantly alter the viewshed of any sensitive receptors. As discussed in Section 3.11.3.1, pipeline routes have been sited to avoid major population areas, cultural resources, and public lands, and would utilize existing clearings and highway ROWs to the extent practicable. The pipeline would be located 150 feet from residences (rather than the minimum 50-foot distance required under 49 CFR 195). This would reduce aesthetic impacts maintenance activities or other visible impacts of pipeline operations. Overall impacts from operation of the CO2 pipeline would be minor. CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 injection well site(s) would consist of surface facilities, the injection and monitoring wells, and monitoring facilities (i.e., MVA). These structures would not exceed one story and would be designed with surface components to blend in with the surrounding area. Six-foot high fencing would be installed around the injection well site(s). Depending on the monitoring layout, fencing would also enclose each monitoring site. The Alliance would also seek local landowner viewpoints on the final exterior design of surface facilities. The Alliance intends to incorporate low-height vegetated berms in their landscaping to lessen the visual impact of the facilities. If electrical poles are required to bring electricity to the well sites (see Section, 3.15 Utilities), the Alliance would place the poles along existing or new access roads to the extent practicable. Under this scenario, an estimated 2 miles of new line may be constructed. For low voltage rural lines, pole spacing of 320 feet can be assumed. With 320-foot pole spacing, 33 wooden single poles would be placed. Pole placement would be along existing roads or new access roads. Pole height has not been determined; however, poles would be permanently visible from a short distance and would thus impact the viewshed for nearby sensitive receptors. Existing electrical poles are present along most major roads in the area and the placement of new poles would result in minor impacts to the viewshed. Impacts at the injection well site(s) from traffic and noise would be negligible to minor (refer to Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). Overall, aesthetic impacts from operations of the injection wells would be minor. Impacts related to aesthetics resulting from operation of the monitoring wells would be similar to those discussed for the injection wells. Educational Facilities The educational facilities would be located in or near Jacksonville. The facilities may be co-located or there may be one location for the visitor and research center and another for the training facility. Specific locations for these facilities have not yet been determined; however, it is expected that they would be located in existing buildings or occupy areas that have been previously disturbed. If the facilities were sited within existing structures, impacts to aesthetics would be negligible. If the Alliance constructs new buildings, the facilities would be one story and not significantly impact existing viewsheds. Increased traffic would occur as a result of patrons visiting the centers (see Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation), whereby the impacts from traffic would depend on the pre-existing conditions of the chosen sites, though they are not anticipated to be any greater than negligible. 3.11.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and land use would remain consistent with its current conditions, existing vistas and viewsheds would be preserved, and the aesthetic qualities of the ROI would remain as they are. 3.12 MATERIALS AND WASTE MANAGEMENT 3.12.1 Introduction This section describes the materials and wastes historically associated with the Meredosia Energy Center prior to suspension of operations at the end of 2011. The section also presents potential direct and indirect impacts related to the materials that would be consumed and wastes that would be generated during the construction and operation of the proposed project. 3.12.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI includes waste management facilities; industries that could use the FutureGen 2.0 Project byproducts; and the suppliers of construction materials, coal, fuel oil, and process chemicals used in the construction and operation of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. The extent of the ROI varies by material and waste type. The ROI for construction material suppliers and process chemical suppliers is small (within approximately 50 miles of the Meredosia Energy Center), because these types of resources are widely available and the large volumes of materials needed and wastes generated are costly to transport over large distances. Municipal landfills with adequate available capacity are present in Illinois within a distance of 100 miles from the energy center; therefore, the ROI for the disposal of nonhazardous waste is 100 miles. Treatment and disposal facilities for hazardous wastes are less common; hence, the associated ROI includes a multi-state (Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, and Michigan) area extending 100 to 400 miles from the Meredosia Energy Center. The ROI for coal includes the states of Illinois and Wyoming (the proposed suppliers for coal to operate the oxy-combustion facility). 3.12.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE evaluated impacts by comparing the demands posed by construction and operation of facilities for the FutureGen 2.0 Project to the capacities of material suppliers and waste management facilities within the ROI. The analysis also addressed regional demand and access to markets for fly ash and bottom ash. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would:  Cause new sources of construction materials and operational supplies to be developed, such as new mining areas, processing plants, or fabrication plants;  Affect the capacity of existing material suppliers and industries in the region;  Create wastes for which there are no commercially available disposal or treatment technologies;  Create the need for a hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal permit for the project;  Affect the capacity of waste collection services and treatment, storage, and disposal facilities;  Create reasonably foreseeable conditions that would increase the risk of a hazardous waste release; or  Create reasonably foreseeable conditions that would increase the risk of a hazardous material release. The specific quantities of materials and wastes that would be generated from the construction and operation of the energy center has been estimated based on preliminary design data for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The impact analysis in this section uses the maximum estimated value for the materials required and waste generated by the project. 3.12.1.3 Regulatory Framework The handling and storage of raw materials and the management of solid (non-hazardous) and hazardous wastes in Illinois are regulated by the IEPA (35 IAC) and by the USEPA (RCRA regulations in 40 CFR). There are several in-state and out-of-state facilities that provide for the storage, treatment, recycling, and transportation of solid and hazardous waste that would be available to the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The primary raw materials used at coal power plants are coal, water, wastewater treatment chemicals, natural gas, and backup fuel sources (e.g., fuel oil). Wastes generated at coal power plants primarily consist of coal combustion residuals. These residuals include:  Fly ash, consisting of fine particles that are collected by the electrostatic precipitators or filter fabric baghouses from flue gasses prior to exit to the atmosphere;  Bottom ash, or coarse particles that fall by gravity to the bottom of the boiler; and  Boiler slag, which is molten bottom ash that when quenched with water forms uniform-sized pellets. Coal combustion residuals are among the largest waste streams generated in the United States. According to the American Coal Ash Association's Coal Combustion Product Production & Use Survey Report, more than 136 million tons of these residuals were generated in 2008 (USEPA 2011o). Some coal combustion residuals are beneficially reused (e.g., fly and bottom ash are used in concrete production); however, when reuse is not feasible these residuals are typically placed in permitted ponds or landfills. Coal combustion residuals typically contain a broad range of metals, including arsenic, selenium, and cadmium; however, the leach test levels rarely reach the RCRA hazardous waste characteristic levels (USEPA 2011o). Coal combustion residuals are not currently regulated as RCRA hazardous waste under an amendment to RCRA.  Federal regulations governing the disposal of coal combustion residuals may become more stringent in the future. On June 21, 2010, USEPA proposed to regulate coal combustion residuals to address the risks from the disposal of the wastes generated by electric utilities and independent power producers. Under this proposal, USEPA is considering two possible options for the management of coal combustion residuals. Under the first option, USEPA would list these residuals as special wastes subject to regulation under subtitle C of RCRA, when destined for disposal in landfills or surface impoundments. For the second option, USEPA would regulate coal combustion residuals under subtitle D of RCRA, the section for non-hazardous wastes. USEPA has not issued a final ruling at the time this EIS was prepared. USEPA is proposing to retain the exemption from regulation for beneficial uses of coal combustion residuals (e.g., asphalt, cement, concrete). Within the state of Illinois, coal combustion residuals are regulated as non-RCRA special waste unless the generator of these residuals certifies that the waste meets certain requirements to be declassified as a special waste (DOE 2006; IEPA 2012b). Special waste is defined by the IEPA as any potentially infectious medical waste, hazardous waste, pollution control waste, or industrial process waste and is regulated under 35 IAC, Subtitle G. Any non-hazardous industrial process waste or pollution control waste may be declassified if the generator certifies that the waste:  Is not hazardous;  Is not a liquid;  Is not regulated asbestos-containing material as defined in 40 CFR 61.141;  Does not contain PCBs regulated in accordance with 40 CFR 761;  Is not formerly hazardous waste rendered non-hazardous; and  Does not result from shredding recyclable metals; Declassified special waste coal combustion residuals can be disposed of in any permitted commercial solid waste landfill in the state. Coal combustion residuals may also be disposed of in onsite, captive landfills or surface impoundments. Captive disposal facilities do not need permits, but they must meet design standards for landfills and they can only receive coal combustion residual waste that was generated onsite. Pollution control waste (e.g., dust collected from baghouses on air emissions control equipment) and wastewater are other wastes typically generated in large quantities at power plants. In Illinois, pollution control waste is regulated as a special waste. As discussed above, a special waste that has been declassified can be disposed of in a municipal landfill; otherwise, it must be disposed of in landfills permitted to receive special waste. Wastewater at power plants is typically treated onsite and discharged under a state-regulated wastewater discharge permit (see Section 3.6, Surface Water). Typical hazardous waste generated at coal power plants is generally limited to spent cleaners and solvents from maintenance and unused or spent wastewater treatment chemicals. 3.12.2 Affected Environment Solid (Non-hazardous) Waste Landfills As of 2011, Illinois had 40 active landfills (IEPA 2012c). The Illinois Nonhazardous Solid Waste Management and Landfill Capacity Report (IEPA 2012c), organizes these landfills into seven regions and provides the locations and life expectancies of each landfill. Table 3.12-1 lists the landfills within a 100-mile radius of the Meredosia Energy Center and their remaining disposal capacities. In addition to these and other landfills located in Illinois, there are available landfills in adjoining states. However, outof-state landfills are not expected to be utilized based on the available in-state capacity. Illinois landfills within a 100-mile radius of the Meredosia Energy Center are located in Illinois Regions Three, Four, Five, and Six (IEPA 2012c). Region Three includes the Peoria and Quad Cities area and is a 14-county region that includes landfills located in counties north of the Meredosia Energy Center. Region Three landfills within the ROI have an estimated combined remaining capacity of 62.6 million cubic yards. Region Four includes 19 counties to the east of the Meredosia Energy Center. Three landfills in this region are within the ROI, with an estimated capacity of 49.7 million cubic yards. Region Five is a 17-county region that includes Morgan County and has four active landfills, all within the project ROI. There are no landfills in Morgan County; the closest landfill to the Meredosia Energy Center is the Hickory Ridge Landfill located approximately 20 miles west of the Meredosia Energy Center. Region Five landfills have approximately 36.1 million cubic yards of remaining capacity. Finally, Region Six consists of nine counties to the south of the Meredosia Energy Center. Two landfills in this region are within the ROI, with an estimated capacity of 30.8 million cubic yards. Hazardous Waste Treatment, Storage, Disposal and Recycling Facilities Hazardous waste generated in Illinois may be managed both at the site of generation and at commercial facilities located within and outside of the state (IEPA 2011e). The FutureGen 2.0 Project would utilize one or more offsite facilities for hazardous waste management; onsite treatment of hazardous waste would not take place. There are several in-state options for storage, treatment, recycling, incinerating, processing, and transporting hazardous waste. The vast majority of in-state hazardous waste management consists of treatment and recycling (IEPA 2011e). Within Illinois, there are a total of 18 hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal, and recycling facilities (ENVCAP 2011). Within the states immediately bordering Illinois (Iowa, Wisconsin, Missouri, Kentucky, and Indiana) there are 45 additional hazardous waste treatment, storage, disposal, and recycling facilities (ENVCAP 2011). Source: IEPA 2012c  a.  Permit application Log #2009-571 for a proposed expansion (9,532,000 cubic yards) is under review as of December 31, 2011. b. Permit application for a proposed expansion has been approved, to allow operations to continue beyond 2013. IEPA = Illinois Environmental Protection Agency 3.12.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center  A review of various regulatory databases indicates that the Meredosia Energy Center property is not associated with voluntary cleanup for leaking underground storage tanks. There are no known Superfund sites within a 50-mile radius of the property (USEPA 2012g). The Meredosia Energy Center is regulated under RCRA for activities associated with the handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous and solid waste. The facility is regulated as a small-quantity generator of hazardous waste, meaning the facility may generate more than 220 pounds, but less than 2,200 pounds, of hazardous waste per month. The Meredosia Energy Center has numerous aboveground storage tanks, warehouse buildings, and storage areas. In addition, the energy center maintains two ponds historically used for the disposal of fly ash and bottom ash generated onsite prior to the suspension of operations at the end of 2011. A description of the main process-related raw materials used for current operations is provided below. Process-Related Materials The primary process-related materials historically used (prior to the suspension of operations at the end of 2011) include IL No. 6 and Powder River Basin coal, fuel oil, natural gas, and process water treatment chemicals. The storage and use of each of these materials is discussed below. Table 3.12-2 lists the historical quantities of coal and fuel oil delivered to the energy center each year. Table 3.12-2. Historical Material Usage Rates Annual Usage Product 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 281,497 203,439 0 0 0 825,912 712,284 346,856 364,632 242,415 1,165,609 0 800,000b 0 0 479,217 500,019 190,820 350,313 107,994 a. Assuming that all coal supplied by truck was IL No. 6 coal. b. Oil was sold and offloaded to a barge. IL = Illinois; PRB = Powder River Basin Coal Supply. Historically, the Meredosia Energy Center used sub-bituminous coal from the Powder River Basin in Wyoming and bituminous coal from Illinois (Illinois No. 6 coal) to fuel Unit 3 (Boiler 5). Units 1 and 2 (Boilers 1 through 4) were typically supplied with Illinois No. 6 coal; operation of these units is currently suspended, though they could be reactivated in the future. The typical burn rate of Boilers 1 through 4 of bituminous coal was approximately 180 tons per hour at full load. The burn rate for Unit 3 (Boiler 5) was approximately 108 tons per hour of bituminous coal or 125 tons per hour of Powder River Basin coal. Coal was delivered by barge and truck, and stored in onsite storage piles. Fuel Oil and Natural Gas. Boiler 6 operated on fuel oil that was stored in two 4.6 million-gallon aboveground storage tanks. Distillate fuel oil was used as auxiliary fuel for Boilers 1 through 6, to power onsite mobile power equipment (scraper dozers, etc.) and to operate stationary equipment. Distillate fuel was stored in eight 14,000-gallon aboveground storage tanks. Natural gas was provided via an underground pipeline (see Section 3.15, Utilities) and used for warmup and ignition of Boiler 6 and to fuel a small boiler to heat the molten sulfur tank when steam was not available from the main boilers. Process Water Treatment Chemicals. The process chemicals used by the energy center, prior to the suspension of operations at the end of 2011, were common water treatment and conditioning chemicals that are widely used in industry. Sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide were used to regenerate the ion exchange resin in the demineralizer, where deep well water was treated for use as boiler makeup water. Sulfuric acid was also used to control pH in the fly ash pond effluent. Sulfuric acid was stored in a 10,000-gallon aboveground storage tank; sodium hydroxide was stored in a 22,600-gallon aboveground storage tank and in a 10,000-gallon day tank. Boiler 6 utilized hydrazine and ammonium hydroxide for all-volatile treatment of boiler feed water, whereas Units 1, 2, and 3 utilized hydrazine and phosphate treatment. Hydrazine and ammonium hydroxide used in the boiler treatment chemical feed program were stored in aboveground storage tanks or smaller containers (e.g., 55-gallon drums). Disodium phosphate and trisodium phosphate were stored dry in bags or covered plastic barrels at the location of final use. Since the energy center suspended operations, no water treatment and conditioning chemicals have been delivered to the energy center. Process-Related Waste  Fly Ash and Bottom Ash. The main process-related wastes historically generated at the Meredosia Energy Center were fly ash and bottom ash. Table 3.12-3 shows the annual generation of coal combustion residuals at the Meredosia Energy Center. Fly ash and bottom ash generated at the Meredosia Energy Center were historically disposed of in two onsite ash ponds (note that any ash generated in the future from operation of the proposed oxycombustion facility would not be disposed of in these ponds). The fly ash pond was commissioned in 1968, is 34 acres in area, and has a total storage capacity of 620 acre-feet. The bottom ash pond was commissioned in 1972, is 11 acres in area, and has a total storage capacity of 186 acre-feet. There has been one incident within the past 10 years, which occurred in 2006, when water from the fly ash pond was released to the land (less than 500 gallons). In response, the pond was modified and the energy center adopted internal procedures to prevent a recurrence. No other spills or releases from the ash ponds have occurred. The IEPA reports that there are 24 power plants in Illinois with a total of 68 active ash impoundments and 15 inactive ash impoundments that are regulated under Illinois’ NPDES permit program. IEPA identified the Meredosia Energy Center surface impoundments as one of 10 “Priority 1” surface impoundments, for its high potential for aquifer recharge that could have an impact on existing or future potable water uses (IEPA 2011e). Priority 1 facilities were requested to install groundwater monitoring wells, implement a monitoring program, and submit electronic compliance reports to IEPA because a groundwater monitoring system was not already in place at these facilities. According to the IEPA, initial groundwater monitoring results have been submitted and reviewed for Priority 1 facilities (IEPA 2011c). IEPA analyzed groundwater flow direction based on the initial sampling event at the Meredosia Energy Center and determined that groundwater flows towards the river, which would not affect any of the potable water supply wells identified near the ash ponds. IEPA sent a letter to Ameren stating that if elevated levels of contaminants were identified, further investigation and appropriate remedial activities would be required where necessary. It should be noted that the existing ash ponds at the Meredosia Energy Center will remain the responsibility of Ameren and would not be used for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Other Hazardous and Solid (Non-Hazardous) Waste. The Meredosia Energy Center used nearby solid waste management facilities for the offsite disposal of its solid waste (other than coal combustion residual waste, which was placed in onsite ponds as discussed above). Hazardous waste was disposed of at an offsite treatment facility. Table 3.12-4 shows historical quantities of hazardous waste generated by the facility. Solid waste typically consisted of sanitary waste, general and bulk trash; scrap metal was also collected and sent to metal recyclers. Table 3.12-5 shows the approximate annual quantities of solid waste generated by the facility. Table 3.12-5. Historical Solid (Non-hazardous) Waste Generation  Approximate Annual  Waste Receptacle Capacity Pickup Frequency Waste Generationa 6 cubic yards Every 2 weeks (26 times per year) 156 cubic yards 25 cubic yards Monthly (12 times per year) 300 cubic yards 50,000 pounds Three (3) times per year 150,000 pounds a. These quantities are calculated assuming that containers were full at the time of each pickup. 3.12.2.2 CO2 Pipeline  The region around the proposed pipeline corridor from the Meredosia Energy Center to the CO2 storage study area consists mainly of agricultural land, scattered small communities (i.e., Concord and Sinclair), and the larger city of Jacksonville. There are no known structures or material storage areas located along the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor. Further, there are no known areas of historical or current contamination from hazardous materials or wastes present along the proposed pipeline corridor. 3.12.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area There are no structures or material storage areas located at the proposed CO2 storage study area. Further, there are no known areas of historical or current contamination from hazardous materials or wastes. 3.12.2.4 Educational Facilities  The visitor and research center and training facility are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve the functions of the facilities. Because the locations of the educational facilities are unknown, DOE cannot characterize the existing environment specifically; however, it is likely that the facilities would be located in a semi-urban to urban area. The city of Jacksonville and its vicinity has ample access to material supplies and waste disposal services. 3.12.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.12.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Standard construction materials for the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would include structural steel members, steel and other metallic and non-metallic piping and tubing, tanks, valves, concrete, ductwork, insulation, electrical cable, sand, paint, fasteners, mechanical and electrical fittings, adhesives, and lumber for the proposed facilities and temporary structures (e.g., fencing and scaffolding). Components of the facilities would also include lighting fixtures, small electrical generators, transformers, and other miscellaneous electrical equipment. These materials are typical construction-related materials and would be available from local suppliers within the region. It is expected that the materials needed would be readily available, and the quantities required for construction at the energy center would not result in any adverse impacts on regional supplies. There would be larger electrical components and specialty materials needed for the project that would likely be obtained from national or international suppliers. Waste from construction at the energy center and supporting infrastructure would include demolition materials from the removal of existing structures, excess materials, and miscellaneous materials such as pallets, crates, and other packing materials. Demolition materials would be segregated by materials that can be reused or recycled (e.g., scrap metal) from waste materials that would be disposed of in offsite demolition waste landfills. Regulated wastes such as asbestos or lead-based paint, if generated during construction activities, would be managed and disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations. Excess supplies of new materials would be returned to vendors or be retained for future use. Surplus paint, partial spools of electrical cable, and similar leftover materials would also be retained for possible future use in maintenance, repairs, and modifications. Scrap metal would be sold to scrap dealers. Packaging material (e.g., wooden pallets and crates), support cradles used for shipping large vessels and heavy components, and cardboard and plastic packaging would be collected in dumpsters and periodically transported offsite for recycling or disposal. Organic debris (e.g., dirt, brush) would be generated from clearing and grading, although the majority of the area is free of vegetation. Organic debris would be used as fill on the site when feasible or disposed of at an offsite facility. Construction equipment would include cranes, forklifts, air compressors, welding machines, trucks, and trailers. Operation of heavy equipment would require fuel, oils, lubricants, and coolants. These materials may be stored onsite in aboveground storage tanks, 55-gallon drums, or smaller containers. Vehicle maintenance could be contracted either onsite or offsite. All liquid hazardous material storage would be equipped with secondary containment to prevent a release of these liquids to the environment. Should any of these liquids require disposal, they would be appropriately managed in accordance with Illinois and federal regulations by the construction contractor. The available solid waste disposal capacity in the region is summarized in Table 3.12-1. Because the quantity of waste from construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would be small in comparison to the landfill capacity and waste quantities routinely handled, the impact to waste collection and disposal services within the ROI would be negligible. CO2 Pipeline During the construction of the CO2 pipeline, removal and disposal of trees, brush, etc. would be consistent with the IDOA Impact Mitigation Agreement, including consultation with landowners to determine whether there are trees of commercial or other value to the landowner that should be retained. Construction-related debris would be used as fill along the pipeline whenever feasible and allowed by state regulation; other construction waste would be removed and disposed of at an offsite facility. Additional raw materials (e.g., pipeline materials, fuel for equipment) would be required for pipeline construction. The quantities and types of materials required for the project are expected to be readily available within the region and nationally. CO2 Storage Study Area The conceptual design for the injection well site(s) consists of surface facilities, up to four injection wells, access roads, and MVAs. Surface facilities would consist of the site control building, the booster pump building, two well maintenance and monitoring system buildings, and a parking lot. Construction materials for the surface facilities would consist primarily of structural steel beams and steel piping, tanks, valves, sand, paint, and lumber for the proposed facilities and temporary structures (e.g., fencing and scaffolding). Other materials needed would include concrete, ductwork, insulation, electrical cable, lighting fixtures, generators, and transformers. These materials are typical construction-related materials and would be available from local suppliers within the region. Other components to be constructed at the CO2 injection well site(s) would be the injection wells, monitoring wells, any piping associated with the wells, and access roads. The materials needed for well components would include piping and concrete for seaming. The construction of the pipeline would require metal, as well as joining and welding materials including compressed gasses. Construction of the injection wells would require materials to operate and maintain construction equipment, including engine oil, hydraulic oil, diesel fuel, gasoline, antifreeze, and drilling fluids. Fuel would be stored in aboveground storage tanks equipped with secondary containment. Double-wall tanks would be preferred, but lined dikes with a capacity of 1.5 times the volume of the storage tank(s) could also be used. Sources for these construction materials are well established both regionally and nationally, and the quantities of materials required to construct the pipeline would have a negligible impact on the supply and demand for these materials. Wastes generated during well construction would include drill cuttings, drilling fluid, and fluid removed from subsurface formations. It is anticipated that a total of approximately 700 cubic yards of drill cutting waste would be generated. These wastes would be transported offsite by a licensed waste hauler for treatment and disposal at permitted facilities. All construction materials would be ordered in the correct sizes and quantities, resulting in small amounts of excess material that could be saved for future use and very small amounts of waste to be disposed in a permitted landfill. Heavy equipment would be used that requires fuel, oils, lubricants, and coolants. Should any of these hazardous materials require disposal, they would likely be regulated as special waste or hazardous waste and would be appropriately managed (e.g., recycled or treated and disposed of offsite) by the construction contractor. Precautions would be taken to minimize the potential for spills; any releases would be immediately cleaned up. Personnel would be trained and equipped to respond to spills when they occur. There would be no impact to waste collection services or disposal capacity. As previously discussed, there is adequate solid waste disposal capacity in the region and adequate hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities available within the region and nationally. Educational Facilities The visitor and research center and training facility would be located near the CO2 injection wells. Nonhazardous and hazardous or special waste generated from the construction of the educational facilities would be similar to those described above for the surface facilities at the injection wells. The construction of the educational facilities would generate approximately 82 tons of waste. As discussed earlier, the specific location of the educational facilities is currently unknown, but they would be located in the Jacksonville area. The site or sites for the educational facilities would be in areas that have adequate access to sources of construction materials and waste disposal facilities. Therefore, impacts to materials availability and waste disposal would be negligible. 3.12.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Process-Related Materials Similar raw materials as previously used at the Meredosia Energy Center would be required for the FutureGen 2.0 Project, namely coal, fuel oil, natural gas, and water treatment chemicals. Table 3.12-6 provides the estimated quantities of coal, trona, and lime that would be used. IL = Illinois Coal Supply. Coal would be delivered to the Meredosia Energy Center site by barge or truck and would be stored in the existing coal pile, which has the capacity to handle coal for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Table 3.12-6 lists the quantities and types of coal that the oxy-combustion facility would use. The quantities required would be lower than the amounts historically used by the Ameren facility, and would have a negligible impact on national supplies of coal. Lime and Trona. The estimated consumption of lime and trona is presented in Table 3.12-6. Lime and trona would be delivered to the energy center by truck and stored onsite. The required quantities of these materials would have a negligible effect on supply, compared to regional and national availability. Fuel Oil and Natural Gas. The estimated consumption of natural gas is not known. The estimated consumption of fuel oil by stationary sources would be 85,900 to 877,000 gallons per year, depending upon the number of warm and cold startups the system may experience. Fuel oil would be stored in aboveground storage tanks, while a natural gas pipeline already serves the Meredosia Energy Center (see Section 3.15, Utilities). Fuel oil and natural gas are commonly used in industrial facilities and are widely available from suppliers. Water and Wastewater Treatment Chemicals. The estimated consumption of process chemicals by the oxy-combustion facility is not presently known. Water treatment chemicals expected to be used are commonly used in industrial facilities and are widely available from national suppliers. The materials needed in the largest quantities would be sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide, and lime. The polymers, antiscalants, and stabilizers needed for the cooling tower, makeup water, and wastewater systems are not specified at this time; however, a variety of products are available from regional and national suppliers. Process-Related Waste Table 2-6 provides the estimated quantities of fly ash and bottom ash that would be generated from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility, while Table 3.12-7 provides the estimated quantities of other wastes that would be generated at the Meredosia Energy Center. The primary waste stream anticipated from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility would consist of fly ash and bottom ash. The facility would generate in excess of 200,000 tons of fly ash and bottom ash per year. These wastes would be disposed of at an offsite facility; the two onsite ponds that historically accepted fly ash and bottom ash would not be used for disposal of fly ash or bottom ash for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Fly ash and bottom ash would be stored onsite before being transferred into trucks that would transport these wastes to an offsite facility. See Section 2.4.4.2 for further information. Per IEPA regulations, coal combustion residuals (including fly ash and bottom ash) are considered special wastes (see Section 3.12.1.3) and may only be disposed of in landfills permitted to receive special waste. However, generators of special waste may request IEPA to declassify their waste if the waste meets certain criteria; if declassified, the waste can be disposed of in any permitted landfill. Coal combustion residuals are typically eligible for declassification based on the criteria established by IEPA (IEPA 2012b). If declassified, the fly ash and bottom ash generated by the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be disposed of in any available, permitted landfills; otherwise, they would be disposed of in landfills permitted to receive special waste. In addition, the bottom ash and fly ash generated would be beneficially reused whenever possible, to reduce the volumes requiring disposal. If there is not a demand for the ash by-product, disposal of the bottom ash and fly ash at a commercial landfill could potentially shorten the lifespan of landfills selected for the project, due to the large quantity of ash that would be disposed. This could have a minor to moderate negative impact on the availability of disposal options for businesses and communities. As discussed earlier, the USEPA has also proposed new rules on the management and disposal of coal combustion residuals under RCRA (see Section 3.12.1.3). At the time of this EIS, these rules have not been finalized. If the USEPA finalizes these rules in the future, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would comply with them, as applicable. Per USEPA’s current proposed rule, beneficial use of coal combustion residuals would continue to be exempted from regulation. Table 3.12-7. Estimated Other Waste Generation Rates  Waste Type Amount per day Amount per year Waste Type/Disposal 60 percent Illinois No. 6 and 40 percent PRB Coal Combustion Water and Wastewater Treatment System Wastes Highly variable 158 tons Special waste/Offsite disposal PRB = Powder River Basin; RCRA = Resource Conservation and Recovery Act In addition to the waste previously described, the facility may generate hazardous waste such as solvents and paints from maintenance activities. If operations at the energy center generate enough hazardous waste to meet the threshold for a large quantity generator of hazardous waste as defined by USEPA (greater than 2,200 pounds of hazardous waste generated per month), the facility would be operated in compliance with all requirements applicable to large quantity generators. Hazardous waste would be managed in accordance with federal and state hazardous waste regulations, including providing secondary containment where necessary. All hazardous waste would be transferred offsite to a hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facility. Chemical waste would be generated by periodic cleaning of the steam generator and turbines. This waste would consist of alkaline and acidic cleaning solutions mixed with wash water, and is likely to contain heavy metals. Chemical cleaning would be performed by outside contractors who would be responsible for the removal of associated waste products from the site. Cleaning waste would be characterized prior to disposal and, if determined to be hazardous, would be managed and tracked appropriately; however, based on available information, it is not expected that this waste stream would be considered hazardous waste. Precautions would be taken to prevent releases by providing spill containment for tankers used to store cleaning solutions and waste. Other wastes generated would include solids generated by water and wastewater treatment systems, such as activated carbon. Water from the Illinois River would serve as the process water supply for the oxycombustion facility. The water supply would have to be treated to decrease the concentrations of dissolved solids and constituents such as sodium and potassium to levels consistent with the process water design parameters for the oxy-combustion facility. Waste generated by the water treatment facility would include sludge and spent filter media that would be transported offsite for disposal in a municipal landfill approved for disposal of special waste. Wastewater from the CO2 compression and purification unit would be pH-adjusted and treated to remove mercury, prior to discharge. Spent mercury polishing media and mercury polishing system backwash would be transferred offsite for disposal. This waste would be characterized prior to disposal and, if determined to be hazardous, would be managed accordingly. Wastewater from other Unit 4 processes would be treated to meet all applicable water quality standards found in 35 IAC 302 (Water Quality Standards) and applicable state and federal effluent limits. Wastewater contaminated with oil would be routed through oil-water separators before being sent to the Unit 4 wastewater treatment system. Oil-water separator waste (i.e., oily water) would be collected in a storage reservoir integrated into each oil-water separator, and would be pumped out periodically for transport and disposal offsite. It is expected that separator waste would be transferred directly from the separators into a truck and would be removed from the facility on the same day; however, it is possible that the waste may be transferred to an intermediate tank with secondary containment prior to shipment offsite. Such an arrangement, if used, would be described in the SPCC plan along with procedures for preventing spills during transfers. Dewatered sludge from the Unit 4 wastewater treatment system would be transported offsite for disposal in a municipal special waste landfill. DOE estimates that the quantities of general (i.e., municipal) solid waste and hazardous waste generated would be comparable to the historical rates discussed in Section 3.12.2.1. Given the small amount of sanitary and hazardous waste (e.g., paints and solvents) that would be generated and the availability of commercial treatment and disposal facilities, the impact of disposal of generated waste would be negligible. CO2 Pipeline Operation of the CO2 pipeline would require periodic inspections and maintenance activities, including vegetation clearing along the pipeline ROW. Small amounts of organic land clearing debris would be generated as a result of these activities, and would be disposed of in an offsite disposal facility. No other solid or hazardous wastes would be generated as a result of pipeline operations. CO2 Storage Study Area The site control building would house the major operational components of the pipeline and injection wells. A maintenance area would be included to house the equipment needed for routine maintenance of pump equipment, repair parts, and at least one site and pipeline monitoring vehicle. The booster pump building would house the well injection pumps and associated flow meters, flow control valves, and variable speed drive cabinets. The booster pump building would be equipped with an emergency generator to operate the pump station and the injection wells. Backup power would be supplied by a diesel generator. Diesel fuel used to operate the generator would be stored in an aboveground storage tank equipped with secondary containment. During normal operations at the injection wells, minimal waste would be generated from routine maintenance. The waste could be special or hazardous (e.g., lubricants and oils) and sanitary waste (e.g., packaging and food waste). The expected minimal waste quantities would not impact disposal capacities of area landfills and waste collection services.  Periodic injection well maintenance (or well workover) may result in the generation of wastes such as brine fluids and sand. Acid may be employed to remove scaling, in which case acid and scaling residue would be generated. The rigs used for well workover would also generate wastes including hydraulic fluids, rigwash, spent solvents, and used lubricating oil and filters. The frequency of workover operations would depend on data from well monitoring, but external mechanical integrity tests are planned at not less than 5-year intervals and workover activity would likely coincide with those activities. Solid waste materials would be transported in dump trucks and would be disposed in permitted landfills. The workover liquid waste would be collected and transported in vacuum tanker trucks and hauled to a wastewater treatment plant. The volume of waste material generated during a well workover would depend on pipe and equipment degradation. While the volume would vary greatly from well to well, it is expected that less than 40 liquid hauling trucks with capacities of up to 3,000 gallons each would be required for liquid wastes, and less than 20, 20-cubic-yard roll-offs for solid wastes would be required for each workover. The volume and frequency of well workover waste generation would be low enough that impacts on waste treatment and disposal capacity in the region would be negligible. The Alliance is reviewing a series of monitoring activities, which will be finalized in the MVA of the UIC Class VI permits. No waste would be generated from monitoring activities. The injection wells would have a well maintenance and monitoring system building containing facilities to supply the well with fluid to maintain annulus pressurization. No chemicals would be required to operate or maintain the well maintenance and monitoring system building, and no wastes would be generated. Educational Facilities Operation of the educational facilities would require minor amounts of materials for maintenance, and would result in the generation of primarily sanitary waste and solid waste (e.g., food containers and office trash) along with small amounts of hazardous and special wastes from facility operations and maintenance. Operation of the educational facilities would have negligible impacts to materials and waste management, since there is adequate access to required materials and to sanitary and hazardous waste disposal facilities in the Jacksonville area. 3.12.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no changes to material use and waste generation. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.13 TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION 3.13.1 Introduction This section describes traffic and transportation systems potentially affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and analyzes the potential direct and indirect effects from this project on these systems. This section discusses the existing roadways and other transportation infrastructure that would be used during construction and operation of the oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, CO2 injection wells, and educational facilities. This analysis focuses on the potential short- and long-term effects that may occur along existing maintained state and county roadways in the area. Specifically, it analyzes the ability of existing traffic and transportation infrastructure to meet the needs of the project while continuing to meet the needs of other users. 3.13.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for the transportation analysis consists of the primary roads most likely used for worker commute and delivery of materials. The ROI is easily accessible using different transportation modes, including roadways, rail, aircraft, and watercraft. Because the proposed project would primarily result in changes to roadway traffic, it is the main focus of the transportation resource section. The ROI includes the roadway network within 40 miles of the Meredosia Energy Center, along the pipeline corridor, and adjacent to the CO2 storage study area. Since the proposed oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, and CO2 injection wells would be the focus of the transportation-based activities (e.g., vehicle traffic), indirect effects outside the ROI would be less than those described herein. 3.13.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered Components of the project that would impact transportation resources include the number of personnel, as well as the volume of trucks transporting materials and wastes, during the construction and operation phases. The impact analysis was limited to major roadway segments leading to the project areas from nearby population centers (e.g., Jacksonville) as these would represent major transportation corridors for workers commuting to the site. The vehicular transport of materials and equipment is also expected to occur mainly on these roadways. DOE analyzed impacts on the roadway network within the ROI based on the following:  Baseline traffic volumes and level of service (LOS);  Geographic distribution of travel patterns of workers and truck transport of materials;   No-build traffic volumes (i.e., projected future traffic volumes without the project); and  Proposed project traffic volumes (i.e., “Build” scenario or projected future traffic volumes with the project). DOE assessed the potential impacts on transportation resources based on whether the proposed project would:  Substantially increase daily vehicular traffic on key roadway segments and thereby degrading the LOS to exceed traffic-handling capacity;  Substantially increase daily barge traffic on the Illinois River to exceed capacity and interfere with other users; or  Conflict with regional or local transportation improvement plans. The number of vehicles that travel along a route in a 24-hour period is the average daily traffic, which is not adjusted for trucks or seasonal variations. The average annual daily traffic includes adjustments for seasonal, weekly, daily, and hourly variations and is calculated as the number of vehicles traveling along a roadway in a year, divided by 365 days. For this project, the 2011 levels were obtained from IDOT. One-way peak hour volume is the number of vehicles using the primary travel lane during the busiest hour of the day, normally the morning or afternoon rush hour. The Highway Capacity Manual establishes a scale for the LOS of a road or intersection, which consists of six levels. This scale qualitatively measures the operational conditions within a traffic flow and the perception of these conditions by motorists. The six levels are given letter designations ranging from A to F, with “A” representing the best operating conditions (free flow, little delay) and “F” the worst (congestion, long delays). Various factors influence the operation of a roadway or intersection, including speed, delay, travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort, convenience, and safety. LOS designations of A, B, or C are typically considered good operating conditions, in which motorists experience minor or tolerable delays. DOE used the highest average annual daily traffic, and subsequently the highest peak hourly traffic, for the road segments within the corridor to reflect worst-case baseline conditions. DOE reviewed 2011 average annual daily traffic volumes obtained from the IDOT. DOE also estimated the number of vehicle trips generated during the peak construction period (2015) and first full year of operation (2017) based on project information provided by the Alliance and Ameren. This information included the anticipated total number of personnel during construction and operation, the projected truck volumes during construction and operation, and the proposed transport of feedstock and wastes that would occur at the Meredosia Energy Center during operation. Employee and truck traffic from the proposed project was distributed on roadways near the Meredosia Energy Center that would be affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. DOE used the volume-to-capacity ratio to determine the LOS of roadway segments in the ROI and to determine the level of effects. DOE assumed that the maximum one-way distance that a worker would drive is 40 miles, and the traffic distributed on roadways based on the population of each destination town. To assess potential effects to the Illinois River, DOE compared the change in daily barge traffic during both construction and operation of the oxy-combustion facility and pipeline to existing conditions. Further, DOE assessed the ability of the existing water-base transportation infrastructure to accommodate the increased barge volume. An adverse effect would be created by any changes to barge traffic that would cause delays, exceed capacity along the waterways in the region, or affect other waterway traffic in the region. Since road and barges would be the primary modes of transportation, only a cursory review of air, rail, and public transit resources was performed.  3.13.2 Affected Environment 3.13.2.1 Regional and Local Roadway System The ROI can be accessed from the north and south by I-55 from Chicago to Missouri, and from the east and west by I-70 and I-72 from Indiana to Missouri. The closest interstate is I-72, which is approximately 10 miles south of Meredosia. US-67 is the principal north-south highway serving western Illinois. IL-104 is the main regional route into Meredosia and to the energy center site. From IL-104, Washington Street and Old Naples Road provide direct access to Cips Drive, the main entrance to the Meredosia Energy Center. Historically, trucks accessing the energy center used a bypass road from IL-104 to access the energy center from the south and avoid traveling through residential areas of Meredosia. Other routes in the project area include IL-100, IL-125, IL-99, IL-123, IL-78, and IL-107, many of which cross US-67. Figure 3.13-1 presents a map of the primary roadways within 40 miles of the Meredosia Energy Center. Listed below are the functions and classifications of the major routes in the ROI:  US-67. US-67 extends over 200 miles from I-280 at Rock Island to I-270 south of Alton. US-67 is predominately two lanes except from Macomb to Monmouth, and the Alton and Jacksonville Bypasses (IDOT 2002). IDOT is currently going through the process of improving this alignment along its entire length. Many sections of the corridor have been placed on IDOT’s multi-year program with the intent to develop it into a multilane divided highway configuration over most of its length. In May 2002, IDOT published the Final EIS for this project.  IL-104. IL-104 is a two-lane roadway that connects with US-67 to the east of Meredosia and IL-99 to the west. IL-104 serves as Meredosia's main street through its business district, and crosses the Illinois River at the west end of the town. IDOT conducted an environmental assessment on the proposed infrastructure upgrades project from US-67 to IL-99 (Morgan and Pike counties), which includes plans to improve the Meredosia Bridge; in October 2011, IDOT published a Finding of No Significant Impact for its environmental assessment of the bridge project (IDOT 2011).  I-72/US-36. I-72 is a four-lane roadway that travels from Indianapolis, Indiana to Kansas City, Missouri. It has served as a major interregional transportation route since 1919.  IL-100. IL-100 is a two-lane roadway that originates near Alton, and travels in a northerly direction to IL-136 near Havana. IL-100 is coterminous with US-67 between Meredosia and Beardstown.  IL-125. IL-125 is a two-lane roadway that travels from Beardstown to Springfield.  IL-99. IL-99 is a two-lane roadway traveling from IL-104 in Meredosia to Brooklyn. The IL-104/IL-99 link between US-67 and US-24 provides a shortcut for regional traffic between Jacksonville/Springfield and Quincy. IL-99 is also an alternate route to Rushville via US-24.  IL-107. IL-107 is a two-lane roadway that connects Mount Sterling and Griggsville. IL-107 becomes US-54 as it traverses I-72 just north of Pittsfield.   IL-123. IL-123 is a two-lane roadway that connects Ashland to I-72, which runs adjacent to the CO2 storage study area.  IL-78. IL-78 is a two-lane roadway that connects Virginia to Jacksonville and transects the pipeline corridor. IDOT’s proposed Highway Improvement Program lists the roadway improvements scheduled for years 2007-2012. Table 3.13-1 lists proposed improvements within the project area by route. Route Location Project Description Source: IDOT 2012a I-# = Interstate; IL-# = Illinois Highway; US-# = U.S. Highway 3.13.2.2 Rail, Air, and Public Transportation The Norfolk Southern Corporation has rail lines running between Bluffs and Meredosia before joining the main rail line, which connects Decatur, Illinois with Kansas City, Missouri. Primary products transported by rail include grain, granulated fertilizer, and potash (IDOT 2006; IDOT 2002). There are approximately 15 trains traveling along this rail segment each day. As stated in Section 2.4.1.4, the energy center previously had a rail spur for coal delivery, which has been removed. The closest Amtrak station providing passenger service is approximately 50 miles west of Meredosia in Quincy. This station has limited routes with service to Chicago. There is also a Springfield station approximately 60 miles east of Meredosia with several connections, including high-speed rail service from St. Louis, Missouri to Dwight, Illinois (IDOT 2012c). The Jacksonville Municipal Airport is 18 miles east of the site and has 52 operations per day. The closest international airport is Lambert-St. Louis International approximately 70 miles south of the project area with an average of 512 daily operations. Within the project area, there are four smaller public airports and four private airstrips within 20 miles of the Meredosia Energy Center (FAA 2012). None of the communities within the study area has a public transit (bus or rail) system. Jacksonville, Pittsfield, and Mount Sterling have bus service for seniors with limited service by appointment (West Central Mass Transit 2012). 3.13.2.3 Meredosia Energy Center Existing Traffic and Level of Service Table 3.13-2 lists the 2011 average annual daily traffic and estimated LOS for the primary roadway segments as presented in Figure 3.13-1, connecting population centers within 40 miles to the Meredosia Energy Center. As indicated by the average annual daily traffic levels, most of the roadways near the Meredosia Energy Center operate with little or no congestion due to the rural characteristic of the region and, consequently, operate within capacity (i.e., LOS C or better). Roadways estimated with LOS ratings of D are primarily roadways that travel through more urban areas, which are subject to higher traffic volumes during peak travel hours. Table 3.13-2 highlights the segments along each roadway with the highest traffic volume during peak periods. These roadways would operate at or better than these LOS on segments with lower traffic volumes, and during times other than peak traffic periods. Historically, the majority of trucks accessing the Meredosia Energy Center were used to transport coal and fuel oil. The energy center used both bituminous coal from Illinois sources and Powder River Basin sub-bituminous coal from Wyoming. The bituminous coal was delivered by truck, while the Powder River Basin coal was delivered by barge. Although coal has been exclusively transported via barge over the past few years, prior to 2009 the annual number of trucks used to transport coal varied between 5,000 and 26,000. Approximately 8,000 trucks were used in 2008; the last year coal was delivered by truck. The number of trucks used to deliver fuel oil over the past several years ranged between 15 and 90 trucks per year. An average total of approximately 30 roundtrips a day were generated by the energy center in recent years. Trona, lime, and limestone were not historically used at the Meredosia Energy Center. Ash disposal was conducted onsite and, therefore, did not generate any vehicle trips. Separate barge facilities at the Meredosia Energy Center are located on the Illinois River along the northwestern border of the Meredosia Energy Center site for Powder River Basin coal and for fuel oil deliveries. Historically, Powder River Basin coal was delivered by barge (from St. Louis, Missouri, where it was delivered from Wyoming via rail). Coal deliveries by barge over the past several years ranged from approximately 140 to 500 deliveries per year; annual fuel oil deliveries by barge were sparse, ranging from zero to two over the past several years. Water freight transport is an important part of the transportation system in the project area. The area from Beardstown to Naples on the Illinois River is an agri-business transportation center for west central Illinois. Truck traffic uses US-67 to reach these terminals to transfer shipments (IDOT 2002). 3.13.2.4 CO2 Pipeline and CO2 Storage Study Area Existing Traffic and Level of Service Table 3.13-3 lists primary state roadway segments within the pipeline corridor and adjacent to the CO2 storage study area along with their average annual daily traffic and estimated LOS. As indicated by the average annual daily traffic levels, all roadway segments within the pipeline corridor and adjacent to the CO2 storage study area operate with little or no congestion and within roadway capacity (i.e., LOS A or B). Table 3.13-3 highlights the segments along each roadway with the highest traffic volume during peak periods. These roadways would operate at or better than these LOS on segments with lower traffic volumes, and during times other than peak traffic period. Table 3.13-2. Level of Service on Roadway Segments Near the Meredosia Energy Center–Existing Conditions One-Way Volume-to2011 Level of Peak Hour Capacity Map ID Roadway Begins Ends AADTa Service Volume Ratio (vpd) (LOS) (vph) (V/C) Local Destinations to the West 14 & 15 IL-106 IL-100 Old IL- 36 1,550 167 0.10 A a. Source: IDOT 2012b AADT = average annual daily traffic; I-# = Interstate; IL-# = Illinois Highway; LOS = level of service; US-# = U.S. Highway; V/C = volumeto-capacity ratio; vpd = vehicles per day; vph = vehicles per hour Note: Traffic volumes outlined were obtained when the Meredosia Energy Center was not in operation. LOS = levell of service Table 3.13-3. Roadways within the Pipeline Corridor and Adjacent to the CO2 Storage Study Area One-Way Peak Hour Volume-to-Capacity Level of Service Road AADTa [vpd] Volume (vph) Ratio (V/C) (LOS) a. Source: IDOT 2012b b. Roadway adjacent to the CO2 storage area educational facilities. AADT = average annual daily traffic; CO2 = carbon dioxide; IL-# = Illinois Highway; LOS = level of service; US-# = U.S. Highway; V/C = volume-to-capacity ratio; vpd = vehicles per day; vph = vehicles per hour 3.13.2.5 Educational Facilities  The Alliance anticipates that the visitor and research center and the training facility would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve the functions of these facilities. Because the locations of the educational facilities are unknown, DOE cannot characterize the existing environment specifically; however, roadways around Jacksonville are typical for a semi-urban setting, and are free flowing most of the day with some congestion during peak traffic periods. 3.13.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.13.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center and CO2 Pipeline Construction at the Meredosia Energy Center and the CO2 pipeline would have short-term minor adverse effects on transportation resources. Construction would cause temporary and localized congestion, particularly on roadways close to the facility. However, construction would be temporary, and all roadways in the area have the capacity for all traffic associated with the construction of the oxycombustion facility and the pipeline. Additional barge traffic and offloading would have minor adverse effects. Traffic and Level of Service  As a reasonable worst-case scenario, DOE assumed that the peak construction year for both the Meredosia Energy Center and the pipeline would coincide in 2015, and all traffic would depart from and return to the Meredosia Energy Center and adjacent areas. Assuming that the construction of the pipeline would overlap with that of the oxy-combustion facility, the total traffic volumes used in the analysis were those from the Meredosia Energy Center and pipeline construction combined. As pipeline construction would move further away from the oxy-combustion facility, the effects would be less than those shown herein. The number of construction and craft workers at the Meredosia Energy Center would range from 450 to 500 during peak construction activities. Construction of the oxy-combustion facility would occur six days per week between 2014 and 2017, and peak construction would occur between 2015 and 2016. During the peak of pipeline construction, there would be 300 workers who would generate 270 roundtrips per day assuming a 10 percent carpool rate. Pipeline construction trucks would generate approximately 53 roundtrips per day, which would be distributed throughout the workday. On average, there would be 150 pipeline construction workers who would generate 135 roundtrips per day assuming a 10 percent carpool rate. Table 3.13-4 outlines the number of additional daily vehicles due to construction of the oxycombustion facility and pipeline combined.  a. Estimation of trips due to the proposed project is based on the best available information. Small variations in the amount of trips may occur throughout the construction and operation of the project components. b. Assumes a carpool rate of 10 percent. CO2 = carbon dioxide; vpd = vehicles per day Table 3.13-5 lists the average annual daily traffic and estimated LOS with the construction traffic from the proposed energy center and pipeline for main roadways connecting to population centers within the ROI. Most roadways within the ROI would operate with little or no congestion (i.e., LOS A though C) during construction. Table 3.13-5 highlights the segments along each roadway with the highest traffic volume during peak periods. These roadways would operate at or better than these LOS on segments with lower traffic volumes, and during times other than peak traffic periods. The pipeline would extend primarily throughout rural areas where the roadways are free flowing and well below design capacity. DOE performed a review of the roads that might be affected along the pipeline routes, and none of the major roads within the pipeline corridor are near capacity (i.e., very high average annual daily traffic levels or LOS D through F) (Table 3.13-3). All roadways in the pipeline corridor have the capacity for all construction traffic associated with the proposed project. As traffic would occur at different times and be distributed throughout the area, these effects would lessen on roadways further from the pipeline corridor. However, due to the limited number of worker trips during the peak of construction, these worker trips would have a minor adverse effect on transportation resources, particularly near the construction sites. For comparison, Table 3.13-6 lists the estimated LOS for the existing (2011), no-build (2015), construction (2015), and operational conditions. Effects attributable to operations are discussed in Section 3.13.3.2. The LOS would degrade from LOS A to LOS B on Washington Street adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center during peak construction at the energy center and the pipeline. Although traffic on Washington Street would increase by approximately 50 percent above current levels, it is estimated that the roadway would be able to handle the additional traffic. There may be some queuing at nearby intersections during peak traffic periods due to commuting workers. As traffic disperses, effects would lessen at roadways further from the construction site(s). The LOS would remain unchanged at all other roadways analyzed with the proposed project when compared to future conditions without the proposed energy center and pipeline construction. Adding increases to background traffic from anticipated natural growth, the busiest portions of IL-267 would likely change from a LOS D to LOS E (i.e., from bad to worse) in the next few years, with or without the proposed project. Although IL-99, US-67, and IL-267 roadways would have LOS D or E under either the existing or the no build conditions, traffic associated with the proposed construction would not be sufficient to change the LOS on these roadways either initially or in the future. Although traffic conditions would be indistinguishable from those without the proposed project, the project would cause an incremental increase in traffic on these already congested roadways. These effects would be minor. Table 3.13-5. Level of Service on Nearby Roadways - During Peak Construction (2015) DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION One-Way Volume-Existing AADT With Level of # of New Increase Peak to-Map 2011 Proposed Service Roadway Begins Ends Roundtrips in AADT Hour Capacity ID AADT Project (2015) per Day (percent) Volume Ratio (vpd) (vpd) (LOS) (vph) (V/C) Local Cips Lane IL-104 1,400 779 3,044 52 329 0.19 B Destinations to the West IL-104 IL-99 2,550 107 2,920 4 315 0.19 B AADT = average annual daily traffic; I-# = Interstate; IL-# = Illinois Highway; LOS = level of service; US-# = U.S. Highway; V/C = volume-to-capacity ratio; vpd = vehicles per day; vph = vehicles per hour Table 3.13-6. Comparison of Level of Service on Nearby Roadways Level of Service  Map ID  Roadway  Begins  Ends  Existing (2011)  No Build (2015)  Peak Construction (2015)  Operations  Local  Destinations to the West I-# = Interstate; IL-# = Illinois Highway; US-# = U.S. Highway Trenching and pipe-laying activities would cause temporary increases in traffic near the construction areas. At certain locations where traffic or road-use restrictions would affect the construction schedule, construction would proceed during late evening hours. Equipment would not be fixed in one location for long durations but would progress along the construction ROW. Trenching and pipe-laying related traffic would be temporary and would subside at any particular location as construction progresses to subsequent segments of the pipeline. Parking may be a concern among some portions of the pipeline corridor. However, adverse parking conditions would subside at any particular location as construction progresses to subsequent segments of the pipeline and would end upon its completion. Barge Traffic The Alliance plans to use the existing public boat ramp area located southwest of Meredosia (and north of the Meredosia Energy Center) to unload large modules for the oxy-combustion facility (see Figure 2-14). The existing boat ramp area is owned by the village of Meredosia. Additional phases of project engineering and coordination with the village of Meredosia would determine accessibility decisions. It is anticipated that any changes to the boat ramp area would be temporary and would be for barge unloading only. Twelve barge deliveries are expected during the construction phase to deliver equipment (see Section 2.4.3.4). Because the number of barge deliveries would be relatively low, the added barge volume is not expected to exceed the capacity of the Illinois River or interfere with other local uses. These effects would be minor. Rail, Air, and Public Transportation  Construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities would not change the operations for any airports, rail segments, or public transportation facilities. CO2 Storage Study Area Construction within the CO2 storage study area would have short-term minor adverse effects. Construction at the well sites could cause temporary and localized congestion, particularly where access roads intersect county and state roadways. However, due to the limited work force, delays to traffic would be minor.  Drilling activities would cause temporary increases in traffic near each of the well sites. Construction is estimated to last 100 to 120 days of drilling per injection well, and between 10 and 100 days for the monitoring wells depending on depth. Once drilling is initiated, drilling would generally occur 24 hours per day, 7 days a week. The schedule would consist of two 12-hour shifts with 14 construction workers each shift, generating a total of 28 roundtrips per day. Construction and delivery trucks would generate an additional 12 roundtrips per day, which would be distributed throughout the workday.  Construction of the surface facilities at the injection wells would take less than a year to complete and require approximately 41 construction workers, generating 82 roundtrips per day.  The CO2 storage study area is a rural area where the roadways are free flowing and well below design capacity. DOE completed a review of the roads that might be affected by the injection well site(s), and none is near capacity (i.e., none has very high average annual daily traffic levels or LOS D through F) (Table 3.13-3). All roadways within and adjacent to the CO2 storage study area have the capacity for all construction traffic associated with the proposed project. As traffic would occur at different times and be distributed throughout the area, these effects would lessen on roadways further from the CO2 injection well site(s). Due to the limited number of worker trips during the development of the CO2 injection well site(s), these worker trips would have a negligible adverse effect on transportation resources. Additionally, truck trips would be distributed throughout the day and not be focused during the peak traffic hour; therefore, truck traffic at the CO2 storage study area would have a negligible adverse effect on transportation resources. Educational Facilities Construction of the educational facilities would have short-term minor adverse effects. Construction would cause temporary and localized congestion, particularly where access roads to the construction sites intersect county and state roadways. However, due to the limited workforce, delays to traffic would be minor. Construction of the educational facilities is estimated to last 52 weeks, and would likely occur in or near Jacksonville, away from the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline corridor, and CO2 storage study area. The schedule would primarily be limited to daytime hours, and staff would consist of approximately 70 to 80 construction workers generating one roundtrip per day each. There would be a limited number (i.e., two per day) of delivery trucks throughout the workday. The traffic associated with the construction of the educational facilities would be substantially less than that associated with the construction of the oxy-combustion facility and pipeline. The nature of effects would be similar to, but somewhat less than, those outlined for the construction of the oxy-combustion facility and CO2 pipeline. It is unlikely that construction of these facilities would overlap appreciably with that of the pipeline and injection well site(s) as it would occur towards the end of the total construction period. Therefore, these effects would be short term and minor. 3.13.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center  Operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would have long-term minor adverse effects on transportation resources resulting from increased truck traffic transporting feedstock and waste. Operation would cause long-term but localized congestion, particularly on roadways close to the facility. Minor adverse effects due to additional barge traffic transporting coal would be expected. However, all roadways and waterways in the area would have the capacity for all traffic associated with operations. Traffic and Level of Service Operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the energy center is scheduled to begin in 2017. The primary vehicles that would contribute to additional daily traffic are trucks transporting feedstock (mainly coal and limestone) and removing wastes (mainly fly ash and bottom ash) (for details on the transportation of materials and wastes to and from the energy center see Sections 2.4.4.1 and 2.4.4.2). The number of daily vehicles from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the energy center is outlined in Table 3.13-7. This would be in addition to existing traffic. As indicated in the table, the volume of additional truck traffic would total approximately 88 daily roundtrips. This represents almost 50 additional roundtrips a day when compared to historic truck traffic volumes. For analysis purposes, employee and truck traffic from operations at the energy center was distributed on roadways near the energy center (see Figure 3.131). a. Estimation of trips due to the proposed project is based on the best available information. Small variations in the amount of trips may occur throughout the construction and operation of the project components. b. Assumes a carpool rate of 10 percent. vpd = vehicles per day Table 3.13-8 lists the 2011 average annual daily traffic and estimated LOS with the operational traffic from the proposed energy center facilities for roadways connecting to population centers within 40 miles of the Meredosia Energy Center. Most roadways within the area would operate with little or no congestion (i.e., LOS A though C). Roadways that would have LOS ratings of D or E are primarily roadways that travel through more urban areas, which are subject to higher traffic volumes during peak travel hours. Table 3.13-8 highlights the segments along each roadway with the highest traffic volumes during peak period. These roadways would operate at or better than these LOS on segments with lower traffic volumes and during times other than the peak traffic period.  For comparison, Table 3.13-6 (see previous) lists the estimated LOS for the existing (2011), no-build (2015), construction (2015), and operational conditions. After construction ends, the conditions on Washington Street would return to LOS A. Although the roadway would operate at LOS A, there may be some queuing at nearby intersections during peak traffic periods. Adding increases to background traffic from anticipated natural growth, the busiest portions of IL-267 would likely change from LOS D to LOS E in the next few years with or without the proposed project. Although IL-99, US-67, and IL-267 roadways have LOS D or E under either the existing or the no-build conditions, traffic associated with the operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would not be sufficient to change LOS on these roadways either initially or in the future. Table 3.13-8. Level of Service on Nearby Roadways - During Meredosia Energy Center Operation (2017) DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION 3.13-13 One-Way Volume-Existing AADT With Level of # of New Increase Peak to-Map AADT Proposed Service Roadway Begins Ends Roundtrips in AADT Hour Capacity ID (2011) Project (2017) per Day (percent) Volume Ratio (vpd) (vpd) (LOS) (vph) (V/C) Local Cips Lane IL-104 1,400 131 1,748 9 189 0.11 A Destinations to the West 18 2,742 1 296 0.17 B IL-99 IL-104 US-24 6,200 6 6,591 0 712 0.42 D 12 2,412 1 260 0.15 B 5 IL-107 IL-104 I-72 3,200 12 3,420 0 369 0.22 B 67 5,758 1 622 0.37 C Destinations to the East 110 4,624 3 499 0.29 C 8 US-67 IL-104 IL-125 2,250 26 2,439 1 263 0.15 B 9 4,316 0 466 0.27 C 10 US-67 US-67 IL-78 6,700 77 7,264 1 784 0.46 D 22 2,486 1 268 0.16 B 12 IL-267 US-78 US-36 9,500 10 10,101 0 1091 0.64 E 12 3,845 0 415 0.24 C 14 IL-106 IL-100 Old IL- 36 1,550 8 1,660 0 179 0.11 A AADT = average annual daily traffic; I-# = Interstate; IL-# = Illinois Highway; LOS = level of service; US-# = U.S. Highway; V/C = volume-to-capacity ratio; vpd = vehicles per day; vph = vehicles per hour Although traffic conditions would be indistinguishable from those without the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the project would constitute an incremental increase in traffic on these already congested roadways. Additionally, trucks transporting materials and wastes would be routed around the village of Meredosia by accessing the bypass road into the proposed facility. Therefore, impacts during operations are expected to be long term and minor. Barge Traffic Approximately 169 barge deliveries per year are expected to transport coal from the Powder River Basin (see Section 2.4.4.1); therefore, barge deliveries would not occur on a daily basis. Historically, the number of annual barge deliveries ranged anywhere between 140 and 500 over the past several years. Therefore, waterway capacity would be sufficient for the operation of the facility, and impacts are expected to be negligible. Rail, Air, and Public Transportation  Operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, the CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities would not change the operations for any airports, rail segments, or public transportation facilities. CO2 Pipeline   Operation and maintenance of the CO2 pipeline would have negligible adverse effects. Pipeline patrolling would be by road, foot, and helicopter, contracted to specialist companies. These visual surveys would be conducted every two weeks and would look for signs of leaks and potential infrastructure concerns. The activities would be sparse and would extend primarily throughout rural areas where the roadways are free flowing and well below designed capacity. DOE reviewed the roads that might be affected, and none of the major roads within the pipeline corridor is near capacity (i.e., none has very high average annual daily traffic or LOS D through F) (Table 3.13-3). All would be able to handle the limited additional traffic from operation and maintenance activities. Traffic associated with operation and maintenance of the CO2 pipeline would constitute less than 1 percent of the total traffic on any roadway in the pipeline corridor. Therefore, these activities would have long-term negligible adverse effects.  CO2 Storage Study Area Operation of the CO2 injection well site(s) would have long-term negligible adverse effects. The operations phase, with active injection and monitoring, would begin in 2017, and end in 2022; however, commercial operations could continue beyond this period. The post-injection monitoring phase would begin in 2022 and continue in accordance with the UIC permits. Approximately 20 workers would work at the surface facilities at the injection wells on a daily basis during normal shifts. In addition, there would be two staff personnel (3 shifts/day, 7 days/week) onsite managing and monitoring pipeline operations and continually monitoring injection operations. All of these activities would cause some amount of traffic. In addition, the truck traffic from well maintenance would consist of approximately 20 vehicles associated with the maintenance rig, and there would be less than 40 liquid hauling trucks and up to 20, 20-yard roll-off dumpsters for each maintenance operation. Periodic well maintenance would involve actions to ensure proper functioning of the wells, and could include replacing and repairing tubing, packer, valves and sensors, repairing corroded casing, and remedial cementing. These activities would be infrequent and extend primarily throughout rural areas where the roadways are free flowing and well below designed capacity. Traffic at the CO2 injection well site(s) would constitute less than 1 percent of the total traffic on adjacent roadways. All roadways adjacent to the storage study area would have the capacity for all traffic associated with the operation of the CO2 injection well site(s). These effects would be negligible. If necessary, pull-offs would be installed and other upgrades would be provided to roads accessing the injection wells, to further reduce traffic congestion in the area. All local and IDOT requirements would be met for design and construction of pull-offs or other improvements to existing roadways within the CO2 storage study area. Educational Facilities Operation of the educational facilities would have long-term negligible adverse effects. The visitor and research center would be open 6 days a week for 9 hours a day and would employ 7 full-time employees, and approximately 10 outside researchers could be accommodated at a time. There would be between 10,000 and 20,000 annual visitors with a significant percentage being local students arriving in buses. This would equate to approximately 20 cars and/or 1 bus per day. The training facility would be open 12 hours a day, 6 days per week and would employ 15 full-time staff. All of these activities would cause some amount of traffic. However, traffic at the educational facilities would constitute less than 1 percent of the total traffic on any individual roadway in the area. The nature of effects would be similar to, but substantially less than, those outlined for the operation of the oxy-combustion facility, pipeline, or CO2 injection wells. These effects would be negligible. 3.13.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to transportation systems. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.14 NOISE AND VIBRATION 3.14.1 Introduction This section describes techniques used to analyze noise and vibration, and identifies current levels in the vicinity of the proposed project locations. This section also analyzes potential noise and vibration impacts on local receptors resulting from the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project.  3.14.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for the noise environment of the FutureGen 2.0 Project was based on the estimated magnitude of noise generated by the project and baseline noise levels, which would affect how far away the noise might be heard. The ROI includes the areas within 0.5 mile (2,640 feet) of the Meredosia Energy Center, within 1,000 feet of the construction equipment and new stationary sources related to the pipeline and injection wells, and areas through which project-related vehicular traffic would pass (Cowan 1994). 3.14.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE analyzed noise levels generated by stationary and mobile sources for potential impacts to sensitive noise receptors. Noise levels were calculated based on widely-accepted noise principles and references, as described in this section. DOE assessed the potential for impacts to sensitive receptors based on whether the oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, CO2 injection wells, and educational facilities would:  Conflict with any state or local noise ordinances;  Cause perceptible increases in ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors during construction of the oxy-combustion facility, proposed pipeline and ROW, injection wells, and educational facilities—from either mobile or stationary sources;  Cause long-term perceptible increases in ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors during operation of the proposed oxy-combustion facility, pipeline and ROW, injection wells, and educational facilities—from either mobile or stationary sources; or  Cause excessive ground-borne vibration to persons or property. Noise Principles Noise is defined as any unwanted sound. The human ear experiences sound as a result of pressure variations in the air. The physical intensity or loudness level of noise sources is expressed quantitatively as the sound pressure level. Sound pressure levels are defined in terms of decibels (dB), which are measured on a logarithmic scale. Sound can be quantified in terms of its amplitude (loudness) and frequency (pitch). Frequency is measured in hertz, which is the number of cycles per second. The typical human ear can hear frequencies ranging from approximately 20 hertz to 20,000 hertz. Typically, the human ear is most sensitive to sounds in the middle frequencies (1,000 to 8,000 hertz) and is less sensitive to sounds in the low and high frequencies. Since the human ear cannot perceive all pitches or frequencies equally, measured noise levels in dB will not reflect the actual human perception of the loudness of the noise. Thus, the sound measures can be adjusted or weighted to correspond to a scale appropriate for human hearing. This adjusted scale, known as the A-weighted sound level in decibels (dBA), is useful for gauging and comparing the subjective loudness of sounds to humans. As shown in Table 3.14-1, the threshold of perception of the human ear is approximately 3 dB, a 5-dB change is considered to be clearly noticeable to the ear, and a 10-dB change is perceived as an approximate doubling (or halving) of the noise level (MPCA 1999). Sounds encountered in daily life and their approximate levels in dBA are provided in Table 3.14-2. Source: MPCA 1999 dB = decibel Source: Liu and Lipták 1997 dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels Ambient or background noise is a combination of various sources heard simultaneously. Noise levels for combinations of sounds are not combined by simple addition, but instead are based on the logarithmic scale (HUD 1985). As a result, the addition of two noises, such as a garbage truck (100 dBA) and a lawn mower (95 dBA), would result in a cumulative sound level of 101.2 dBA, not 195 dBA. Noise levels decrease (attenuate) with distance from the source. The decrease in sound level from any single noise source normally follows the “inverse square law.” That is, the sound level change is inversely proportional to the square distance from the sound source. A generally accepted rule is that the sound level from a stationary source would drop approximately 6 dB each time the distance from the sound source is doubled. Sound level from a moving “line” source (e.g., a train or a roadway) would drop 3 dB each time the distance from the source is doubled. Noise levels may be further reduced by natural factors such as temperature and climate and are reduced by barriers, both manmade (e.g., sound walls) and natural (e.g., forested areas, hills, etc.) (FTA 2006). The dBA noise metric describes steady noise levels; however, very few noises are, in fact, constant. Therefore, a noise metric, equivalent sound level (Leq), has been developed. Leq represents the average sound energy over a given period presented in dB. There are a variety of measures used to describe the noise environment that take into account changes in noise levels over time, the time of day the noise is occurring, as well as the percentage of time noise is at a particular level. For example, Leq(h) is the equivalent sound level over one hour, day-night sound level (Ldn or DNL) is the 24-hour Leq but with a 10 dB penalty added to nighttime noise levels (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) to reflect the greater intrusiveness of noise experienced during this time, and L50 and L90 represent the levels exceeded 50 or 90 percent of the time, respectively. Stationary Noise Sources Stationary noise sources include construction-related equipment and any noise-generating equipment used for normal operations. DOE estimated potential noise levels at sensitive receptor locations resulting from stationary sources during construction and normal operations by identifying sound levels from dominant noise-producing equipment, summing anticipated equipment noise contributions, and applying fundamental noise attenuation principles (FTA 2006; Lamancusa 2009). DOE did not consider the effects of meteorology, terrain, vegetation, or structures that can affect sound propagation (i.e., reduce sound levels) as these would be highly variable for each receptor location. Therefore, the results presented may be conservatively higher predictions of noise impacts. However, in the case of the injection well drill rigs, the mitigating principals of a noise-mitigation berm are discussed. Mobile Noise Sources (Traffic Noise) Mobile noise sources include light-duty vehicles (i.e., cars, pickup trucks, and sport utility vehicles), medium trucks (i.e., 2-axle, 6-wheel trucks), and heavy trucks (i.e., 3 or more axles) transporting workers and materials and wastes during the construction and operational phases. The level of highway traffic noise depends on numerous factors. Generally, the loudness of traffic noise is increased by heavier traffic volumes, inclined roads, higher speeds, and greater numbers of trucks. In addition, there are other, more complicated factors that affect the loudness or attenuation of traffic noise, such as distance, terrain, vegetation, and natural and manmade obstacles. 3.14.1.3 Regulatory Framework Noise Regulatory Framework In 1974, the USEPA provided information suggesting that continuous and long-term noise levels in excess of Ldn 65 dBA are normally unacceptable for noise-sensitive land uses such as residences, schools, churches, and hospitals (USEPA 1974). Similarly, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) established 65 dBA as a threshold for unacceptable noise levels for residential areas. HUD’s guidelines, shown in Table 3.14-3, categorize noise levels for proposed residential development as acceptable, normally unacceptable, and unacceptable (HUD 1985). Source: HUD 1985 dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels Construction activities on this project are not governed by either federal or state regulations; however, there are Illinois noise level standards pertaining to operational activities. The applicable IEPA regulations are set forth by the Illinois Pollution Control Board as noise limits for commercial and industrial noise sources and provide guidance for assessing compliance. The regulations are defined in the 35 IAC, Subtitle H, Chapter I, 901 Sound Emissions Standards and Limitations for Property-Line Noise-Sources (IPCB 2007). The IAC specifically lists the limits that different classifications of land can allowably experience based upon their land use. The three land classes are defined as follows:  IAC Class A properties (residences) are considered the most sensitive property use.  IAC Class B properties (businesses and services) are considered of mixed use.  IAC Class C properties (utilities, manufacturing, industrial, and agricultural) are considered the least sensitive. The Meredosia Energy Center is defined as Class C. The pipeline corridor passes through areas defined as Class A, Class B, and Class C. The injection well site(s) are considered Class C properties. Noise is broken down into specific frequency bands (octave bands) that characterize the nature of the sound and identify which frequencies contain the most energy. Regulatory limits are established for each octave band. Furthermore, limits are established for both daytime and nighttime, with nighttime being more restrictive than daytime. Table 3.14-4 presents the un-weighted dB permissible sound levels during day and nighttimes for sound emanating from a Class C land (the Meredosia Energy Center and the CO2 injection well site(s)) to a receiving Class A land (nearby residential neighborhoods). Emanating sound levels at a residence are considered to be in compliance if they are below the regulatory thresholds for the frequencies listed in this table. There are no limits set for sound emanating from a Class C land onto a receiving Class C land. Per the Illinois Pollution Control Board Section 901.107, the permissible sound levels do not apply to equipment being used for construction. Table 3.14-4. Permissible Sound Levels for Class C Land to Class A Land Octave Band Center Frequency Daytime Sound Levela Nighttime Sounda Level (hertz) (decibel) (decibel) 75 69 74 67 69 62 64 54 58 47 52 41 47 36 43 32 40 32 Source: IPCB 2007 a. The Illinois Pollution Control Board states that no measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made less than 25 feet from a propertyline-noise-source. For assessment of traffic noise impacts the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and IDOT use the Leq(h) descriptor to estimate the degree of nuisance or annoyance arising from changes in traffic noise. IDOT and FHWA established noise abatement criteria (NAC) that provide a benchmark to assess the level at which noise becomes a clear source of annoyance for different land uses (see Table 3.14-5) (FHWA 1995). Category B, which represents moderately sensitive land uses, best describes the majority of the receptors around the energy center, along the pipeline corridor, and within the storage study area. The NAC for residential use (category B) is 67 dBA. As defined in the IDOT and FHWA noise abatement policies, traffic noise effects can occur under two separate conditions: (1) when noise levels are unacceptably high, or (2) when a proposed highway project would substantially increase the existing noise environment. Specifically, a traffic noise effect occurs when the predicted levels equal or approach the NAC (e.g., greater than 66 dBA for category B), or when predicted traffic noise levels exceed the existing noise levels by greater than 10 dBA. The level of impact (i.e., negligible, minor, moderate, or significant) is determined on the basis of the total number of receptors affected, and the relative increase in noise for identified receptors. Table 3.14-5. Noise Abatement Criteria Activity Description of Activity Category NAC Leq(h) Category Picnic areas, recreation areas, playgrounds, active sports areas, parks, 67  B residences, motels, hotels, schools, churches, libraries, and hospitals (exterior) C  Developed lands, properties, or activities not included in categories A or B  72 (exterior)  D Undeveloped lands NA E  Residences, motels, hotels, public meeting rooms, schools, churches, libraries, hospitals, and auditoriums  52 (interior)  Sources: 23 CFR 772; FHWA 2006 Leq(h) = equivalent sound level over one hour; NA = not applicable; NAC = noise abatement criteria Vibration Principles and Regulatory Framework Vibration refers to the oscillations or rapid linear motion of parts of a fluid or elastic solid whose equilibrium has been disturbed. Vibration can be caused by operating heavy farm or construction machinery, ground-breaking construction activities (e.g., drilling or excavating), trains on railways, operating equipment indoors, or slamming doors. Similar to noise, the sensitive receptors to outdoor vibrations include nearby residences, schools, hospitals, nursing home facilities, and recreational areas. Typically, the effects of vibration range from feeling the floor shake and rumbling sounds to minor structural damage. Vibration is often expressed in terms of the peak particle velocity, as inches per second or millimeters per second, when used to evaluate human annoyance and building damage impacts. There are no federal standards for vibrations, however, various researchers and organizations have published guidelines. Table 3.14-6 presents guidelines to assess human perception and annoyance, and Table 3.14-7 presents guidelines for vibration damage to buildings. Source: Jones and Stokes 2004 a. Transient sources create a single isolated vibration event, such as blasting or drop balls. Continuous/frequent/intermittent sources include impact pile drivers, pogo-stick compactors, crack-and-seat equipment, vibratory pile drivers, and vibratory compaction equipment. DOE assumes that trenchless boring operations would be categorized as continuous/frequent/intermittent sources. PPV = peak particle velocity Table 3.14-7. Thresholds for Potential Vibration Damage  Maximum PPV (inches/second)a Structure and Condition Continuous/Frequent/ Transient Sources Intermittent Sources Source: Jones and Stokes 2004 a. Transient sources create a single isolated vibration event, such as blasting or drop balls. Continuous/frequent/intermittent sources include impact pile drivers, pogo-stick compactors, crack-and-seat equipment, vibratory pile drivers, and vibratory compaction equipment. DOE assumes that trenchless boring operations would be categorized as continuous/frequent/intermittent sources. PPV = peak particle velocity The DOT Federal Transit Administration (FTA) published guidelines to perform vibration impact assessments for proposed projects that may involve transit activities. The methodology applies a screening approach based on the distance between sensitive receptors and the source of vibration. According to the FTA, if the distance between source and receptor is greater than 200 feet, it is reasonable to conclude that no further analysis of vibration impacts is necessary (FTA 2006). 3.14.2 Affected Environment 3.14.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center As shown in Figure 3.14-1, the Meredosia Energy Center property and surrounding areas are predominantly classified as IAC Classes A, B, and C. The nearest Class A land is the residential area of Meredosia to the north and east of the proposed facility. The land designated as Class B, found mainly to the north of the energy center property, includes warehouses, general sales or services, the boat launch and recreational areas, the campground, and a potentially historic train depot. Class C land found in the project area includes the roadways, unused railroad ROW, agricultural land, and manufacturing facilities to the east and south of the energy center. Also, the Meredosia Energy Center itself and properties in Pike County located to the west (across the Illinois River) are consistent with Class C land. The Meredosia Energy Center can be characterized as a developed, industrial site. Existing dominant noise sources in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center mainly consist of equipment and vehicle noise related to the operations of the energy center; noise associated with the adjacent grain elevator operations at the Cargill facility located to the north of the energy center site; vehicular traffic on Old Naples Road, South Washington Street, and IL-104; and rail traffic on the Norfolk Southern rail-line providing access to the industrial sites to the south of the Meredosia Energy Center. Figure 3.14-1 presents the class designations of the properties to the north and east of the energy center. The Meredosia Energy Center site is currently a Class C property. Residences primarily to the east and north of the energy center are considered as Class A. The properties to the south and to the west (across the river) are industrial and thus Class C. There are 137 residences within 0.5 mile of the project site. These residences are located to the north and east of the site, primarily within the boundary of the village of Meredosia. No other sensitive receptors (schools or hospitals) have been identified within 0.5 mile of the energy center. There are two schools (the Meredosia-Chambersburg Elementary and High School) 0.5 to 1 mile to the northeast of the site (Beacon 2011), but no hospitals in the general vicinity. The two schools are within 500 feet of IL-104, a major transportation access route. DOE measured sound levels at seven sites adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center and IL-104 in May 2011 (PHE 2011). The noise monitoring sites (Site #1 through Site #7) are described and summarized below in Table 3.14-8. Figure 3.14-2 depicts the locations of the seven noise monitoring sites in relation to the Meredosia Energy Center. Source: PHE 2011 Cargill = Cargill, Inc.; IL = Illinois State Route; MEC = Meredosia Energy Center Sites #1 and #2 are representative of receptors along IL-104. Sites #4 and #5 are representative of the closest houses to the north (Site #4) and east (Site #5). Sites #3 and #6 are approximately 2,500 feet away from the noisy elements at the Meredosia Energy Center and also reflective of traffic noise from South Washington Street (Site #3) or Old Naples Road (Site #6). It is important to note that the Cargill facility, near the center of Meredosia, is the largest noise source at Sites #3, #4, #5, and #6. At Site #3, which is only 350 feet east of the Cargill noise generators, the noise environment is totally dominated by Cargill. The Meredosia Energy Center contains a total of six boilers (B-1 through B-6) and four turbine units (Units 1 through 4). Units 1 and 2 (Boilers B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4) were not operating during the noise monitoring. During the noise monitoring, the Meredosia Energy Center operated in three different scenarios: Scenario 1: For most of the time, only Unit 3 and the fans associated with it were operational. This is described as the first scenario, and the baseload operating condition. Scenario 2: Under the second scenario, two dozers were operating on the coal storage pile. During this special event, noise levels were monitored at Site #7. This additional noise was added to the baseload condition of continuous Unit 3 operation. Scenario 3: Under the third scenario, Unit 4 was also operating. During this scenario, noise levels were monitored at Sites #4, #5, and #6. This additional noise was added to the baseload condition of continuous Unit 3 operation. Table 3.14-9 presents the range of Leq measured at the noise monitoring sites, and the scenarios and time periods under which they were monitored. Subsequent to the noise monitoring that occurred in May 2011, the Meredosia Energy Center suspended operation (at the end of 2011). The noise monitoring results presented herein serve to describe the historical conditions; however, after suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, the ambient noise would not include the activities under the three scenarios listed above. The nighttime noise monitoring was conducted at the three monitoring sites adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center: Site #4 at Railroad Street, Site #5 at South Washington Street, and Site #6 at Old Naples Road. There were numerous instances of noise levels exceeding the state code limits for particular octave bands (hertz levels) at each of these locations (PHE 2011). The following three nighttime noise locations and conditions were monitored:  Site #4 was representative of the homes to the north of the Meredosia Energy Center on Railroad and Pearl streets. At Site #4 the dominant noise source was Cargill. Other noise sources were the Meredosia Energy Center and occasional traffic on Railroad and Pearl streets, along with environmental noise such as rustling leaves.  Site #5 was representative of noise levels at the homes east of the Meredosia Energy Center. This location was quieter than Site #4 since it is further from Cargill, though Cargill was still the dominant noise source at this site, with cricket noise also constantly present. Other sources included the intermittent traffic on South Washington Street and the Meredosia Energy Center.  Site #6 was the noisiest of the three sites during the overnight monitoring. While crickets provided a source of continuous noise, numerous extraneous noises were also observed, including a train, barking dogs, heavy truck, etc. The daytime noise monitoring was conducted at all seven monitoring sites (#1 through #7) under a variety of scenarios and times of day (see Table 3.14-9). There were numerous instances of noise levels exceeding the state code limits for particular octave bands (hertz levels) at each of these locations (PHE 2011). The following five daytime noise locations and conditions were monitored:  Site #3 was located near the intersection of IL-104 and South Washington Street, and diagonally across the street from the Meredosia Post Office on South Washington Street. The largest sound source, by a significant margin, was the Cargill grain facility. The Cargill facility routinely exceeded the standards for 250; 500; 1,000; 2,000; and 4,000 hertz, with occasional additional exceedances in 125 and 8,000 hertz ranges. dBA= A-weighted sound level in decibels; Leq = equivalent sound level   Site #4 was located north of the Meredosia Energy Center, near the homes on Railroad and Pearl streets. Monitoring was conducted during time periods when the Unit 4 fans were in operation and during time periods when Unit 4 fans were not in operation. The Meredosia Energy Center was noticeably louder when Unit 4 was in operation, with the largest increases observed in the deeper octaves (31.5 to 250 hertz). The exceedances noted in the 4,000 hertz octave band were due to Cargill, not the Meredosia Energy Center. When Unit 4 was not in operation, Cargill was the loudest noise source. When Unit 4 was in operation, the Meredosia Energy Center became very nearly as loud as Cargill.  Site #5 was located to the east of the Meredosia Energy Center. Monitoring was conducted during time periods when the Unit 4 fans were in operation and when the Unit 4 fans were not in operation. Cargill was a more apparent continuous noise source than the Meredosia Energy Center during all monitored time periods. The widely scattered exceedances in the 1,000 and 2,000 hertz octave bands were caused by a combination of Cargill and heavy truck pass-bys, not the Meredosia Energy Center.  Site #6 was located to the southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center. Monitoring was conducted during time periods when Unit 4 fans were in operation and when Unit 4 fans were not in operation. Cargill was a more apparent continuous noise source than the Meredosia Energy Center during all monitored time periods. The widely scattered exceedances in the 1,000 and 2,000 hertz octave bands were caused by a combination of heavy truck pass-bys and Cargill.  Site #7 was located closest to the storage piles, on the Meredosia Energy Center property. This site was monitored to evaluate typical energy center operational noise associated with two bulldozers moving coal on the coal storage pile. The monitoring session was divided into three parts reflecting a low, average, and high amount of activity on the coal pile. There were various octave band exceedances during the monitoring session, though all these exceedances were in the octave bands that the Cargill facility dominates. At the adjacent property lines, the coal pile activity did not contribute to any noise exceedances. Sites #1 and #2 were located along the IL-104 corridor in Meredosia. The following were the only two sites that were not influenced by Cargill:  Site #1, located 25 feet off IL-104 on the south side of the roadway, is representative of receptors along IL-104 outside the village of Meredosia. Variations in noise levels were primarily caused by the changing volumes of heavy trucks.  Site #2 was located on the lower speed portion of IL-104 in the village of Meredosia. It was positioned at the set-back of the Meredosia Elementary School. The even wider variations in noise levels were caused by changing levels of activity in the school yard, fluctuating volumes of heavy trucks, and variations in community noise adjacent to the site, such as lawn mowers. 3.14.2.2 CO2 Pipeline The potential pipeline route from the energy center to the injection wells would pass primarily through rural sparsely-populated land, which has relatively quiet noise levels. The route would, however, cross state and local highways that pass through or border rural communities, which introduce additional sources of noise, at least intermittent peaks, above those expected in rural environments. Noise measurements were conducted as part of the assessment of potential impacts associated with improvements to US-67 between Jacksonville and Macomb, Illinois, which crossed the proposed pipeline corridor to the injection wells. Existing noise levels ranged from 44 to 67 dBA along the proposed highway route (IDOT 2002). Along the highways, periodic noise levels could spike to 86 dBA due to heavy trucks passing at 55 miles per hour (Cowan 1994). 3.14.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area The storage study area is located in an agricultural area in the northeastern corner of Morgan County. As such, the site is classified as a Class C property per the state of Illinois noise control regulations. The Alliance contracted with Patrick Engineering, Inc. to conduct an assessment to determine the potential for noise and vibration impacts to surrounding receptors at the location of the stratigraphic well. The report, which was limited to the construction of the well pad and drilling of the well, documents ambient noise levels at nearby receptor locations. Ambient nighttime noise levels were determined to be 38 dBA, averaged over one hour on the night of April 27, 2011. The maximum noise level was 58 dBA and the minimum was 31 dBA (Patrick 2011). The nearest sensitive receptor to the stratigraphic well site is approximately 1,570 feet away. 3.14.2.4 Educational Facilities The Alliance anticipates that the visitor and research center and the training facility would be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois. The Alliance is working with local stakeholders to identify the location(s) that would best serve the functions of these facilities. Because the locations of the educational facilities are a. Traffic noise levels predicted using FHWA’s Traffic Noise Model 2.5 (FHWA 2004), assuming a distance of 100 feet from centerline. dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; I = interstate, IL = Illinois; Leq(h) = equivalent sound level over one hour; US-# = U.S. Highway 3.14.3 Impacts of Proposed Action DOE assessed the potential for impacts to sensitive receptors in the ROI based on whether the FutureGen 2.0 Project would result in any of the effects identified in Section 3.14.1.2. 3.14.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Ambient noise levels within the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center would increase due to construction of the oxy-combustion facility and associated infrastructure. The construction phase for the oxy-combustion facility, including initial demolition, is estimated to occur over a period of approximately 42 months beginning in early 2014, and extending through the middle of 2017. However, construction would be substantially completed within 30 months, and the last 12 months of construction would overlap with a 1-year commissioning and startup effort. During construction, various mixes of construction equipment would be used and would thus generate different noise levels. The USEPA derived average noise levels for various phases of industrial construction projects, including ground clearing, excavation and grading, foundations, building construction, and finishing work. These construction activities are based on the number of each type of equipment typically present, and the combined average noise levels during construction activities (Bolt et al. 1971). Table 3.14-11 presents these common noise levels that would be associated with the construction of the project components at the Meredosia Energy Center. Source: Bolt et al. 1971 dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels According to the estimated noise levels presented in Table 3.14-11, the loudest average levels during normal industrial construction activities would range from 78 to 89 dBA (at 50 feet) depending on the stage of construction, and would dissipate with distance. If two of these activities occurred simultaneously (e.g., grading of the stormwater management system and building construction of the oxy-combustion facility), the cumulative noise level could be approximately 90.5 dBA (at 50 feet). Although the temporary impact areas during construction could briefly extend to the fence lines of the nearest residential properties (as shown in Figure 2-14), DOE assumed the closest residences are approximately 900 feet from the main energy center noise sources (see Noise Monitoring Site #4 in Table 3.14-9). At 900 feet distance, the construction noise level for simultaneous activities could be heard at 65.4 dBA, which is slightly above the level deemed as acceptable for residences by HUD (65 dBA) (see Table 3.14-3), and below the NAC benchline level of 67 dBA for residences (see Table 3.14-5). Construction of the new roadway to the barge unloading area, as well as barge unloading events, would generate noise levels similar to those presented in Table 3.14-11, thus impacting the few residences in close proximity to the barge unloading area and access road (see Section 2.4.3.2 for further discussion of the barge unloading activities). These construction noises could have a minor to moderate impact on the few nearest residences; however, due to the nature of construction, the noise would be intermittent and temporary until the construction phase is over. The majority of construction activities would occur during daytime hours Monday through Saturday, with occasional additional construction hours if required to complete critical construction activities. Although construction noise is exempt from Illinois Pollution Control Board noise regulations, to the extent practicable, the Alliance would make efforts to minimize the impacts from construction noise by using proper machinery operation techniques and properly maintaining machinery. DOE anticipates negligible vibration impacts to sensitive receptors, since no residences are located within 200 feet of the proposed construction activities. According to the FTA, if the distance between source and receptor is greater than 200 feet, it is reasonable to conclude that no further analysis of vibration impacts is necessary (FTA 2006). CO2 Pipeline Construction of the potential pipeline would consist of site clearing, excavation, trenching, pipe laying, and finishing work. These activities would require the use of heavy-duty construction equipment (e.g., trenching equipment, trucks, graders, backhoes, excavators, and portable generators). Use of this equipment would likely result in moderate impacts with temporary increases in ambient noise levels in the immediate area of the construction sites. The sound levels resulting from linear facility construction activities would vary greatly depending on such factors as the types of activities being performed and equipment being used. The USEPA derived average noise levels from typical public works, sewer, and trenches construction activities based on the number of each type of equipment typically present and the combined average noise levels during construction activities (Bolt et al. 1971). Table 3.14-11 presents these estimated noise levels that would be associated with pipeline construction, which would include ground clearing, excavation and grading, and potentially rock drilling. The loudest average levels during normal pipeline construction (excluding rock drilling) would range from approximately 84 to 89 dBA at 50 feet. Noise levels would range from 64 to 69 dBA at 500 feet and 58 to 63 dBA at 1,000 feet from the construction site. Trenchless pipe-boring techniques such as jack and bore techniques and horizontal directional drilling may be required to construct pipeline under water features, roadways, and other obstacles. Use of rock drills for these techniques could result in sound levels around 78 and 72 dBA at 500 and 1,000 feet, respectively. Noise generated by construction activities of the pipeline would be naturally attenuated (reduced) by trees and vegetation or masked by noise from other manmade activities, such as traffic on adjacent roadways. Therefore, actual noise levels may be lower than predicted. There are two potential routes (the southern route and the northern route) proposed for the pipeline to the injection wells (see Figure 2-17). Table 3.14-12 presents the number of sensitive receptors that could be impacted from the pipeline construction based on the proposed routes to the injection wells. Within 500 feet of the southern route, there are 23 residences, 3 cemeteries, and 1 church. Within 500 feet of the northern route, there are 15 residences, 1 cemetery, and 1 church. a. Counts are based on a review of aerial images and, therefore, should be considered estimates. b. The predicted dBA levels for receptors located 500 feet from construction site without and with horizontal directional drilling are 69 and 78 dBA, respectively. c. The predicted dBA levels for receptors located 1,000 feet from construction site without and with horizontal directional drilling are 63 and 72 dBA, respectively. d. Within 500 feet of the southern route, there are three cemeteries (New Salem, Tippet William, and Ebenezer cemeteries) and one church (Ebenezer Church). The closest is the New Salem cemetery at 344 feet from the ROW. e. Within 500 feet of the northern route, there is one cemetery (Grace Cemetery) and one church (St. Paul Lutheran Church). The closest is the Grace Cemetery at 400 feet from the ROW. ROW = right-of-way The majority of the construction is expected to occur during a 4-month period with 10-hour workdays Monday through Saturday. There would be approximately 150 to 300 construction workers required for the pipeline construction. The use of trenchless pipe-boring techniques at various locations along the proposed pipeline route would produce louder, non-typical construction noise impacts. The Alliance intends to use either jack and bore techniques or horizontal directional drilling to install the pipeline under roads, railroads, waterbodies, and water-sensitive areas (e.g., wetlands) to minimize impacts. Jack and bore operations require an excavation on each side of the bore, which serve as jacking and receiving pits for the boring equipment. Horizontal directional drilling is a steerable trenchless method of installing pipeline using a surface-launched drilling rig, with minimal impact on the surrounding area. Table 3.14-13 presents the number of jack and bore techniques and number of horizontal directional drilling techniques that would be used to construct the pipeline under the various surface features. Table 3.14-13. Number and Type of Pipeline Crossings Number of Pipeline Crossings Pipeline Route HDD under J&B under HDD under J&B under J&B under Options Water/Sensitive Water/Sensitive Roads Roads Railroads Areas Areas HDD = horizontal directional drilling; J&B = Jack and Bore technique Using these trenchless pipe-boring techniques under roads and railroads would allow the roads and tracks to remain operational during construction of the pipeline. This operation is anticipated to take less than 12 hours to install the pipeline at each of the proposed road locations. The use of jack and bore techniques or horizontal directional drilling for pipeline construction under wetlands and perennial streams would eliminate the need for earth-moving activities and thus protect the sensitive eco-systems from construction impacts. Trenching may still be used to cross dry stream channels. Where horizontal directional drilling is required, the hole drilling machinery may operate continuously (24 hours a day) for approximately 1 to 4 days depending on the distance. Continuous operation would be necessary in order to maintain hole stability and to prevent damage to the specialized equipment. Any adverse effects that would occur would be of a temporary nature and cease with completion of the jack and bore or horizontal directional drilling activities. The predicted dBA levels both without and with trenchless techniques would be 69 and 78 dBA, respectively, for receptors located 500 feet from the construction site. The predicted dBA levels would be 63 and 72 dBA, respectively, for receptors located 1,000 feet away. Due to the linear nature of pipeline construction, the location of the construction site would be transient as the pipe-laying progresses. The noise impacts from construction would be moderate, short term, and intermittent. Not accounting for natural attenuation, receptors at distances greater than approximately 830 feet during typical pipeline construction, or approximately 2,330 feet during trenchless boring activities, would hear the construction noise at levels below 65 dBA, which is the limit deemed normally acceptable to residential receptors (see Table 3.14-3) (HUD 1985). Vibration created by trenchless drilling operations would be below 0.2 inches per second and could be perceptible to residents depending on the distance of the residents to the construction site. However, vibration levels would be below limits for potential structural damage (Jones and Stokes 2004). CO2 Storage Study Area Primary sources of noise during construction of the injection well facilities would be from site preparation activities and a drill rig with supporting equipment (e.g., compressors, boosters, pumps, and diesel engines). The general construction of the drill pad, buildings and associated infrastructure, and access roads could generate noise levels that would range from 78 to 89 dBA (at 50 feet) due to construction equipment noises listed in Table 3.14-11. The drilling of the injection wells would occur over a continuous, 24-hour duration, 7 days a week, for approximately 13 weeks (90 days), and because of the duration, would be the dominant noise source. Noise would be generated from the equipment associated with the drilling as well as the construction vehicle motors and back-up beeps. The Alliance would construct earthen noise berms surrounding three sides of the well pad to mitigate the noise impact during this period. On October 5, 2011, the Alliance began the drilling of a geological stratigraphic well within the storage study area (not part of the proposed action). This stratigraphic well is intended to provide scientific understanding of the geological conditions within the storage study area, to be used to determine the suitability and capacity of the location for the FutureGen 2.0 Project CO2 injection wells. The construction techniques and drilling equipment used for the stratigraphic well are similar to those that would be used for the injection wells. To mitigate noise impacts from the drilling activities, the Alliance constructed noise mitigation berms to the west and north of the drill rig site. In November 2011, the Alliance conducted a noise study to monitor the noise levels resulting from the drilling operations (Patrick 2011). DOE expects that the noise levels measured during the drilling of the stratigraphic well are representative of noise levels that would be generated during construction of the injection wells. Ambient noise levels were measured in April 2011 at the nearest residence, located 1,570 feet northwest from the stratigraphic well drilling location (Patrick 2011). Table 3.14-14 presents these ambient sound measurements. a. Measurements taken April 27 and 28, 2011. Measurements taken at the Beilschmidt homestead property located 1,570 feet northwest of the stratigraphic well location. Readings taken 5 feet above ground level using Reed C-322 Sound Level Meter, with accuracy of ±1.5 dBA. dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; mph = miles per hour; SW = southwest; W = west Drilling noise levels were measured in November 2011 at various distances and directions from the drill rig, as shown in Figure 3.14-3 and Table 3.14-15. According to data measured during the noise study, the berm reduced the noise level at the receptors by over approximately 12.8 dBA. General construction activities prior to drilling are estimated to generate noise levels that can reach approximately 89 dBA at a distance of 50 feet; and drilling activities for the injection wells could generate 98 dBA at a distance of 50 feet based on typical noise levels for rock drilling (see Table 3.14-11). The distances to the sensitive receptors are currently unknown, as the exact locations of the injection wells have not yet been selected. To evaluate the potential for impacts to sensitive receptors when the site locations are chosen, DOE estimated anticipated noise levels from the construction and drilling activities for distances at 500 and 1,000 feet from the well, with and without noise mitigation berms. The estimates are based on typical rock drilling noise levels as well as proportional estimates based on noise levels measured during the drilling of the stratigraphic well (see Table 3.14-16). Source: Patrrick 2011 ft = feet; SPP = sound point As shown in Table 3.14-16, residences over 1,000 feet away from general non-drilling construction activities (without noise mitigation measures) and from drilling activities (with a noise berm in place) would experience short-term minor to moderate impacts as the noise levels would be above the typical rural ambient level, but still below the acceptable level of 65 dBA, as recommended by HUD for residential areas (HUD 1985). Source: Patrick 2011 a. Measurements taken November 2011. Readings taken 5 feet above ground level using Reed C-322 Sound Level Meter, with accuracy of ±1.5 dBA. b. A noise mitigation berm stood between the drilling area and the receptor point. The western berm was 10 feet high, located between points #8 and #10; the northern berm was 15 feet high, located between points #7 and #11. dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels Drilling Noiseb NA 78 (62) 72 (54) NA 66 (50) 60 (42) a. The general construction equipment noise level was calculated without consideration of a noise mitigation berm (see Table 3.14-11). b. Values not in parentheses are drilling noise levels based on published typical rock drilling noise levels (98 dBA at 50 feet, see Table 3.14-11). Values in parentheses are drilling noise levels estimated on a proportional basis from the noise data measured during drilling of the stratigraphic well (see Table 3.14-15). c. According to data measured during the noise study, the berm reduced the noise level at the receptors by over approximately 12.8 dBA (conservatively rounded down to 12 dBA). dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; NA = not applicable The noise study data from the drilling of the stratigraphic well indicates that at approximately 1,570 feet from the well, with the noise berms in place, the sound level during drilling activities would be approximately equal to the ambient noise level (36 dBA) as measured at this distance in April 2011 (Patrick 2011).  Ground vibrations from well drilling activities are expected to have negligible impact to nearby structures. A typical value for ground vibrations from drilling activities is 0.089 inches per second, measured at a distance of 25 feet from the source (FTA 2006). The lowest vibration damage threshold for continuous vibrations, applicable to extremely fragile historic buildings, is 0.08 inches per second (see Table 3.14-7). DOE estimates1 that drilling vibrations would decay to below this threshold at a distance of approximately 30 feet from the source. Therefore, any structures located further than 30 feet from the drilling activity would not experience damaging levels of ground vibration. Further, DOE estimates that vibrations from well drilling would be imperceptible to humans beyond a distance of 800 feet from the drilling location. Although the locations of the wells are currently unknown, the wells would not be placed at locations closer than 800 feet from dwellings. Thus, DOE expects negligible impacts to sensitive receptors due to vibrations from the drilling. The Alliance would be required to install monitoring wells as a condition of its UIC permits (see Section 2.5.2.4). The quantity and location of the monitoring wells would be based on the UIC permitting process and the results of the geologic stratigraphic study. Related noise and vibration impacts would be similar to those described for the construction of the injection wells. Educational Facilities For the worst-case scenario, in which the educational facilities would be newly constructed buildings, construction activities could involve ground clearing, excavation and grading, foundations, building construction, and finishing work. The typical noise levels of these activities could range from 78 to 89 dBA (see Table 3.14-11) (Bolt et al. 1971). With multiple items of equipment operating concurrently, noise levels could be relatively high during daytime periods at locations within several hundred feet of the active construction sites. The specific locations of the sites are currently unknown, though the facilities are anticipated to be located in the urban area of Jacksonville. Although construction-related noise would have moderate adverse impacts on nearby sensitive receptors, the effects would be temporary in nature and would end upon completion of the construction. Contractors would typically limit construction to occur primarily during normal weekday business hours, and would properly maintain construction equipment mufflers. If the educational facilities were instead located in renovated buildings, construction noise impacts would be lower. Traffic Noise during Construction (For All Project Components) Ambient noise levels along the primary construction traffic routes would likely increase as a result of construction-related vehicles entering or leaving a particular construction site, as well as construction workers commuting to and from the construction sites. See Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for a discussion about the number of vehicles accessing the site and impacts from traffic. Short-term negligible adverse effects on the noise environment would be expected due to construction traffic. Each roadway was modeled, assuming no special noise abatement measures would be incorporated, and the roadway sections were assumed to be at-grade. It was assumed that the peak-hour volumes and corresponding speeds for trucks and automobiles would result in the noisiest conditions. Noise predictions of Leq(h) for representative receptors within 328 feet of nearby roadways appear in Table 3.14-17. During construction, there would be only a slight increase in the level of traffic noise for receptors adjacent to nearby roadways when compared to the no action alternative. No residences or other land uses identified equal or approach the NAC for category B of 67 dBA, or would have an increase of greater than 10 dBA. These changes in noise would not even be barely perceptible when compared to existing conditions. 1 The following equation was used to calculate vibration levels (Jones and Stokes 2004): Peak Particle Velocity (PPV) = 0.089 * (25/D)1.1, where D is the distance in feet from the source to the receptor. a. Traffic noise levels predicted using FHWA’s Traffic Noise Model 2.5 (FHWA 2004), assuming a distance of 328 feet (100 meters) from centerline. dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; I = interstate, IL = Illinois; Leq(h) = equivalent sound level over one hour; US-# = U.S. Highway 3.14.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center The proposed project would include new sources of noise resulting from the operation of the oxy-combustion facility. The project would involve replacing existing Boiler 6 (of Unit 4) with a new oxy-combustion boiler (Boiler 7), and adding various other project features including booster fans, compressors, material unloading areas, etc., as discussed in Section 2.4.1. The new oxy-combustion boiler would utilize some of the existing energy center features, including existing noise sources such as the coal handling systems and the Unit 4 steam turbine and generator. As discussed in Chapter 2, all other boilers of the Meredosia Energy Center have been removed from service. Thus, the operational noise at the Meredosia Energy Center during the proposed project would result from the FutureGen 2.0 Project components, along with other third-party actions occurring on the property as discussed in Section 4.3, Potential Cumulative Impacts, including a new substation run by Ameren Transmission Company of Illinois, and use of the oil storage tanks by Sunrise Ag Energy, LLC.  DOE measured ambient noise levels in 2011 during operation of the Meredosia Energy Center as discussed in Section 3.14.2.1 (PHE 2011). Scenario 3 of the 2011 noise study involved operation of Units 3 and 4, along with two dozers operating on the coal storage pile. DOE assumes that the new operations under the proposed project would be similar to this operational Scenario 3, though smaller in magnitude. This assumption is based on the proposed oxy-combustion facility generating capacity (approximately 168 MWe) being smaller than the previous system operating during the noise monitoring (approximately 369 MWe). Specifically from a noise perspective, the new system would operate one turbine (for Unit 4) instead of two (for Units 3 and 4), and the coal storage pile operations would likely continue to have one to two dozers in use, though the frequency and duration of the dozer usages would change depending on the amount of coal required. Sensitive-receptor Sites #4 and #5 (shown in Figure 3.14-2) are representative of the closest residences to the project site, and Site #2 is the location of the nearest elementary school. According to the noise study in 2011, the Cargill facility, near the center of Meredosia, is the most significant contributor to the ambient noise levels at Sites #3, #4, #5, and #6, and the IL-104 is the most significant contributor to noise at Sites #1 and #2. Therefore, considering that noise from the Meredosia Energy Center would either remain the same or be reduced from historical levels, the ambient noise levels at these receptor locations are expected to stay at approximately the same level in comparison to historical levels. Similarly, noise levels are expected to stay at the same level in comparison to ambient conditions after the suspension of the energy center operations at the end of 2011, since local noise levels are and will continue to be dominated by the existing Cargill facility and the highway. There would, however, be an increase in truck noise in the near vicinity of the energy center due to increased usage of trucks for coal delivery under the proposed project, compared to the historical use of barges as the primary means for coal delivery. The volume of truck traffic transporting feedstock (mainly coal and limestone) and removing wastes (mainly fly ash and bottom ash) would total approximately 88 daily roundtrips. This represents almost 50 additional roundtrips a day when compared to historic truck traffic volumes. See Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for a discussion of the number of trucks and barges anticipated during operations. Overall, the project would result in minor, long-term noise impacts to noise receptors. Upon final design and selection of equipment for the oxy-combustion and CO2 capture system, potential noise mitigation measures may be incorporated. These could include sound enclosures or sound dampening materials or equipment, as appropriate. DOE anticipates that any increase in vibration due to operation of the oxy-combustion facility would be negligible. CO2 Pipeline The potential pipeline would be buried except where the pipeline would cross a vertical rock outcropping and where it would be necessary to come to the surface for valves and metering. Potential noise impacts from aboveground equipment are anticipated to be negligible during operations. CO2 Storage Study Area Operations at the injection well site(s) would consist of pumping CO2 underground and maintaining the injection wells. The noise-generating equipment at the injection well site(s) under normal operating conditions would be dominated by the booster pumps and typical heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems. There would be three 710 horsepower pumps, but only two operating at a time, generating approximately 76 dBA individually and 79 dBA collectively (FTA 2006). The pumps would be located inside the booster pump building, which would attenuate the noise levels. Under emergency conditions, there could also be operation of a backup emergency generator(s) capable of producing 1,111 kW (generating approximately 81 dBA); and emergency exhaust fans. This emergency equipment would be operated rarely and only for short durations. If a conservative level of 81 dBA is assumed, the noise at 500 feet away would be heard as 61 dBA, which is below the HUD acceptable level of 65 dBA. Since the nearest sensitive receptors at the injection well site(s) are expected to be farther than 500 feet away, the noise impacts from operational equipment at the injection well site(s) would be minor. During maintenance, certain activities such as acidizing and swabbing could temporarily increase sound levels equal to or less than those presented in Table 3.14-11 for general construction noise. If conducted, these activities would likely take place during initial drilling activities or annual workover activities. Additionally, the occasional transport of by-products generated during maintenance activities, would also contribute to temporary increases in noise. However, these sources would have a minimal impact on the local noise levels. Due to the temporary nature of the maintenance activities and the small volume of vehicles accessing the sites, noise impacts are considered negligible to moderate, depending on the distance to the nearest receptors. Educational Facilities Operational noise from stationary sources at the educational facilities would be negligible. The only likely outdoor source of noise would possibly be the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning units. Traffic Noise during Operations (For All Project Components) Noise would be generated by mobile sources during operations, including employee and truck traffic at the energy center, injection wells, and educational facilities. The primary source of noise from mobile sources during operations of the proposed project would be the trucks transporting feedstock (mainly coal and limestone) and removing wastes (mainly fly ash and bottom ash) from the Meredosia Energy Center. See Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, for a discussion about the number of vehicles accessing the project sites and impacts from traffic. DOE anticipates minimal impacts to the noise environment from mobile noise sources due to operations of the proposed project. Table 3.14-17 presents noise predictions of Leq(h) for representative receptors within 328 feet of nearby roadways during energy center operations. There would be only a slight increase in the level of traffic noise for receptors adjacent to nearby roadways when compared to the no action alternative. These changes in noise would be barely perceptible when compared to existing conditions. 3.14.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to noise and vibration. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.15 UTILITIES 3.15.1 Introduction This section describes the existing utility systems that may be affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, including potable and process water supply, wastewater treatment, electricity, and natural gas, as well as the associated direct and indirect impacts that may occur. 3.15.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for utility systems includes the existing public utility infrastructure and facilities that would provide service to the FutureGen 2.0 Project, including potable and non-potable water, wastewater, electricity, and natural gas. The ROI also includes existing pipelines, transmission lines, and other utility lines that lie within or cross the proposed project areas in Morgan County. Utility systems that may be affected are located primarily in Morgan County. 3.15.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered The estimated utility consumption for the FutureGen 2.0 Project was compared to the existing utility demand to determine whether the proposed project would strain any of the existing utility systems. The potential for impacts to utility systems were assessed based on whether the proposed project would directly or indirectly:  Impact the effectiveness of existing utility infrastructure or cause temporary failure;  Affect the capacity and distribution of local and regional utility suppliers to meet the existing or anticipated demand; or  Require public utility system upgrades. 3.15.1.3 Regulatory Framework The Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5) and the regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission regulate public utilities in Illinois. These laws do not apply to utilities run by municipalities or rural electric Co-Ops, which are governed by local ordinances or by their own rules. The service area of the Illinois Rural Electric Cooperative includes the majority of the ROI, including the village of Meredosia, the city of Jacksonville, and the area encompassed by the CO2 pipeline corridor. The service area of the Menard Electric Cooperative includes the area encompassed by the proposed CO2 storage study area. The Midwest Independent Transmission System Operator is the Regional Transmission Organization responsible for reliability coordination and regional planning for electrical transmission. Illinois regulations state that an entity acting in the capacity of a utility must obtain a permit issued by an officer of the elected governing body before entering a highway ROW (92 IAC 530); and that any entity connecting to a public potable water supply requires a permit (35 IAC 174). 3.15.2 Affected Environment 3.15.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center Water Usage According to the Meredosia Water Department, the Meredosia Water Plant serves approximately 450 users within the village of Meredosia. The Meredosia Water Plant pumps approximately 65,000 gpd to its service area and has an overall capacity to provide 500,000 gpd. The Meredosia Water Plant currently operates at 13 percent of its total capacity and has approximately 435,000 gpd of additional capacity for public water supply (Hull 2011). The Meredosia Energy Center has historically used well water as its source for drinking water as well as for freeze protection of the bottom ash pond piping during the winter months when necessary. Information on well water usage at the Meredosia Energy Center and surrounding areas is covered in Section 3.5, Groundwater. The energy center has historically utilized city water from the Meredosia Water Plant for fire protection and Unit 4 floor wash. Since the suspension of operations at the end of 2011, the energy center has greatly reduced its well water usage as only minimal amounts of drinking water are required by the few maintenance and security personnel onsite, and city water is only required for general maintenance. Process water was historically supplied to the Meredosia Energy Center from a combination of well water and river water sources. Information on well water usage for process water at the Meredosia Energy Center and surrounding areas is discussed in Section 3.5, Groundwater. Historic demand on the Illinois River for process water at the Meredosia Energy Center is discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. Wastewater The village of Meredosia sewer system routes sanitary sewage to three large evaporative settling ponds north of Meredosia. According to the Meredosia Water Department, the settling ponds have sufficient available capacity for future demands (Hull 2012b). Historically, the Meredosia Energy Center generated wastewater from both sanitary facilities and industrial processes. Sanitary wastewater was collected and routed to a single point of discharge to the village of Meredosia sewer system. Process wastewater was either recycled as practicable or treated onsite and discharged to the Illinois River. Process wastewater was not discharged to a public wastewater treatment facility. Since the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, only a minimal amount of wastewater is generated by the few maintenance and security personnel onsite. Electricity Prior to suspension of operations, the nominal rated generating capacity of the combined four generating units at Meredosia Energy Center was 549 MWe. A portion of this generating capacity was used to power the energy center facilities. Existing electrical infrastructure is located onsite, including medium and low voltage systems, transmission towers, and substations. Since the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, the site has required a limited supply of electricity for building maintenance. Natural Gas Prior to suspension of operations, Ameren Illinois provided natural gas to the Meredosia Energy Center via a natural gas substation on the north end of the energy center property, which is fed by an existing natural gas pipeline that runs under the Illinois River. The pipeline supplied fuel for Boiler 6 ignition and additional minor plant processes. Since the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center, the site does not require natural gas with the exception of potential use for the back-up generator at the microwave tower. 3.15.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Water Usage The North Morgan County Water Co-Op currently supplies water to approximately 520 users in the area of the CO2 pipeline and storage study area and pumps approximately 90,000 gpd. The North Morgan County Water Co-Op has the capacity to pump 2 mgd and is currently operating at 4.5 percent capacity. The North Morgan County Water Co-Op buys their water from the Jacksonville Water Department, which supplies water to the city of Jacksonville from the Jacksonville Water Plant. The Jacksonville Water Plant currently pumps approximately 3.5 to 4 mgd, has the capacity to pump approximately 9 mgd, and is currently operating at 44 percent capacity (Cole 2011). Wastewater The Jacksonville Sewer Plant provides service to residents within Jacksonville. The Jacksonville Sewer Plant has the capacity to process 7.57 mgd, but has the capability of increasing capacity to 15 mgd during wet weather. The Jacksonville Sewer Plant currently processes approximately 5.0 mgd and operates at 66 percent of normal (i.e., dry weather) capacity. The sewer plant serves a residential population of approximately 24,000 residents (City of Jacksonville 2012c). There is no public wastewater treatment system serving the rural portions of the ROI that encompass the CO2 pipeline corridor or storage study area. Septic tanks are primarily utilized in these areas. Electricity The service area of the Illinois Rural Electric Cooperative includes the city of Jacksonville and the area encompassed by the CO2 pipeline corridor (Shelby Electric Cooperative 2011). Ameren Illinois also provides electricity throughout the ROI (Jacksonville Municipal Department 2012). Electricity in the vicinity of the CO2 storage study area is currently provided by Menard Electric Cooperative from a three-phase 12.5-kV line running along the west side of Morgan County Road (CR) 123. The nearest Menard Electric Cooperative substation is approximately 3.5 miles east of the CO2 storage study area at the intersection of Riley Road and CR 18W in western Sangamon County. Natural Gas Ameren Illinois provides natural gas service within the ROI (Jacksonville Municipal Department 2012). 3.15.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.15.3.1 Construction Impacts Impacts to public utility systems would occur from increased demand and could potentially impact a utility system’s ability to provide sufficient service for its users. Existing utilities infrastructure could inadvertently be damaged or have service disrupted during construction of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The potential for accidental damage or service disruption during construction would vary based on proposed construction methods and proximity to existing utility systems, but would be greatest during trenching activities. To minimize the possible interference with existing overhead or underground utility lines, all proposed construction ROWs would have sufficient width to allow for the safe use of construction equipment and installation of proposed project-related infrastructure and facilities. Specifically, crossings of other pipelines (i.e., not the CO2 pipeline) and other underground utilities would require a minimum of 12 inches of separation; the minimum separation may be increased to 24 inches where considered prudent. Existing pipelines would be under-crossed unless over-crossing is specifically permitted by the pipeline owner. The Alliance would ensure that alignments of existing utilities (e.g., electric, telephone, cable, water, gas, and sewer) would be located and demarcated prior to construction, and coordination with affected utility providers would continue throughout final engineering and design. Also, where appropriate, the Alliance would implement measures (e.g. vacuum excavation) to decrease the potential for construction equipment, particularly trenching equipment, to sever or damage existing underground lines. Should a disruption of an existing utility service occur in the event of a construction accident, it is anticipated that impacts would be short term and minor. Meredosia Energy Center Water Usage During construction, potable water for workers, as well as any water requirements for construction activities, would be provided by either existing wells at the Meredosia Energy Center or water tanks transported onsite via trucks. For purposes of analysis, it is assumed that water for the tanks would be supplied by the Meredosia Water Plant. An estimated average demand of 15 gpd of potable water per employee would be consumed during construction of the oxy-combustion facility. Based on a peak of 500 workers at the height of construction at the Meredosia Energy Center, maximum daily water consumption during construction would be 7,500 gpd. If water tanks supply all potable water needs for construction, the Meredosia Energy Center would require 1.7 percent of the Meredosia Water Plant’s current unused capacity. Water demand would not exceed available capacity of the Meredosia Water Plant and impacts to potable water providers are expected to be short term and negligible. The Alliance currently does not plan to construct additional water lines; however, in the future, they may extend the existing city water line onsite to provide water needs. This would not adversely impact the village of Meredosia public water utilities. Wastewater Sanitary wastewater during construction would be generated by workers onsite. Based on typical sanitary wastewater generation rates for construction projects, 15 gpd of sanitary wastewater generation per employee during construction is assumed (Liu and Lipták 1997). Based on a peak of 500 workers at the height of construction, maximum daily sanitary wastewater generation would be 7,500 gpd. Portable toilets and hand-wash stations would be provided for construction workers and serviced regularly. The ultimate sanitary wastewater disposal would be determined during the construction phase; however, it is assumed that the sanitary wastewater would be disposed of at permitted sewage treatment facilities with sufficient capacity, and would not adversely impact local utilities. Impacts to wastewater treatment providers would be short term and negligible. The Alliance currently does not plan to construct additional sewer lines; however, in the future, they may reroute the sanitary wastewater piping on the energy center site. This would not adversely impact the village of Meredosia sewer system. Electricity The construction of upgrades to the existing electrical infrastructure at the Meredosia Energy Center would be necessary. The existing 138 kV substation would be expanded to provide a new overhead distribution line to supply power to a new Unit 4 Auxiliary Transformer and new electrical equipment, and connections would be installed to provide power to the various components of the oxy-combustion facility. Existing overhead transmission and distribution lines would be re-routed, which would require the demolition of existing towers and construction of four new towers. Impacts from the demolition and construction of these electrical structures would occur solely on the project site and would not disrupt local utilities’ ability to provide service. It is assumed that electricity needs during construction would be provided by the public electrical grid (i.e., a local utility) to be spot supplemented by portable generators. Overall utility impacts from electricity usage during construction would be negligible. Natural Gas The Alliance does not anticipate a need for natural gas during construction nor any construction involving natural gas lines; therefore, no impacts to natural gas providers would occur. CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Water Usage During construction of the CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities, it is assumed that potable water would be provided via water tanks transported to the sites by trucks. For purposes of analysis, DOE assumed that water tanks for construction of the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s) would be filled by the North Morgan County Water Co-Op (which purchases its water from the Jacksonville Water Department) and directly from the Jacksonville Water Department for construction of the educational facilities. Based on an average of 15 gpd of potable water usage and a maximum of 355 workers needed for construction at the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s), an estimated 5,325 gpd of potable water would be required from the North Morgan County Water Co-Op. This demand would represent less than one percent of the North Morgan County Water Co-Op’s unused capacity. Based on an average of 15 gpd of potable water usage, and considering a maximum of 87 workers needed for construction of the educational facilities, an estimated 1,305 gpd of potable water would be needed from the Jacksonville Water Department. This demand would represent less than one percent of the Jacksonville Water Department’s capacity. Therefore, impacts from potable water needs during construction of the CO2 pipeline, injection well site(s), and educational facilities would be negligible. The CO2 pipeline would undergo hydrostatic testing prior to operation. Water sources for hydrostatic testing have not been identified; however, if a public utility is utilized, impacts would be temporary (i.e., less than two days). Water would be trucked to the pipeline via tanks and would only be sourced by local utilities with sufficient capacity. Impacts to local water utilities from hydrostatic testing would be temporary and minor. Water would be required for the drilling of the injection and monitoring wells. Volumes needed for construction of the injection wells would be greater than the amount used for drilling the stratigraphic well because of the larger well diameters. DOE estimates the maximum volume each injection well would require would be approximately 659,000 gallons of water for drilling fluids, another 1,587,600 gallons of water to account for zones of lost circulation, and an additional 136,000 to 152,000 gallons of water to prepare the cement. Thus, the total water demand per well drilled would be approximately 2.4 million gallons. Assuming a drilling duration of 100 to 120 days, between 20,000 and 24,000 gpd of water would be required to drill each well. The monitoring wells would likely require an amount less than this, since they would be smaller in diameter and shallower than the injection wells. The water for construction of the injection and monitoring wells would be supplied by water trucks using water from the North Morgan County Water Co-Op and from other nearby sources. If the North Morgan County Water Co-Op were to supply all water needed, drilling of each injection well would require between 1 and 1.25 percent of its daily un-used capacity. Overall, construction impacts to water utilities would be short term and minor. Wastewater During construction of the CO2 pipeline, injection well site(s), and educational facilities, sanitary wastewater would be generated by construction workers. Based on a maximum of 442 employees employed during the construction phase and 15 gpd of sanitary wastewater generated per worker, a maximum total of 6,630 gpd of sanitary wastewater would be generated during construction for the CO2 pipeline, injection well site(s), and educational facilities. Portable toilets and hand-wash stations would be provided for construction workers. These self-contained portable units would be serviced regularly and the effluent would be collected and hauled to permitted sewage treatment facilities by licensed waste transporters. For purposes of this analysis, DOE assumed that all sanitary wastewater would be trucked offsite to the Jacksonville Sewer Plant. Under this scenario, a demand of less than one percent of the Jacksonville Sewer Plant’s available capacity would occur; therefore, negligible impacts would be anticipated. Spent hydrotest water from CO2 pipeline hydrostatic testing would be discharged to local waterways under an NPDES permit from the IEPA or to an existing treatment facility. If hydrotest water is discharged to a treatment facility, a permitted facility with sufficient capacity would be utilized and impacts to local utilities would be negligible. During construction of the wells, excess fluids generated during drilling, discarded water used in the cementing process, and spent drilling mud from mud change-outs would be discharged to lined earthen pits at the construction site. For purposes of this analysis, DOE assumed that wastewater would be transported offsite by licensed waste transporters and disposed of at permitted sewage treatment facilities with sufficient capacity, and would not adversely impact local utilities. Electricity Electricity needs during construction for the CO2 pipeline, injection well site(s), and educational facilities would be provided by portable generators and would not impact local utilities. Natural Gas No natural gas would be required for construction; therefore, no impacts to natural gas providers would occur. 3.15.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Water Usage Water from the Meredosia Water Plant would be utilized for fire protection and the oxy-combustion boiler floor wash. Approximately 1,400 gpd of Meredosia Water Plant water would be used during operations.  The Alliance plans to use onsite wells for drinking water purposes during operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project at the Meredosia Energy Center, though use of city water may be considered in the future. If city water is used for potable water, the estimated maximum of 115 employees could consume up to 1,725 gpd of water. At a maximum, the use of city water for fire protection, floor wash, and possibly potable water for employees would represent less than one percent of the Meredosia Water Plant’s unused capacity, and impacts would be negligible.  Process water would not impact utilities as it would be supplied by a combination of well water and river water sources during operation. Impacts on well water usage are discussed in Section 3.5, Groundwater. River water impacts are discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. Wastewater Process wastewater would be generated from process contact wastewater, non-contact cooling water (once-through and tower blowdown), backwash from the intake screen, and oily effluent from floor and equipment drains. Process wastewater generated from operation of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would be treated onsite and discharged to the Illinois River and, therefore, would not impact any public wastewater treatment facility. Impacts from treated process wastewater are discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water. Sanitary wastewater would be collected and routed to a single point of discharge to the Meredosia sewer system, which discharges to settling ponds north of the village. An annual average discharge of 4,680 gpd of sanitary wastewater would be anticipated. This daily amount of additional discharge to the settling ponds would have negligible impacts on system capacity. Electricity Gross electrical generation from operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be approximately 168 MWe. The proposed auxiliary electric power demand to operate the Meredosia Energy Center would be less than 69 MWe. This would result in a net output of at least 99 MWe of electricity distributed to the regional power grid. No impacts to public electric utility providers are anticipated as a result of operation of the Meredosia Energy Center. Natural Gas Natural gas would be required for heating purposes during operations. This would be supplied by the existing natural gas pipeline serving the oxy-combustion facility and would be less than historical levels of natural gas consumption, because natural gas would no longer be utilized for boiler startups. Overall impacts to natural gas utilities would be negligible. CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Water Usage During operation of the CO2 injection well site(s), potable water for the surface facilities would be supplied by the North Morgan County Water Co-Op via either its 6-inch line along CR 123 or its 4-inch line along Beilschmidt Road. Assuming 21 employees per day would be employed at the CO2 injection well site(s), and assuming a 15-gpd consumption rate of potable water, 315 gpd of water would be consumed during operations. This would represent a less than one percent increase in the capacity of the North Morgan County Water Co-Op; therefore, impacts to public water utilities would be long term but negligible. Potable water use for the educational facilities is projected at 15 gpd for each employee and 10 gallons per visitor. Annual potable water use for the visitor and research center would be 270,000 gallons, or approximately 740 gpd. The annual potable water use for the training facility would be 215,000 gallons, or approximately 590 gpd. Thus, the total potable water use by the educational facilities would be 1,330 gpd. Potable water would be supplied by the Jacksonville Water Department and would represent less than one percent of available capacity; therefore, impacts to water utilities would be long term but negligible. No process water would be required to operate the CO2 injection well site(s) or educational facilities. Hydrostatic testing may be required every 3 to 5 years for maintenance of the CO2 pipeline. Water for hydrostatic testing would be obtained from available sources and trucked to the testing sites with negligible impacts on local water utilities. Wastewater Sanitary wastewater generated at the CO2 injection well site(s) would be disposed onsite and would not impact local wastewater utilities. The sanitary wastewater generation by the educational facilities is projected at 15 gpd for each employee and 10 gallons per visitor. Annual sanitary wastewater generation would be 270,000 gallons, or approximately 740 gpd, for the visitor and research center. Annual sanitary wastewater generation would be 215,000 gallons, or approximately 590 gpd, for the training facility. Total sanitary wastewater generation from the educational facilities would be 1,330 gpd. The Alliance intends to site the educational facilities within the service area of the Jacksonville Sewer Plant. The predicted sanitary discharge by the facilities would represent a less than one percent demand on the available capacity of Jacksonville Sewer Plant; therefore, impacts to wastewater utilities would be long term but negligible. Electricity Based on electric power availability, valves for the mainline block valves would be operated by electric motor or gas (nitrogen)-over-oil hydraulic actuators. A 6‐hour uninterruptible power supply for critical instrumentation would be provided for these structures along the CO2 pipeline. During operation of the injection wells, meter station data would be transported to the site control building through the SCADA telecommunication network. Utilities for monitoring wells are assumed to be wireless; however, if electricity lines are constructed to reach each monitoring well site, a negligible increase in electricity consumption would occur during operations. Surface facilities at the injection wells, including the two 710 horsepower booster pumps, would require approximately 1.1 MWe (or approximately 800 MWh per month). Menard Electric Cooperative has analyzed the impact to their system to supply the large load required by the injection pumps and is suggesting that a 5,000 kVA substation be installed next to an existing substation, and a new 12.5 kV line be run to the site control building and booster pump building site on above-ground wooden poles. The nearest Menard Electric Cooperative substation is at the intersection of Riley Road and CR 18W in western Sangamon County, likely over 3.5 miles from any chosen location for the injection wells. In addition, a step-down transformer connected to the new Menard Electric Cooperative power line would be required at the injection wells to convert the 12.5 kV line voltage to site voltage of 4,160 volts and lower. The educational facilities would require a total annual energy use of 435,000 kWh and 400,000 kWh, respectively, for the visitor and research center and training facility buildings; however, preliminary energy modeling shows that the facilities could use less than these amounts. Electricity would be provided by existing sources within Jacksonville and the additional demand is not anticipated to impact local utilities. Backup power at the surface facilities of the CO2 injection wells would be provided by a diesel generator and would be sufficient to operate the two booster pumps simultaneously and all of the surface facility buildings functions. Natural Gas The educational facilities may use natural gas for space and water heating. The maximum annual usages are projected to be 8,000 therms for the visitor and research center and 2,000 therms for the training facility. Natural gas would be provided via connections to existing gas pipelines within Jacksonville and would result in long-term but negligible impacts to natural gas utilities. Backup power to the educational facilities would be provided by a natural gas-fueled generator. The output of the generator at the visitor and research center would be sufficient to operate the building functions and be capable of at least two continuous days of operation. Backup power for the training facility would be limited to emergency lighting and heating to prevent freezing of water pipes. 3.15.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to utilities. Because the Meredosia Energy Center suspended operations at the end of 2011, the no action alternative would not restore electrical generating capacity at the facility. 3.16 COMMUNITY SERVICES 3.16.1 Introduction This section describes the community services potentially directly and indirectly affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, including emergency response, law enforcement, fire protection, healthcare services, and local school systems, as well as the anticipated impacts from the proposed project.  3.16.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for community services includes Morgan, Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. These are the counties in which DOE expects almost all construction and operations workers would live, and they are the counties that would primarily provide law enforcement, fire, and emergency services needed as a result of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The proposed project would occur entirely within Morgan County, which is the county where community services would be most affected.  Morgan County adjoins Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. Morgan County is also bordered by Greene, Sangamon, and Macoupin counties; however, these three counties are relatively farther away from the sites of the proposed project; therefore, community services in these three counties are not anticipated to be impacted by the proposed project and were not analyzed. 3.16.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered To evaluate the effects of the FutureGen 2.0 Project on community services, DOE considered the potential impacts of the proposed project on existing service levels, response times, and other performance objectives. Potential impacts were assessed based on whether construction and operation of the proposed project would:  Displace, impede effective access to, or increase demand beyond available capacities of emergency response services, fire protection, law enforcement, healthcare facilities, and school systems in the ROI; or  Conflict with local and regional plans for emergency response services, fire protection, law enforcement, healthcare facilities, or school systems. 3.16.1.3 Regulatory Framework Community services are generally regulated by county and municipal governments based on state and national standards and guidelines. Local planning commissions (or regional agencies) are responsible for studying the needs and conditions of a region and for developing strategies that enhance the region's community services. Capacities and effective access to community services are addressed in regional plans and municipal ordinances. Local governments also have primary responsibility for response to and recovery from disasters and emergencies. The Morgan County Regional Planning Commission is responsible for regional planning in Morgan County (Morgan County 2012). The IEMA assists local governments when their capabilities are exceeded (IEMA 2011). 3.16.2 Affected Environment 3.16.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities The Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline corridor, and the CO2 storage study area are located in Morgan County. The educational facilities are expected to be located in or near Jacksonville, Illinois, which is also in Morgan County. Emergency Response The IEMA is responsible for preparing Illinois for natural, manmade, or technological disasters, hazards, or acts of terrorism, and assists local governments when their capabilities are exceeded (IEMA 2011). The IEMA maintains the Illinois Emergency Operations Plan and coordinates the state's disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery programs and activities (IEMA 2010). The IEMA maintains a 24-hour Communication Center and State Emergency Operations Center. The State Emergency Operations Center leads crisis/consequence management response and operations to notify, activate, deploy, and employ state resources. The IEMA supports disaster stricken communities, however, historically has not included emergency medical services, fire services, technical rescue, urban search and rescue, or hazardous materials operations teams. The Mutual Aid Box Alarm System works in partnership with the IEMA to mobilize local emergency medical, municipal fire, and special operations assets in order to provide a comprehensive statewide mutual aid response system (MABAS 2011). During an emergency, system alarms provide speed of response by emergency resources. The Mutual Aid Box Alarm System’s emergency resources include approximately 1,000 of the state’s 1,200 fire departments; 35,000 of Illinois’ 40,000 firefighters; more than 1,500 fire stations; 2,495 engine companies; 469 ladder trucks; 1,100 ambulances (mostly paramedic capable); 297 heavy rescue squads; and 788 water tenders (MABAS 2011). An additional 1,000 emergency vehicles are provided by fire/emergency medical services reserve units. The Mutual Aid Box Alarm System also offers 42 specialized operations teams for hazardous materials, as well as certified fire investigators that can be "packaged" as teams for larger incidents requiring complicated and time-consuming efforts for any single agency. A volunteer ambulance service provides emergency response in Meredosia. Response times average between 5 to 10 minutes. Two ambulance providers operate in the city of Jacksonville (Lifestar and American), as well as paramedic services that operate from Passavant Area Hospital in Jacksonville. Emergency response services in Meredosia and Jacksonville are categorized as sufficient (Werries 2012; Kluge 2012). Fire Protection There are 8 fire departments in Morgan County and a total of 25 fire stations in Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. The Meredosia Fire Department is located less than 1 mile from the energy center in the village of Meredosia. The city of Jacksonville is served by the Jacksonville Fire Department. The Jacksonville Fire Department also provides fire protection services outside of the city limits to residences or private entities that purchase a rural fire protection contract. For those residencies or entities that do not purchase a rural fire protection contract, the nearest volunteer fire department is dispatched to the incident (Kluge 2012). Table 3.16-1 summarizes fire protection statistics within the ROI. Table 3.16-1. Fire Department Statistics Active Personnel per Active Personnel per Fire Region Firefighters 1,000 Population Firefighters 1,000 Population Departments (Career)  (Active Career) (Volunteer)  (Active Volunteer) 48,978 325,111 1.1 596,948 1.9 1,809 15,300 1.2 15,205 1.2 4 0 0 73 10.5 6 6 0.4 80 5.9 8 25 0.7 85 2.4 120 0 21613.1 3 0 0 67 12.5 Sources: USCB 2010d; USFA 2012 Note: The National Fire Department Census is a voluntary program and does not include all fire departments in the United States. Law Enforcement Morgan County is served by the Morgan County Sheriff’s Office, District 9 of the Illinois State Police, and six police departments located in Chapin, Franklin, Jacksonville, Meredosia, South Jacksonville, and Waverly, Illinois. Ten Police Departments, four Sheriff’s Offices, and Districts 9 and 20 of the Illinois State Police serve Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties (ISP 2009; ISP 2012) (see Table 3.16-2). Full-time civilian and sworn law enforcement personnel ratios are lower in the ROI than in the state and United States; however, the crime rates in the ROI are substantially lower, indicating an adequate existing level of law enforcement services (see Table 3.16-3). Sources: ISP 2009; FBI 2009 Table 3.16-3. Crime Statistics Region Total Crime Index Offenses Crime Rate per 100,000 Population 10,639,369a 3,465.5 425,720 3,299.8 78 1,186.7 280 2,062.8 707 2,005.6 102 617.5 44 849.3 Sources: ISP 2009; FBI 2011 a. Sufficient data are not available to estimate national totals for arson; therefore, this total excludes arson. Note: Crime offense includes murder, criminal sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault/battery, burglary, theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson. Healthcare Services The Passavant Area Hospital, located in Jacksonville, is the only hospital in Morgan County. There is one hospital located in the adjacent counties, Pittsfield’s Illini Community Hospital, located in Pike County. There are no hospitals in Brown, Cass, or Scott counties (IDPH 2011). Table 3.16-4 lists healthcare statistics in the ROI. Sources: USCB 2010d; Health Resources and Services Administration 2011; IDPH 2012; American Hospital Directory 2011 Local School System There are 21 public schools and 5 private schools in Morgan County, with total 2009-2010 school year enrollments of 5,176 and 551 students, respectively. The adjacent counties of Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott have a total of 32 public schools and 3 private schools (there are no private schools in Pike or Scott counties). The 2009-2010 total school year enrollment was 6,990 for public schools and 202 for private schools. Tables 3.16-5 and 3.16-6 list public and private school statistics in the ROI. Average student to teacher ratios in both public and private schools are substantially lower than in Illinois and the United States, indicating an adequate level of educational services in these schools. Average Student to Region Schools Teacher Ratio 98,817 16.1 4,405 16.0 3 14.4 11 12.9 21 11.9 13 12.0 5 12.1 Sources: NCES 2011a; NCES 2012 Average Student to Region Schools Teacher Ratio Sources: NCES 2011b; NCES 2012 NA = not applicable 3.16.3 Impacts of the Proposed Action 3.16.3.1 Construction Impacts The construction schedule and workforce anticipated for the oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, CO2 injection wells, and educational facilities are described in respective sections of Chapter 2. The need for up to 942 construction workers for the proposed project would be limited in duration but would likely cause a small influx of temporary residents. DOE anticipates that most of the potential workers for the construction phase would already reside in the ROI as included in the county labor pools; however, some construction workers with specialized training, and workers employed by contractors from outside the ROI, would be brought into the area. Most workers would be expected to commute to the construction sites on a daily basis, while some would relocate to the area for the duration of the construction period. Section 3.18, Socioeconomics, addresses the potential influx of temporary construction workers and the effects on population and housing. Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Emergency Response Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, addresses the potential for accidents and injuries during construction for the FutureGen 2.0 Project based on projects comparable in size and scope. Emergencies during construction of the proposed project would not be expected to increase the demand for emergency services beyond current available capacity. As discussed in Section 3.16.2.1, the ROI is served by an adequate emergency staff locally, supplemented by services throughout Illinois that would be available for local response. Therefore, the potential impacts to emergency services during construction of project components would be negligible. Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, discusses the potential increase in automobile accidents as a result of increased truck traffic during construction, which could affect the demand for emergency services and response times. The overall impact on emergency response due to increased traffic in the area would be negligible. Fire Protection Construction of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would involve the use of flammable and combustible materials that could pose an increased risk of fire or explosion. However, the probability of a significant fire or explosion during construction is very low, as described in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety. The Illinois fire departments within the ROI have the capacity and are equipped to respond to a major fire emergency during construction at the Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities. All fire departments within the ROI are members of the state’s mutual aid agreement, and any of these fire departments would be available to assist in a fire emergency if needed. Any incidents that may occur during construction for the proposed project would not increase the demand for fire protection services beyond the available capacity of currently existing services, nor would construction activities displace any fire protection facilities, conflict with local and regional plans for fire protection services, or impede access for fire protection services. Thus, potential impacts to fire protection services due to construction of the proposed project would be negligible. Law Enforcement As discussed in Section 3.18, Socioeconomics, construction jobs created by the proposed project could cause a small increase in temporary residents within the ROI; however, most construction workers are expected to be drawn from county labor pools and would already reside within the ROI. An increase in temporary residents would result in additional calls for service. Given the adequate existing capacity, law enforcement services could accommodate the temporary increase in population. Construction for the proposed project would not displace any law enforcement facilities, impact law enforcement access, or conflict with local and regional plans for law enforcement services. Therefore, potential impacts to law enforcement due to construction of the project would be negligible. Healthcare Services The five-county ROI ratio of 1.9 beds per 1,000 residents is lower than the Hill-Burton Act standard of 4.5 hospital beds per 1,000 residents The Hill-Burton Act of 1946 and the state and national averages of 2.5 hospital beds per established the objective standard for the number of hospitals, beds, types 1,000 residents, mainly because Brown, Cass, and Scott counties lack of beds, and medical personnel hospital facilities. However, Morgan County has 3.4 beds per needed for every 1,000 people. The 1,000 residents, which is higher than the state and national averages. Hill-Burton standard is 4.5 beds per Although the project could result in a temporary increase in residents 1,000 residents (E-Notes 2011). possibly requiring medical care, such an increase is not anticipated to adversely affect the existing LOS at local hospitals. It is anticipated that the two nearest hospitals would be capable of meeting the healthcare service needs that would arise during construction. Construction for the FutureGen 2.0 Project also would not displace any healthcare facilities, impact access to healthcare, or conflict with local and regional plans for healthcare services. Therefore, potential impacts to healthcare services due to construction of the project would be negligible. Local School System As noted above, DOE anticipates that most of the potential workers for the construction phase would already reside in the ROI as included in the county labor pools. Due to the temporary nature of the construction phase of the proposed project, it is unlikely that construction workers who reside outside of the ROI would permanently relocate their families, including school-age children, to the ROI. It is more likely that temporary workers who permanently reside outside of the ROI would seek short-term lodging for themselves during the work week. In addition, construction of the proposed project would not displace school facilities or conflict with local and regional plans for school system capacity or enrollment. As a result, potential impacts to local school systems due to construction would be negligible. 3.16.3.2 Operational Impacts Prior to suspension of operations at the end of 2011, the energy center employed approximately 57 personnel. Since the suspension of operations, a few maintenance and security personnel are onsite, as needed. The operations phase of the proposed project would employ approximately 130 to 158 full-time equivalent employees (i.e., permanent and contract employees) as described for the oxy-combustion facility, CO2 injection wells, and educational facilities in respective sections of Chapter 2. Most of these workers would already reside in the ROI, while others would commute or relocate to the ROI. Section 3.18, Socioeconomics, addresses the potential influx of permanent workers and the effects on population and housing. Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Emergency Response Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, addresses the potential for accidents and injuries during operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project based on comparable projects of size and scope. Emergencies during operations would not be expected to increase the demand for emergency services beyond the current available capacities described in Section 3.16.2.1. In addition, a comprehensive statewide mutual aid response system is in place to notify, activate, and deploy emergency response resources to the ROI in the event of an emergency. The operation of the project would not displace any emergency response facilities, conflict with local and regional plans for emergency response services, or impede access to emergency response services. Therefore, the potential impacts to emergency services during operations would be negligible. Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation, discusses the potential increase in automobile accidents as a result of increased truck traffic due to operations, which could affect the demand for emergency services and response times. The overall impact on emergency and disaster response due to increased traffic in the area would be negligible. Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety, describes the risks of catastrophic accidents and intentionally destructive acts during operations of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The risks to public health and safety are considered to be very low, and the emergency response capabilities are expected to be adequate to address these risks. Fire Protection Operation of the proposed project would involve the use of flammable and combustible materials that pose an increased risk of fire or explosion at the project site; however, the probability of a significant fire or explosion is very low as described in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety. Prior to operation of the proposed project, copies of the MSDSs (that provide the information needed to allow the safe handling of hazardous substances) for the process materials and chemicals to be stored and used would be provided to the local fire departments. The Illinois fire departments within the ROI have the capacity and are equipped to respond to a major fire emergency. All fire departments within the ROI are members of the state’s mutual aid agreement and any of these fire departments would be available to assist in a fire emergency if needed. Operation of the proposed project would not displace any fire protection facilities, nor would it conflict with local and regional plans for fire protection services. Any incidents that may occur during operation for the proposed project would not increase the demand on fire protection services beyond the available capacity of existing services. Thus, the potential impact to fire protection services due to operations would be negligible. Law Enforcement A small potential increase in population as a result of operations of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would have a negligible effect on the ratio of law enforcement officers per 1,000 residents. In addition, the average crime rate in the five-county ROI is less than half of the state and national averages, indicating that existing law enforcement services are appropriately staffed and would be capable of handling any small long-term increase in population. Operation of the proposed project would not displace or impede access to any law enforcement facilities, nor would it conflict with local and regional plans for law enforcement services. Therefore, potential impacts to law enforcement due to operations would be negligible. Healthcare Services Currently, healthcare capacity within the five-county ROI is 1.9 hospital beds per 1,000 residents, which is lower than the Hill-Burton Act standard and state and national averages, mainly because Brown, Cass, and Scott counties lack hospital facilities. However, Morgan County has 3.4 beds per 1,000 residents, which is higher than the state and national averages. Although the project could result in a slight increase in residents possibly requiring medical care, such an increase is not anticipated to adversely affect the existing LOS at local hospitals even if all positions were filled by newcomers to the ROI with their families. Operations for the proposed project would not displace any healthcare facilities or conflict with local or regional plans for healthcare or emergency services. Therefore, potential impacts on healthcare services due to operations would be negligible. Local School System Operations for the proposed project could result in the permanent relocation of families to the ROI and cause slight increases in the number of school-aged children. Because most workers are expected to be hired from within the labor pool of the ROI, only a small number of families with school-age children are expected to relocate to the ROI. Existing school facilities within Morgan County would have the capacity to accommodate the anticipated small increase in enrollment that may result from the proposed project, because class sizes in the ROI are currently smaller than the averages in the state and United States as discussed in Section 3.16.2.1. In addition, operation of the proposed project would not displace school facilities or conflict with local and regional plans for school system capacity or enrollment. Therefore, potential impacts on local schools due to operations would be negligible. 3.16.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the proposed action. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the proposed action would not be constructed and there would be no changes in demand on community services. 3.17 HUMAN HEALTH AND SAFETY 3.17.1 Introduction This section describes the affected environment as it relates to occupational and human health and safety, and health and safety risks that could be associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The section includes information on health and safety regulations, toxicity characteristics for relevant gases, worker safety and injury data, and data on populations that could potentially be affected. Health and safety risks were estimated based on the current design of the project, applicable DOE Guidance (DOE 2002; DOE 2004), applicable safety and spill prevention regulations, and expected operating procedures. DOE also considered federal, state, and local health and safety regulations, as well as industrial codes and standards that would govern work activities during construction and operation of the project to protect the health and safety of the workers and the public. 3.17.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for human health, safety, accidents, and intentional destructive acts was determined based on maximum reasonably foreseeable accident release scenarios (i.e., the maximum release scenarios) and the area that could potentially be impacted by such releases. The ROI for potential releases from operation of the oxy-combustion facility was estimated to be 2 miles from the Meredosia Energy Center boundary. This distance was determined based on the maximum predicted distance for potential adverse health effects that could result from an accidental release of gases from the site. A distance of 2 miles from the centerline of the Alliance’s proposed pipeline corridor was used as the ROI for the CO2 pipeline, which was considered the distance within which a person could experience any adverse effects from an accidental pipeline release. As indicated in the impact analysis presented in Section 3.17.3, the actual distance at which adverse effects could occur would likely be substantially less than 2 miles. DOE considered an ROI for the injection well site(s) of 2 miles from the wells, representing the expected maximum lateral distance of the underground CO2 plume. The Alliance used data collected from the stratigraphic well to model the CO2 plume in support of the UIC permitting process. DOE used the modeling data to validate the ROI estimate for the maximum release scenarios, which showed that the maximum lateral distance of the plume after 20 years of injection and 50 years of post-injection migration would be less than 2 miles (Appendix G, Geological Report). 3.17.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE assessed the potential for impacts to human health and safety, based on whether the FutureGen 2.0 Project would cause:  Worker health risks due to industrial accidents, injuries, or illnesses during construction and normal operating conditions;  Human health risks due to accidental releases of CO2 or other trace gases associated with captured CO2 during transport, active CO2 injection and storage activities, and following closure of the injection wells; or  Human health risks due to intentional destructive acts. Potential worker safety impacts were estimated based on national workplace injury, illness, and fatality rates. These rates were obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and are based on similar industry sectors. The rates were applied to the numbers of employees anticipated during construction and operation of the project. From these data, the projected numbers of total recordable cases, lost work day cases, and fatalities were calculated. For chemical hazards, DOE considered a full range of potential accident scenarios, including the maximum release scenario. Potential accident scenarios were considered for each aspect of the oxycombustion facility, the CO2 pipeline, CO2 injection wells, and operational and post-injection releases from the formations used for the injection and storage of CO2. Chemical hazards, as well as other health and safety risk factors, were not considered a concern for the educational facilities based on the nature of activities expected at these facilities. The potential impacts from intentional destructive acts were evaluated based on the analysis of the maximum release from these scenarios.  Accidents considered by DOE address concerns related to the potential release of CO2 and trace co-constituents that may be present, and related health effects that could occur from exposure. Each release scenario was carefully reviewed to determine the predicted frequency for which such an event could occur. DOE considered engineering design and controls, as well as available industry safety statistics, when determining the predicted frequency for each type of accident and release. See Section 3.17.1.3 for descriptions of frequency categories. DOE used modeling results to assess potential health effects that could occur both for workers and the general public. To determine the nature of potential health effects, DOE compared potential exposure concentrations with health criteria published by USEPA, OSHA, and other industry groups (e.g., American Industrial Hygiene Association). See Section 3.17.1.3 for descriptors of health effects and published health criteria. Potential exposure concentrations at receptor locations were calculated by running industry standards or USEPA-approved air quality computer models. Each accident (release) scenario was evaluated through computer modeling to determine exposure concentrations at various distances from the point of release. Dense gases such as the captured CO2 were simulated using the SLAB model (Ermak 1990). The appropriate acute toxicity endpoints (presented in Section 3.17.1.4) were used to identify levels of exposure to chemicals that have the potential to result in adverse effects as a consequence of the exposure. CO2 is heavier than air and can asphyxiate persons located adjacent to a pipeline puncture or rupture, so this scenario would cause an acute health risk. Therefore, the potential for CO2 as a dense gas to accumulate in low areas or subsurface spaces is discussed with respect to the releases evaluated and the setting of the energy center, pipeline, and injection wells. DOE used the SLAB model (Ermak 1990) and the pipeline-walk methodology to evaluate health effects resulting from potential releases of CO2 and trace co-constituents such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide that could be present in the CO2 stream in very low levels from the pipeline and proposed injection wells during operation.1 Under normal operations, the concentrations of the trace gases would be low and below the exposure criteria. However, DOE simulated the release of higher concentrations for the purposes of evaluating maximum release scenarios. DOE also considered various atmospheric (weather) conditions as part of the analysis. For each scenario, DOE used the modeling results and population data (based on 2010 U.S. Census block population densities) for the areas that could be impacted by a release to estimate the number of individuals that could potentially be affected and the types of effects that could occur. Air dispersion modeling was used to predict the concentrations of CO2 and trace gases in air to estimate the potential for exposure and impacts to human receptors. The concentrations of CO2 and trace gas in releases to the atmosphere from the CO2 pipeline and the injection wells were simulated using the SLAB model. The SLAB model simulates both normal and dense gases using thermodynamic properties, including supercritical CO2. The pipeline-walk methodology, developed for and used in a previous DOE project (DOE 2007a; DOE 2007b), was used to evaluate the effects of the gas phase releases along the 1 The CO2 acceptance specification provided by the Alliance indicates that the CO2 stream from the oxycombustion facility into the CO2 pipeline would contain less than 25 parts per million of total sulfur (see Table 3.17-7). For purposes of analysis, total sulfur content was evaluated as sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide based on the ratio of estimated emissions from the oxy-combustion facility. The sulfur dioxide was estimated at 7.9 parts per million and sulfur trioxide as 16.9 parts per million, so that the total was less than 25 parts per million. Under average operating conditions, the sulfur emissions are expected to be less, with negligible sulfur trioxide emissions and low sulfur dioxide emissions. No detectible amounts of hydrogen sulfide would be expected. entire length of the pipeline and to calculate the number of individuals hypothetically exposed to CO2 and trace gases from simulated pipeline ruptures and punctures. This method involves incrementally analyzing release points at approximately 1,000-foot segments of the pipeline for the range of meteorological conditions likely to occur at each point. There are five main steps in the pipeline-walk method for pipeline rupture and puncture release scenarios:  Step 1. Summarize meteorological conditions that affect vapor plume transport. The meteorological data are used to estimate the proportion of time over a year that each atmospheric state occurs (all combinations of 16 wind directions and 7 stability conditions, for a total of 112 cases).  Step 2. Simulate the area potentially affected by a pipeline release. The SLAB model is used to determine the surface area of the potential impact zone for each of the defined atmospheric states. Separate runs are performed for each potential health-effect level and exposure period for the rupture and puncture scenarios.  Step 3. Estimate population affected for each atmospheric state. The polygons representing the areal extent of each predicted exposure zone for each simulation are superimposed onto a map of the population density data at a point along the pipeline route. The population within the estimated vapor (atmospheric) plume area is computed for each census block and then summed if more than one block could be affected.  Step 4. Determine the expected number of individuals potentially affected at the specified release points. The affected population in each exposure zone is next multiplied by the proportion of the time (relative importance) that exposure to a given zone could occur. This process is repeated for each of the defined atmospheric states (a total of 112 cases to represent all 16 wind directions and 7 stability classes). Since all the atmospheric state cases sum to one, the sum of these products provides the expected number of affected individuals at any selected point along the pipeline.  Step 5. Characterize the potential exposure along the entire pipeline. Tabular and graphical summaries of the expected number of affected individuals at points along the pipeline provide a comprehensive summary of potential health effects from a hypothetical pipeline release. The pipeline-walk routine was repeated for each criteria concentration and exposure duration for the full set of increments at an approximate spacing of 1,000 feet along the entire pipeline route. Separate simulations using the SLAB model were made if the volume in a pipeline segment would change due to a different length between mainline block valves. For potential releases during active injection, the SLAB model was used to estimate the CO2 concentrations in air and the extent of a resulting atmospheric CO2 plume due to a release both from a vertical and a horizontal injection well. Steps 3 through 5 of the pipeline-walk routine were conducted at multiple locations to represent the effects of different well locations and to estimate the expected number of people potentially affected. Human health risks resulting from intentionally destructive acts were addressed in conjunction with the risk analysis described in the following subsection.  3.17.1.3 Risk Analysis To evaluate the risk of each accident scenario, DOE considered both the likelihood of the scenario occurring and the potential consequences for that scenario. The likelihood of each scenario has been characterized in terms of frequency based on available industry data. The consequence of each scenario was characterized in terms of potential health effects based either on physical injury or on effects from chemical exposure using available exposure criteria. The proposed operational period for the FutureGen 2.0 Project is 20 years; however, for risk assessment, DOE assumed a conservative operational period of 30 years. The frequency of an accident is the chance that the accident might occur and is typically discussed in terms of the number of occurrences over a period of time. For example, the frequency of occurrence for an accident that can be expected to happen once every 50 years, or one accident divided by the 50-year period, is 2 x 10-2 per year. DOE classified each accident scenario into frequency categories:  Possible: Accidents estimated to occur one or more times in 100 years of facility operations (frequency ≥ 1 x 10-2 per year);  Unlikely: Accidents estimated to occur between once in 100 years and once in 10,000 years of facility operations (frequency from 1 x 10-2 to 1 x 10-4 per year);  Extremely Unlikely: Accidents estimated to occur between once in 10,000 years and once in 1 million years of facility operations (frequency from 1 x 10-4 to 1 x 10-6 per year); and  Incredible: Accidents estimated to occur less than once in 1 million years of facility operations (frequency < 1 x 10-6 per year). The potential consequences of an accident are the range of potential health effects that could occur as a result of the accident. DOE characterized these effects using established criteria as either:  Transient and reversible adverse effects – headache, dizziness, sweating, and/or vague feelings of discomfort;  Irreversible or serious adverse effects – breathing difficulties, increased heart rate, convulsions, and/or coma; or  Life-threatening effects. DOE’s Subcommittee on Consequence Actions and Protective Assessments has developed a database of protective action criteria (PAC) to provide criteria for determining the potential health effects from exposure to accidents. The current version of the PAC database is Revision 27 (SCAPA 2012). The criteria for a given chemical are selected in the following order from criteria set by government and industry groups: (1) Acute Exposure Guideline Levels set by the USEPA, (2) Emergency Response Planning Guidelines (ERPG) acute toxicity endpoints set by the American Industrial Hygiene Association, and (3) Temporary Emergency Exposure Limits (TEELs) set by the Subcommittee on Consequence Actions and Protective Assessments. The PACs that correspond to the three levels of health effects (transient adverse, irreversible adverse, or life-threatening) are as follows:  PAC-1 – The maximum airborne concentration below which it is believed nearly all individuals could be exposed for up to 1 hour without experiencing other than mild transient adverse health effects or perceiving a clearly defined objectionable odor.  PAC-2 – The maximum airborne concentration below which it is believed nearly all individuals could be exposed for up to 1 hour without experiencing or developing irreversible or other serious health effects or symptoms that could impair an individual’s ability to take protective action.  PAC-3 – The maximum airborne concentration below which it is believed nearly all individuals could be exposed for up to 1 hour without experiencing or developing life-threatening health effects. 3.17.1.4 Potential Health Effects of CO2 (and other captured gas constituents) Table 3.17-1 provides health risk criteria for the public and the workers for exposure to CO2, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide. Table 3.17-2 provides the concentrations of CO2, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide that are not likely to cause adverse effects to humans (including sensitive subgroups) for longer exposure periods (up to a lifetime). Long-term criteria for low levels of CO2 have not been established because CO2 is an acute health hazard, rather than a chronic health hazard. Studies have found no evidence of any adverse health impact from long-term exposure to low levels (below 1 percent) of CO2 (IPCC 2005). Table 3.17-1. Potential Health Effects from Exposure to CO2 and Trace Gases Health Protective  Health Protective  ERPG  Gas  Potential Health Effectsa  Criteria Concentrations –  Criteria Concentrations –  Criteria Concentrations –  Publicb (ppmv)  Workersc (ppmv)  Publicd (ppmv)  No health effects Less than 0.33 PEL: 20 Ceiling Less than 0.1 PEL: 50 Maximum Transient and reversible Above 0.51 (1 hour) 0.1 (10 minutes once in 8 adverse Above 0.33 (8 hours) (1 hour) hours) H2S Above 27 (1 hour) Above 30 Irreversible adverse Above 17 (8 hours) IDLH: 100 (1 hour) Above 50 (1 hour) (30 minutes) Above 100 Life-threatening Above 31 (8 hours) (1 hour) Less than 0.3 0.3 (1 hour) SO2 3 (1 hour) 25 (1 hour) No health effects Less than 0.06 Less than 0.6 PEL: NA Transient and reversible Above 0.06 (1 hour) adverse Above 0.06 (8 hours) SO3 Above 2.61 (1 hour) Irreversible adverse 3 (1 hour) Above 2.61 (8 hours) IDLH: NA Above 48.07 (1 hour) Life-threatening 36.1 (1 hour) Above 27.94 (8 hours) a. Transient adverse health effects include symptoms such as headache, dizziness, sweating, or vague feelings of discomfort; irreversible or serious adverse health effects include symptoms such as breathing difficulties, increased heart rate, convulsions, or coma; life-threatening health effects include symptoms that could be fatal. b. Based on PAC for CO2 for exposure time of 1 hour or less established by DOE’s Subcommittee on Consequence Actions and Protective Assessments as TEELs (SCAPA 2012). PACs for H2S and SO2 are based on USEPA’s Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGL) for multiple time periods varying from 10 minutes up to 8 hours. PACs for SO3 are based on interim AEGLs (USEPA 2012h). PAC-1, AEGL-1: The airborne concentration of a substance above which it is predicted that the general population, including susceptible individuals, could experience discomfort, irritation, or certain asymptomatic, non-sensory effects; however, these effects are not disabling and are transient and reversible upon cessation of exposure (SCAPA 2012; USEPA 2012h). Table 3.17-1. Potential Health Effects from Exposure to CO2 and Trace Gases Health Protective Health Protective ERPG Criteria Criteria Criteria Gas Potential Health Effectsa Concentrations – Concentrations – Concentrations – Publicb (ppmv) Workersc (ppmv) Publicd (ppmv) PAC-2, AEGL-2: The airborne concentration of a substance above which it is predicted that the general population, including susceptible individuals could experience irreversible or other serious, long-lasting, adverse health effects or an impaired ability to escape (SCAPA 2012; USEPA 2012h). PAC-3, AEGL-3: The airborne concentration of a substance above which it is predicted that the general population, including susceptible individuals, could experience life-threatening health effects or death (SCAPA 2012; USEPA 2012h). c. Permissible exposure limits (PELs) are legally enforceable standards established by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA 2012). Immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH) levels are recommended criteria established by the National Institute of Safety and Health (NIOSH 2005), designed to allow a worker to escape within 30 minutes. d. Defined by the AIHA, ERPGs provide estimates for concentration ranges ‘below which nearly all individuals could be exposed for up to 1-hour and not experience or develop the stated level of effects as a consequence of exposure to the chemical in question.’ Values obtained from AIHA 2011. DOE policy is to use AEGLs if they are available, or if not, then ERPGs, then TEELs (SCAPA 2012). AIHA = American Industrial Hygiene Association; CO2 = carbon dioxide; ERPG = Emergency Response Planning Guidelines; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; IDLH = immediately dangerous to life or health; NA = not applicable; PAC = protective action criteria; PEL = permissible exposure limit; ppmv = parts per million by volume; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide; TEEL = Temporary Emergency Exposure Limit Sources: ATSDR 2012 (acute, intermediate, and chronic MRLs); USEPA 2012i (H2S RfC) CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; MRL = Minimal Risk Levels; ppm = parts per million; RfC = reference concentration (estimates of daily inhalation exposure likely to cause no appreciable risk of deleterious effects to humans, including sensitive subgroups, during a lifetime); SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide Note: MRLs are estimates of the daily human exposure to a hazardous substance that is likely to be without appreciable risk of adverse non-cancer health effects for three different exposure periods: acute MRL for 1 to 14 days, intermediate MRL for 14 to 365 days, and a chronic MRL for 365 days and longer. No health effects to the general public, including susceptible individuals, are expected to occur at CO2 concentrations of 5,000 parts per million or less. This concentration represents the “no effect” level (TEEL-0 limit), or the level below which there would be minimal or no risk of adverse effects (DOE 2008a). Health effects from inhalation of concentrations of CO2 gas higher than 5,000 parts per million can range from headache, dizziness, sweating, and vague feelings of discomfort to breathing difficulties, increased heart rate, convulsions, coma, and possibly death. Exposure to a concentration of 5,000 parts per million up to 30,000 parts per million for 1 hour or less, constitutes PAC-1 exposure, possibly resulting in mild, reversible effects. Exposure to concentrations above 30,000 parts per million but less than 50,000 parts per million constitutes PAC-2 exposure, possibly resulting in irreversible adverse effects.2 The PAC-3 level is 50,000 parts per million. These levels are based on TEEL limits, since no Acute Exposure Guideline Levels or ERPGs have been adopted for CO2. The OSHA permissible exposure limit (PEL) and American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists threshold limit value for CO2 (based on an 8-hour time-weighted average) are both 5,000 parts 2 The criteria for CO2 changed in February 2012, so that at present the PAC-1 and PAC-2 levels are assigned to the same concentration, 30,000 parts per million (SCAPA 2012). per million. The PEL is the legal limit established by OSHA for exposure of an employee, expressed in terms of a time-weighted average, which is the average exposure over a specified period of time. This means that for limited periods a worker may be exposed to concentrations higher than the PEL, so long as the average concentration over 8 hours remains lower. The threshold limit value is a concentration at which it is believed a worker can be exposed day after day for a working lifetime without adverse health effects. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists short-term exposure limit STEL is 30,000 parts per million (3 percent in air). The short-term exposure limit is a concentration which is believed workers can be exposed to routinely for a short period of time without suffering significant effects, but it should not occur more than 4 times per day and not longer than 15 minutes each time. There are no 8-hour Acute Exposure Guideline Levels for longer-term exposure to CO2. Therefore, for the pipeline puncture releases, anticipated CO2 concentrations from the modeling were compared to values of 5,000 parts per million (i.e., the OSHA time-weighted average value for 8 hours); 20,000 parts per million; and 40,000 parts per million based on information from the USEPA (2000). The 20,000 and 40,000 parts per million exposure values are based on physiological tolerance times and are used in guidelines for the protection of firefighters that could be exposed to CO2 from fire suppressant systems (USEPA 2000). Exposure to 20,000 parts per million for several hours can result in headache, tiredness, and shortness of breath upon mild exertion, and exposures up to 40,000 parts per million can result in increased blood pressure and dizziness (IPCC 2005). The concentration of 40,000 parts per million is also the immediately dangerous to life or health criterion, which was established to allow workers up to 30 minutes to escape. 3.17.1.5 Relevant Safety Factors and Statistics Occupational Injury Data Occupational injury and fatality data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics are presented in Tables 3.17-3 and 3.17-4. This data provides the injury or illness rates and fatality rates for utility-related construction and natural gas distribution. These rates are expressed in terms of injury or illness per 100 worker-years (or 200,000 hours) for total recordable cases, lost work day cases, and fatalities. Note these rates are used for estimating potential impacts. However, the characteristics and associated pipeline risks are different for CO2 and natural gas.  Source: USBLS 2012a Table 3.17-4. Fatality Data for Related Industries in United States in 2010 Fatality Rate Industry (per 100,000 FTE workers) 2.5 9.5 3 fatalities in 2010 5 fatalities in 2010 Sources: USBLS 2012b; USBLS 2012c (natural gas and electric power generation) FTE = full-time equivalent  Table 3.17-5 shows safety incidents between 1992 and 2011 involving natural gas, CO2, and other hazardous liquid pipelines in the United States. CO2 pipelines have not resulted in any fatalities and injuries are rare; the annual incident frequency is 0.062 per 100 miles per year based on incident data from DOT’s Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS 2012a). The major cause of failure in serious incidents considering all pipelines is damage (puncture or rupture) during excavation of existing pipelines for repair or for new pipelines (OPS 2012b). For CO2 pipelines, weld failures and equipment leaks such as relief valves were the cause of most incidents (OPS 2012c). The incident rate for natural gas pipelines is 0.027 per 100 miles, but unlike CO2 pipelines, fatalities have occurred. Table 3.17-5. Pipeline Safety Record in United States (1992 through 2011) Pipelines Natural Gasa Hazardous Liquidsb CO2 312,290 179,042 4,560 1,702 5,379 57 4341 0  221 170 1 $1,505,473,000 $2,707,529,000 $1,910,000 0.027 0.15 0.062 Sources: OPS 2012a (incident data), OPS 2012d a. Natural gas data includes onshore transmission and gathering lines. b. CO2 pipeline data have been separated from onshore hazardous liquid pipeline data. Mileage for types of hazardous liquid pipelines listed separately only through 2010, but used as 2011 mileage for incident calculation. Hazardous liquid pipeline mileage in 2010 for HVL was 64,870 and for non-HVL Petroleum-related pipelines was 120,102. c. Based on Office of Pipeline Safety Data through 2011. Mileage data posted May 31, 2012. d. Number of incidents CO2 = carbon dioxide; HVL = hazardous volatile liquid Pipeline Safety Data DOT’s Office of Pipeline Safety administers and enforces the rules and regulations regarding CO2 pipeline transport. States also may regulate pipelines under partnership agreements with the Office of Pipeline Safety. The rules are designed to protect the public and the environment by ensuring safety in pipeline design, construction, testing, operation, and maintenance. In pipelines that carry captured CO2 for injection, other gases may be captured and transported as well (e.g., hydrogen sulfide or sulfur dioxide), and could affect risks posed to human health and the environment. In 2011, there were 312,290 miles of pipelines in the United States transporting natural gas in onshore transmission and gathering lines and over 2.1 million miles of distribution lines for natural gas (OPS 2012d). Crude oil, other petroleum products, and other hazardous liquids were transported in 179,042 miles of pipelines. There were 4,560 miles of CO2 pipelines in the United States in 2011 (OPS 2012d), of which most were used for enhanced oil recovery projects. The characteristics and pipeline transportation risks for CO2 and natural gas or petroleum products are different. For example, CO2 is expected to be transported by pipeline as a supercritical fluid with a density of approximately 70 to 90 percent of that of liquid water. If a leak develops along a pipeline, a portion of the escaping fluid would quickly expand to a gas, while the remainder would form a solid (i.e., dry-ice snow). CO2 gas is approximately 50 percent heavier than air and would disperse horizontally following the ground contours. In contrast, natural gas in a pipeline is lighter than supercritical CO2 and is more likely to disperse upwards. Natural gas is also highly flammable and poses the risk of explosion, compared to CO2, which is not flammable. DOE used the Office of Pipeline Safety data to estimate CO2 pipeline failure rates and the probabilities of pipeline release incidents for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Incident data from 1991-2011 from the online library of the Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS 2012a) were used to calculate the frequency and probability of pipeline ruptures and punctures. Six of the 57 incidents that occurred from 1991-2011 with the largest CO2 releases (> 4,000 barrels) were designated as rupture-type releases. Using the total length of CO2 pipelines involved (4,560 miles), the annual rupture failure frequency was calculated as 6.26 x 10-5 (miles-year)-1. Ten of the next largest releases from the existing CO2 pipelines had losses of CO2 between 300 and 4,000 barrels. The remaining incidents had releases of less than 100 barrels, although three incidents had CO2 losses less than 0.1 barrels and 1 incident had no loss information. The annual puncture failure frequency was calculated as 1.04 x 10-4 (miles-year)-1. The annual pipeline failure frequencies and the probability of at least one failure over a conservative 30-year operational period were calculated assuming the probability of failure to be exponentially distributed with the hazard rate equal to the product of the failure frequency and the pipeline length. Potential Industrial Hazards  The Meredosia Energy Center would store and use certain process chemicals such as ferric chloride, polymer, salt solution, sodium hydroxide, acid, caustic, antiscalant, sodium bisulfate, detergent, and sodium hydroxide. The storage and handling of toxic or flammable materials would be conducted in compliance with USEPA and OSHA regulations and the National Fire Protection Association’s “Guide on Hazardous Materials” (NFPA 2010). The FutureGen 2.0 Project is not expected to store chemicals on the “List of Substances” (40 CFR 68.130) in amounts that would exceed the threshold quantities that would trigger the need for a Risk Management Plan.  The oxy-combustion facility is expected to have two liquid oxygen tanks, which are considered to be the features most likely to pose the greatest risks to health and safety from an accident during facility operations. Liquid oxygen is oxygen gas that has been purified and cooled to become a cryogenic liquid. Oxygen is classified as hazardous under OSHA’s Hazard Communication Standard, 29 CFR 1910.1200, but is not listed as a regulated toxic gas or liquid subject to the USEPA Risk Management Program (USEPA 2009c). The potential hazards from contact with liquid oxygen include the following (Air Liquide 2007; Praxair 2007):  Oxygen is a strong oxidizer and is incompatible with organic materials including hydrocarbons (i.e., could result in a reaction that causes fire or explosion).  Contact with combustible materials can cause fire or explosion.  Oxygen is non-flammable, but can accelerate combustion of other materials including clothing or asphalt.  Contact with skin, eyes, or ingestion can result in severe frostbite or freezing of tissues.  Release of liquid oxygen from a tank results in rapid expansion to a large volume of gas, which can allow pressure to build-up if the gas leak occurs in a confined area. In addition, the air separation unit would have three vents for the discharge of nitrogen gas removed from the air. Nitrogen-rich gas that is depleted of oxygen can present an asphyxiation hazard if the gas is not properly vented and dispersed. 3.17.2 Affected Environment 3.17.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center The ROI for potential releases from operation of the oxy-combustion facility extends 2 miles from the Meredosia Energy Center boundary; the ROI is the distance within which an individual could experience any adverse effects from an accidental release of gases from the site. The eastern portion of this ROI overlaps with the ROI for the pipeline corridor as depicted in Figure 3.17-1. The ROI includes the village of Meredosia within Morgan County, which is part of U.S. Census Tract 9514. The 2-mile radius extends to the west into Pike County (U.S. Census Tract 9524) and to the northwest into Brown County (U.S. Census Tract 9704) (HUD 2010). The 2010 population density by census block for the Meredosia Energy Center ROI, and the western portion of the CO2 pipeline, is shown in Figure 3.17-1. Census data including population and sensitive receptor information are presented in Table 3.17-6 from the 2010 U.S. Census. Sensitive receptors include young children, the elderly, and those living in poverty (inadequate access to healthcare). The numbers of persons below the federal poverty level are provided by census tract, not by specific blocks. One elementary school, a high school, and a technical school are located within the ROI (Schools List 2011). No licensed daycare providers within the ROI for the energy center were identified (Daycare Centers List 2011). The nearest daycare centers are located in nearby towns including Beardstown to the north, Jacksonville to the east, and Winchester to the southeast. a. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau Block Group Table P1 2010 population and Table P12 age data (USCB 2011a). b. Profile of General Demographic Characteristics (DP-1), Census Tract 2000 (2010 data not yet available) (USCB 2000). Downtown Meredosia is located north of the Meredosia Energy Center on the east side of the Illinois River. Meredosia had a population of 1,044 in 2010 (USCB 2011b). There are no other towns or villages within the ROI around the energy center. As discussed in Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases, the closest available source for atmospheric data is the Springfield Capital Airport located approximately 48.2 miles to the northeast. A wind rose of this data is presented in Figure 3.2-1. 3.17.2.2 CO2 Pipeline The proposed 30-mile pipeline would connect the oxy-combustion facility to the injection wells. Figure 3.17-1 and 3.17-2 illustrate the Alliance’s ROI for the preferred pipeline route to the storage study area, nearby towns, and population densities in the surrounding areas. Population densities are based on the 2010 Census (USCB 2011a). Source: UUSCB 2011a Source: UUSCB 2011a CO2 = caarbon dioxide; ROII = Region of Influuence The town of Chapin and the small town of Concord are both within the ROI. Chapin is located approximately 11.4 miles east-southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center and has a 2010 population of 512. Concord is located approximately 10 miles east of the energy center and has a 2010 population of 167. Jacksonville, which is the closest population center (2010 population of 19,446), is located approximately 21.4 miles east-southeast of the Meredosia Energy Center and 6 miles southwest of the CO2 storage study area. Jacksonville is approximately 1 mile outside of the ROI (see Figure 3.17-2). 3.17.2.3 CO2 Storage Study Area The CO2 storage study area and injection wells are described in detail in Section 2.5.2. As shown in Figure 3.17-2, the nearest town to the storage study area is Jacksonville, located approximately 6 miles to the southwest of the edge of the proposed area. The Alliance evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical and horizontal wells at one or two injection well sites within the study area. The Alliance’s original configuration was for two vertical injection wells to be located on separate injection well pads located 0.5 to 1 mile apart. The project design originally planned for an annual injection of 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 30-year period. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is currently proposing to construct and operate up to four horizontal injection wells at one injection well site for the annual injection of 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 over a 20-year period (a total of 24 million tons [22 million metric tons]) in the Mt. Simon Formation. All four horizontal wells would originate from a common drilling pad, but would operate independently of each other (i.e., separate wellheads). The injection well pad would also accommodate one or two monitoring wells.  The maximum subsurface plume size is estimated to be 4,000 to 5,000 acres within the 5,300-acre CO2 storage study area. The expected maximum radius of the CO2 plume from the injection wells would be 2 miles, as confirmed by the computer modeling completed by the Alliance for the currently proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal wells (see Appendix G, Geological Report). The 2010 population density within the storage study area varies between 2 to 5 people per square mile and 5 to 25 people per square mile. 3.17.2.4 Educational Facilities The educational facilities are expected to be located in or near the city of Jacksonville, Illinois, in Morgan County. The proposed site or sites for the educational facilities would be areas that have been previously disturbed, with utilities (e.g., electricity, telecommunications, water, and sewer) located on or immediately adjacent to the site or sites. These educational facilities could involve new construction, renovation of existing structures, or a combination of new construction and renovation. Although the exact location is currently unknown, it is not anticipated that the facilities would be sited in a location that would potentially impact the human health of workers or the general public from physical or chemical hazards. 3.17.3 Impacts of Proposed Action This section addresses the possible impacts to human health and safety (workers and public) as a result of the construction and operation of the oxy-combustion facility, the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 injection wells, and the educational facilities. The analysis of construction impacts is based on accident statistics for similar industries and the impacts are a function of the number of workers and the duration of the work. The analysis does not take into account the BMPs, including safety training and procedures, that would be implemented by the Alliance as described in Chapter 2 and in Section 4.2, Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts. These practices would be expected to reduce the potential for construction accidents to the fullest extent possible. The analysis of impacts related to the operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project assumes the maximum potential exposure of workers and members of the public to hazardous materials and CO2 if an accident were to occur. For the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center, these impacts relate to the accidental release of liquid oxygen from onsite storage tanks, which is the accident determined to have the greatest potential human health impacts at the energy center. For the CO2 pipeline, potential impacts relate to those resulting from exposure to CO2 and trace gases as a result of a pipeline puncture (such as from the tooth of an excavator) or from a rupture (such as from a faulty weld). For the injection wells, potential impacts relate to exposures from both a small-scale release event, such as a CO2 leak from an unknown well, and a large-scale, catastrophic event (i.e., an immediate, one-time release), such as a well failure or an earthquake. No health and safety impacts would be expected as a result of the operation of the educational facilities. The health and safety analysis recognizes that, absent an accident, the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project would not have adverse impacts on human health and safety. Further, with respect to potential accidents, the analysis does not take into account the myriad actions that have been undertaken by the Alliance to discover potential release pathways, such as existing groundwater and oil and gas wells or geologic faults, or protective measures that would be built into the design and operation of the oxy-combustion facility, pipeline, and injection facilities. Such measures, as described in Chapter 2 and Section 4.2, Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts, include hydrostatic testing of the pipeline prior to operation, automatic sensors and alarms, warning signs, remotely-operated and manual block valves to stop flow, extensive monitoring activities along the pipeline and at the CO2 injection wells, and safety training and procedures. These measures would be expected not only to reduce the potential for exposure, but also to significantly reduce the volume of hazardous materials and CO2 to which workers and the public could be exposed and the time of exposure if an accident or unexpected event were to occur. The analysis also discusses the very low probability that any of the initiating events may occur. 3.17.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Construction of the proposed project would have minor short-term impacts. The number of construction workers for the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center is expected to have a peak of 400 to 500 construction and craft workers on any given day in June through December 2015. The incident rate for potential construction accidents was presented in Section 3.17.1.5. Based on incident rates for utility system construction, the number of lost work days during construction of the oxy-combustion facility is estimated to be 2.2 to 2.8 during peak construction and could potentially total to 10.3 days over the entire construction period with no fatalities. Construction of the CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities would require a total of approximately 300 to 425 construction workers, and would potentially result in 2.2 lost work days. As a result, a total of 12.5 lost work days could occur over the entire construction period for all project components. No fatalities would be expected. 3.17.3.2 Operational Impacts  Meredosia Energy Center Potential health and safety impacts during normal operation of the oxy-combustion facility would generally be limited to workers directly involved in facility operation and maintenance, and would be related primarily to worker injuries that are typical of similar industrial facilities. Based on the industry-specific incident data presented in Tables 3.17-3 and 3.17-4, the upper bound for annual total recordable cases would be 1.4 with less than one lost work day for facility workers. In addition, based on these data no fatalities would be expected to occur over the operating life of the facility. As described in Section 3.1, Air Quality, modeling of air pollutant emissions from the oxy-combustion facility indicates that the emissions would not exceed significant impact levels and are therefore considered de minimis. Therefore, adverse health effects from facility air emissions are not expected to occur.  DOE evaluated the potential for accidents at the oxy-combustion facility and determined that the greatest potential for human health impacts could result from an accidental release of liquid oxygen from either of the two onsite storage tanks or releases from the three nitrogen vents of the air separation unit. The nitrogen removed from the air by the air separation unit would be vented to the atmosphere as a gas, which would promote its upward movement and dispersion as it mixes with ambient air. The discharged gas would be expected to be at atmospheric pressure with a temperature range of 32 to 140oF (Air Liquide 2013). As oxygen deficiency or enrichment is a recognized hazard of the air separation process, the air separation unit would be designed to ensure all oxygen-deficient or oxygen-enriched streams vented to the atmosphere are compliant with industry codes. The design would follow guidelines for minimum heights above the ground, based on the diameter of the vent, its discharge rate, and pressure and temperature conditions (e.g., AIGA 2010). As a result, air separation unit vents would be directed toward safe locations away from any areas where workers could be present and thereby preventing potential asphyxiation hazards. In addition, workers would be required to wear oxygen monitors and comply with requirements regarding confined space entry when working within the air separation unit. The oxy-combustion facility is expected to have two liquid oxygen tanks, each with a capacity of 236 cubic meters. The liquid oxygen tanks would operate at a pressure of 1-5 psig and temperature of approximately -297oF. As shown in the site diagram (see Figure 2-8), the tanks (cylinders) would be 75 feet long, located approximately 25 feet east of the lime preparation building. The frequency of an accident involving liquid oxygen tanks is considered to be extremely unlikely (1.4 x 10-6 per year) based on a 1997 survey of 11,760 tank years at production sites, and 712,000 tank years at customer sites for liquid oxygen, nitrogen, and argon tanks in Europe (EIGA 2004). A review of tank failures concluded that ductile tearing is more likely than collapse, corrosion, excessive deformation, or brittle fracture. A tear in the tank is likely to result in a leak, rather than failure of an entire tank wall. Based on actual accidents that have occurred worldwide, the most common cause of releases were refilling operations, where a valve failed or the operator made an error during the refilling process. Eight of the 12 accidents where liquid oxygen leaked occurred during filling operations. Two other accidents involved improper venting, and one involved corrosion of parts of the valve system. Several accidents occurred due to improper procedures during or after the original leak, rather than mechanical failure. Injuries, fatalities, and property damage that occurred were primarily from associated fires following the leak. To evaluate a release from one of the liquid oxygen tanks, DOE reviewed and scaled the results of an existing simulation for a release from a tank with 1,000 metric tons of liquid oxygen. This simulation included a tank leak through a 6-inch nozzle, forming a liquid pool followed by a vapor cloud. By scaling this simulation to the liquid oxygen tank size at the Meredosia Energy Center, DOE estimated that a vapor cloud with 25 percent oxygen could extend approximately 150 feet from the release location. Based on the proposed location of the liquid oxygen tanks, a release from either tank would remain within the energy center property. The frequency of an accident at one of two tanks is 2.8 x 10-6 per year and the probability of one accident over a conservative 30-year operational period is 8.4 x 10-5. It is expected that consequences related to the accidental release of liquid oxygen from the tanks and associated exposure would be limited to workers that are within 150 feet of liquid oxygen tanks, and that no offsite consequences would occur. Under these circumstances, workers within 150 feet of the release could experience minor to serious injuries by exposure to extreme temperatures (e.g., frost bite). Other physical injuries could occur if any oxygen-fueled fires were to ensue after the leak had occurred. No long-term impacts to the public would be expected from a tank release.  Precautions to prevent accidents include the use of appropriate design and materials for liquid oxygen tanks, compliance with OSHA 1910.104 regulations on allowable distances from flammable and combustible materials, proper siting of equipment and signage to alert workers of the potential hazards, and training and equipment to handle oxygen-fueled fires. CO2 Pipeline This section includes a detailed analysis of accidental release scenarios in consideration of the population densities along both the southern and northern pipeline routes. Both routes end at the western border of the CO2 storage study area. The route that the pipeline would take across the CO2 storage study area depends upon the final siting of the CO2 injection wells. Impacts related to these end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) to the injection wells are addressed in the next section, CO2 Storage Study Area.  DOE assessed the potential impacts of a maximum release scenario by evaluating the release of CO2 with trace gases at the concentration limits set in the Alliance’s CO2 Acceptance Specifications (see Table 3.17-7). The total sulfur content was evaluated as sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide based on the ratio of estimated emissions from the oxy-combustion facility. The sulfur dioxide was estimated at 7.9 parts per million and sulfur trioxide as 16.9 parts per million, so that the total was less than 25 parts per million. Under average operating conditions, these components are expected to be significantly lower with less than 1 part per million total sulfur and negligible hydrogen sulfide content. Table 3.17-7. Alliance CO2 Acceptance Specifications  Component Quantity Carbon Dioxide (CO2)   97 percent dry basis  Inert constituents 1 percent Trace constituents  2 percent   Oxygen (O2)  ≤ 20 ppm  Mercury (Hg)  ≤ 2 ppba  Water vapor  ≤ 1 ppm   Total sulfur  ≤ 25 ppm Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)  < 20 ppmb  a. SDWA standard. b. Standard specification for pipeline quality CO2. However, no detectible amounts of H2S are expected in the CO2 stream from the Meredosia Energy Center. CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; Hg = mercury; O2 = oxygen; ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; SDWA = Safe Drinking Water Act Note: The CO2 stream could contain other trace metals, which would not be known until additional design work is completed. Pipeline Accident Scenarios and Release Simulations Two accidental release scenarios (pipeline rupture and puncture) are considered the most likely type of pipeline accidents that could cause the release of larger volumes of CO2 and trace components. A pipeline rupture release would occur if the pipeline were completely severed, for example by heavy equipment during excavation activities. A rupture could also result from a longitudinal running fracture of a pipe section or a seam-weld failure. In these cases, the entire contents of the pipeline between the two nearest control valve stations (which are expected to be fitted with automatic and manual shut-off valves) could be discharged from the severed pipeline within minutes. Based on modeling, the duration of the release resulting from a pipeline rupture would be approximately 4 minutes and 5 minutes respectively for the 7.5-mile and 10-mile pipeline segments. For the purpose of the analysis, a pipeline puncture release is defined as a 3-inch by 1-inch hole that could be made by a tooth of an excavator. In such a case, all of the contents in the pipeline between the two nearest control valve stations would discharge into the atmosphere, but the release would occur over a period of several hours, as the opening is small relative to the total volume, and the pressure would decline as the fluid escapes. Based on modeling, the duration of a release from a pipeline puncture would be approximately 2.2 hours and 2.9 hours, respectively, for the 7.5-mile and 10-mile pipeline segments. Captured CO2 may be transported as a supercritical fluid, such that its density resembles a liquid but it expands to fill space like a gas. If CO2 were released from a pipe, it would expand rapidly as a gas and, depending on temperature and pressure, could include both liquid and solid (i.e., dry ice) phases. Supercritical CO2 has a very low viscosity but is denser than air. A potential release of CO2 through an open orifice in the pipeline with a gas moving at the speed of sound is referred to as choked or critical flow (Bird et al. 2006). In the rupture scenario, the escaping gas from the pipeline is assumed to escape as a horizontal jet at ground level, which is typically the highest consequence event for heavier-than-air gases (Hanna and Drivas 1987).3 Potential releases to the atmosphere represent the primary exposure pathway considered in the exposure analysis. The receptor groups likely to be exposed by releases from pipelines or aboveground equipment at the energy center or injection wells would be onsite workers and the general public in the immediate vicinity of these sites at the time of an accident. In addition to the potential health effects of a release, which would be dependent on the exposure concentrations and local meteorological conditions at the time of a release, individuals near a ruptured or punctured pipeline or wellhead would likely also be affected by the physical forces from the accident itself, including the release of gases at high flow rates and at very high speeds. People involved at the location of an accidental release would be potentially affected, possibly due to a combination of effects, such as physical trauma, asphyxiation (displacement of oxygen in a small confined place), or frostbite from the rapid expansion of CO2 (e.g., 3,000 psi to 15 psi). The SLAB model was used to simulate releases from a rupture and a puncture of the pipeline. The Alliance’s preferred southern pipeline route (see Figure 2-17) was simulated since it is closer to populated areas, and would therefore produce a more conservative analysis than the northern pipeline route option. The distance between control valves is expected to be 7.5 miles in industrial, commercial, or more populated areas (referred to as “urban” in tables) and 10 miles in rural areas; the areas with shorter sections are expected to be near Meredosia and Jacksonville. DOE’s analysis assumes that the control valves would close under an accident scenario, limiting the potential releases to the amount of CO2 contained in the pipeline segment. The pipeline would have an outer diameter of 12 inches and an inner diameter of 11.34 inches. The temperature of the CO2 in the pipeline would vary between the CO2 capture facility and the injection wells from approximately 90°F to 72.2°F. The pipeline simulations were conducted using 2,100 psig and 90°F, although the most recent design information indicates that the temperature may be lower, about 71°F under average conditions. The CO2 would be transported in a supercritical (fluid) state under any of these conditions. If a pipeline release were to occur, part of the supercritical fluid would be converted to a dry-ice snow form, which would then slowly sublimate (i.e., change from a solid phase directly to a vapor phase). The percent of CO2 released as a vapor is estimated to be 73.7 percent. The transport of the vapor phase in the atmosphere was simulated using SLAB and the results compared to appropriate health criteria. Seven meteorological stability classes, as defined in Table 3.17-8, and all 16 different wind directions were used for the simulations based on local data from the Springfield Capital Airport National Weather Service Station between 2005 and 2009 (IEPA 2011f). As shown in the wind rose diagram (see Figure 3.2-1), calm conditions occurred approximately 2.1 percent of the time. The predominant 3 Studies show that a sudden release from a buried pipeline would more likely escape at roughly a 20 degree angle (McGillivray and Wilday 2009). However, SLAB has the capability of modeling either a horizontal or a vertical release. DOE assumed a horizontal jet for pipeline releases and a vertical jet for injection well releases. Assuming a horizontal jet for a pipeline release introduces another layer of conservatism to the analysis. wind direction is from the south approximately 12 percent of the time. While the wind blows from all directions, the next most common direction is from the northwest at approximately 7 percent of the time. Wind directions between due north and due east occurred less than 5 percent of the time in any one direction. The average wind speeds used in the SLAB simulations varied from 3 to 39 feet per second as shown in Table 3.17-9. Stability Class Description Source: Turner 1994 a. Classes E and G would not be used for the FutureGen 2.0 Project pipeline or wells. Table 3.17-9. Meteorological Conditions  Used in SLAB Simulations Condition F1 A1 B2 C4 D7 D10 D12 2.1 16.3 27.2 30 20.1 3.6 0.7 ft/s = feet per second Simulations were conducted to determine the impact zone where workers and the public could be exposed to concentrations from pipe ruptures and punctures for the PAC for CO2, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide (see Table 3.17-1). Maximum exposure concentrations and related distances were determined by modeling a 15-minute period for pipe ruptures because the calculated release duration would be less than 10 minutes. Additional simulations were then conducted for 30-minute and 60-minute time intervals to determine the distances within which exposure criteria concentrations would be exceeded. Distances at which exposure would occur from a pipe puncture release would be less than those experienced under a pipeline rupture, as the gas would be released more slowly and over a much longer duration. As a result, DOE used the USEPA Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGL) for 8 hours (AEGL-1 to AEGL-3; see Table 3.17-1) for assessing the potential effects related to this release type. Worker guidelines for 8 hours were used for CO2, since AEGLs are not available. DOE simulated releases from both the 10-mile (rural) and 7.5-mile (urban) pipeline segments. The base case simulations were conducted for the following conditions: pressure at 2,100 psig and temperature at 90oF. A sensitivity case for both pipeline lengths between control valves was simulated using an alternate set of conditions with a pressure of 2,114 psia at 71°F, where the CO2 would take longer to be released from the pipe, but the difference in vapor plume extent was less than 6 percent and did not affect the number of individuals potentially affected by a release. Table 3.17-10 shows the estimated distances for the base case conditions that a given exposure concentration plume could extend out from hypothetical pipeline releases. a. See Section 3.17.1.3 and Table 3.17-1 for description of potential health effects and protective health criteria concentrations. b Meteorological condition for longest distance case. CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; ppm = parts per million; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide The potential vapor plume from a pipe rupture or puncture scenario would be small in areal extent, and its position would depend on the wind direction, speed, and stability conditions at the time of the release. The rapid release of high-pressure CO2 from the pipeline would result in a relatively narrow band of CO2 extending laterally in the immediate vicinity of the release point. The rapid decompression of the CO2 would result in extreme cooling at the rupture site, with the rapid formation of CO2 liquids, solids (i.e., dry ice), and gases in the immediate vicinity. In the immediate discharge zone, phase changes would subsequently occur (i.e., from solid or liquid to gas). With distance, the CO2 gas would expand and disperse as the pressure reduced and it mixed with ambient air. A significant amount of noise, similar to a jet engine, would likely be generated by the event and subsequent rapid release of the CO2.  Maximum Reasonably Foreseeable Pipeline Rupture Scenario People in the vicinity of the rupture would be most susceptible to harm due largely to potential physical effects related to high-pressure and the velocity of the release, as well as from exposure to extreme temperature drops that could cause frost-bite. In addition, high concentrations of CO2 would be present in the narrow band of CO2 escaping from the rupture site. Immediate life threatening effects related to asphyxiation from short-term exposure to these high concentrations (i.e., exposure to CO2 at concentrations that exceed 100,000 parts per million by volume), could occur within this band up to distances of 250 feet and 175 feet from the rupture for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile segments respectively. However, people would likely be able to flee the areas with high concentration due to the visual, physical, and audible signs associated with the event. Within a 30-minute period workers would likely need to use respiratory protection within 200 feet and 138 feet respectively, the distance within which the National Institute for Safety and Health declares the concentration could exceed levels immediately dangerous to life or health; and workers would likely need other personal protective equipment for freezing conditions near the discharge point. The potential for exposure and risk to the public would primarily occur as the CO2 expands and disperses creating a vapor plume. The potential maximum reasonably foreseeable accident scenario or exposure distances would occur with a pipeline rupture under calm meteorological conditions, as it would take a longer period of time for CO2 concentrations to dissipate under calm conditions. Based on the modeling results presented in Table 3.17-10, there would be no effects to the general public from this type of rupture beyond a distance where CO2 concentrations would exceed 5,000 parts per million. Over a 60-minute time period after a release, under calm meteorological conditions, this distance could extend from the rupture to 1,301 feet and 851 feet, respectively, for the release of gases from 10-mile and 7.5-mile pipeline segments. Transient effects, which include temporary symptoms such as headache, dizziness, sweating, and/or vague feelings of discomfort, could occur within these distances. Irreversible or serious adverse effects could occur within exposure distances of 118 feet and 81 feet, respectively, with the potential for life-threatening effects from exposures within 58 feet or 35 feet, respectively, for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile segments. The Alliance pipeline siting criteria includes a minimum distance of 150 feet from any occupied structure, which is greater than the distances at which exposures would result in serious adverse effects or life-threatening effects. The exposure distances represent the maximum distances within which health effects could occur from CO2 exposure based on protective health criteria for the public and an exposure time of 60 minutes under calm meteorological conditions. However, exposure distances would be much shorter under other meteorological conditions when more dissipation from the wind would occur.  No health effects from hydrogen sulfide exposure could occur beyond 3,960 feet (0.75 miles), assuming hydrogen sulfide is present in the CO2 gas at the limit of the Alliance’s CO2 acceptance specification. Irreversible or serious adverse effects from hydrogen sulfide could occur within exposure distances of 135 feet and 82 feet, respectively, with the potential for life-threatening effects from exposures within 34 feet or 25 feet, respectively. However, the distance for hydrogen sulfide exposure is considered to be very conservative, as under normal operating conditions hydrogen sulfide is not expected to be present in measurable concentrations. If the content of hydrogen sulfide is negligible, no effects would occur from hydrogen sulfide exposure regardless of distance. No health effects related to exposure to either sulfur dioxide or sulfur trioxide would occur beyond 11 feet from the release point. Maximum Reasonably Foreseeable Pipeline Puncture Scenario People in the vicinity of the puncture would be most susceptible to harm due largely to potential physical effects related to high-pressure and the velocity of the release, as well as from exposure to extreme temperature drops which could cause frost-bite. In addition, high concentrations of CO2 would be present in the narrow band of CO2 escaping from the puncture site. Immediate life threatening effects related to asphyxiation from short-term exposure to these high concentrations (i.e., exposure to CO2 at concentrations that exceed 100,000 parts per million by volume) could occur within this band up to distances of approximately 15 feet for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile segments. However, people would likely be able to flee the areas with high concentration due to the visual, physical, and audible signs associated with the event.  The potential for exposure and risk to the public would primarily occur as the CO2 expands and disperses creating a vapor plume. The potential maximum reasonably foreseeable accident scenario or exposure distances would occur with a pipeline puncture under calm meteorological conditions as it would take a longer period of time for CO2 concentrations to dissipate under calm conditions. Exposure concentrations and distances would be less for a pipeline puncture than a rupture; however, exposure durations could be longer as the release would occur over a longer period of time (i.e., several hours). Based on the 8-hour exposure criteria, no health effects related to CO2 exposure would occur beyond 940 feet and 656 feet, respectively, for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile pipeline segments. However, transient adverse effects could occur within these distances. The distance within which life-threatening effects could occur based on worker exposure criteria for CO2 would be 55 feet and 35 feet, respectively, for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile segments. The Alliance pipeline siting criteria includes a minimum distance of 150 feet from any occupied structure, which is greater than the distance for life-threatening effects. Potential transient adverse health effects related to hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide for puncture releases from respective 10-mile and 7.5-mile pipeline segments could occur within: 1,229 feet and 1,065 feet for hydrogen sulfide; 645 feet and 562 feet for sulfur dioxide; and 1,774 feet and 1,550 feet for sulfur trioxide. Potential irreversible or serious adverse health effects related to hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide for respective 10-mile and 7.5-mile pipeline segment releases could occur within: 98 feet and 85 feet for hydrogen sulfide; 290 feet and 250 feet for sulfur dioxide; and 171 feet and 144 feet for sulfur trioxide. Potential life-threatening effects related to hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide for respective pipeline segment releases could occur within: 68 feet and 59 feet for hydrogen sulfide; 16 feet and 14 feet for sulfur dioxide; and 9 feet and 8 feet for sulfur trioxide. However, the distances for hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide exposures are considered to be very conservative, as under normal operating conditions these components are not expected to be present in measurable concentrations.  Pipeline Walk Method Risk Analysis  The pipeline-walk method and the population density data were used to estimate the expected numbers of people that could be affected by hypothetical ruptures or punctures based on the percent of time that a vapor plume of CO2 or the trace gases would be transported by the wind in all 16 different directions at varying speeds and for all the stability classes listed in Table 3.17-8. Table 3.17-11 presents the estimated maximum number of people potentially affected by exposure to CO2 and the trace gases at various criteria concentrations, resulting from a hypothetical pipeline release for both a rupture and puncture for the 10-mile and 7.5-mile pipeline segments. The estimated number of people is a calculated number based on the population density within each hypothetical plume given the full range of meteorological conditions that could occur multiplied by the percent of time that each of those conditions could occur. For CO2, a pipeline rupture or puncture would not result in one or more persons being affected by CO2 concentrations of 30,000 parts per million or greater (i.e., the threshold for which irreversible adverse effects could occur). The number of people estimated to be within the zone where a concentration of 5,000 parts per million (i.e., the threshold for which transient adverse effects could occur) ranges from less than 1 to 10 people. One individual or less could be affected if the release were to occur in rural areas, up to 10 people if the release were to occur near Meredosia, and up to 4 people if the release were to occur near Jacksonville. For all release locations, people nearby at the time of the release could experience physical effects, in addition to effects from the CO2 or trace gases. a. Near Jacksonville. b. In vicinity of Meredosia. CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; ppm = parts per million SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide Based on the pipeline-walk analysis, the general public would not be subjected to irreversible, adverse effects of hydrogen sulfide from a pipeline rupture or puncture, because the vapor plume would extend to less than 150 feet, which is the minimum distance from the pipeline to residences. However, up to one person could experience transient effects from hydrogen sulfide exposure if a release were to occur near Meredosia or Jacksonville, but less than one person would be expected to experience transient effects if a release were to occur along the rural portion of the pipeline route. The general public is not expected to be affected by exposure to sulfur dioxide or sulfur trioxide in the event of pipeline ruptures or punctures. The estimation of the number of people potentially affected by a vapor plume considers the percent of time that the different meteorological conditions occur and the percent of time that the wind blows toward more populated areas. Thus, the potential impacts to the public from a release are anticipated to be negligible to minor short-term effects such as irritation or discomfort from hydrogen sulfide odors. The annual frequency of a rupture on the proposed 30-mile pipeline to the injection wells in Morgan County is estimated at 1.88 x 10-3 (0.00188). The probability of at least one rupture over a 30-year operating period is estimated to be 5.5 x 10-2 (0.055). The annual frequency of a puncture on the proposed 30-mile pipeline to the injection wells is estimated at 3.13 x 10-3 (0.00313). The probability of a puncture over a 30-year operating period is estimated to be 8.97 x 10-2 (0.0897). Based on the estimated frequencies of pipeline punctures or ruptures, both types of releases on the pipeline to the injection wells are considered unlikely (frequency from 1 x 10-2 to 1 x 10-4 per year or one in a 100 years to one in 10,000 years). CO2 Storage Study Area Since the Alliance has not yet finalized the location of the injection wells within the CO2 storage study area, impacts related to the end-of-pipeline routes (spurs) have been assessed by evaluating a range of reasonable siting scenarios. In each of the siting scenarios, the spurs would run from the end of the southern and northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2 storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage study area. DOE used these hypothetical siting scenarios to evaluate a range of potential impacts, whereby some hypothetical routes would have lesser impacts to physical resources while others would have greater impacts, while still representing reasonable paths. The Alliance would locate the final injection wells using the siting criteria listed in Section 2.5.2.1. The CO2 storage study area is located in a sparsely populated region with a density of 2 to 5 people per square mile but with densities of 5 to 25 people per square mile in part of the area (see Figure 3.17-3). The Alliance evaluated several injection well configurations using both vertical (two well sites) and horizontal wells (one well site) within the CO2 storage study area as described in Section 2.5.2.3. The extent of the subsurface CO2 plume for the two vertical well scenario was estimated to be approximately 4,000 to 5,000 acres within the 5,300-acre study area. For the currently proposed horizontal well scenario, the lateral extent of the subsurface plume after 20 years of injection and 50 years of post-injection period was estimated as less than 4,000 acres from subsurface modeling of the horizontal injection system using the STOMP-CO2 simulator (Appendix G, Geological Report). Although an injection well failure would be extremely unlikely, DOE used the SLAB model to simulate a surface release from both vertical and horizontal injection wells. The releases were modeled as vertical or horizontal jets, assuming gas compositions similar to those used for the pipeline (see Table 3.17-7). The toxicity analysis used the PAC criteria applicable to the public for exposure duration of 1 hour or less (15 minutes for a well failure) and acute worker safety guidelines listed in Table 3.17-1. Two Vertical Injection Wells Scenario The simulations for the two vertical injection well scenario assumed a well depth of 4,400 feet, which is the expected base of the screened (perforated) interval for injection into the Mt. Simon Formation. Table 3.17-12 shows the furthest distances that CO2 and trace gas criteria-level vapor plumes are predicted to migrate from a hypothetical injection well failure and the meteorological stability class associated with the maximum distance. Based on the SLAB simulations, CO2 concentrations greater than 5,000 parts per million averaged over a 15-minute period would occur at less than 92 feet from the injection wells. The furthest distance that higher CO2 concentrations of 30,000 parts per million could extend due to a release from a well is less than 10 feet. The furthest distance that a vapor plume with hydrogen sulfide of 27 parts per million (the condition where irreversible, adverse effects could be experienced) is 518 feet under calm conditions or less than 112 feet under other conditions. For both sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide, a vapor plume with concentrations that could result in adverse effects would be expected to occur at distances less than 200 feet, which is the protected area around each CO2 = caarbon dioxide; ROII = Region of Influuence; sq/mi = squuare mile Table 3.17-12. Simulated Vapor Plume Transport Distances for Vertical Injection Well Chemical  Exposure Duration  Criteria  (ppm)  Distance (feet)  Meteorological Conditiona          CO2              H2S      SO2  SO3  a. Meteorological condition for longest distance case. CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; ppm = parts per million; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide Based on the pipeline-walk analysis method, no nearby residents would be affected by an injection well release of CO2 or trace gases from a well 4,400 feet deep. Based on the SLAB simulations of releases to the air, the areal extent of a vapor plume, if a leak occurred during operation of the wells, was estimated by the model to be small (e.g., 0.02 acres for a vapor plume with CO2 equal to 5,000 parts per million or 0.6 acres for a vapor plume with hydrogen sulfide equal to 0.51 parts per million but less than 0.01 acres for a plume equal to 27 parts per million). The estimation of the number of people potentially affected by a vapor plume considers the percent of time that all different meteorological conditions occur and the percent of time that the wind blows in each of the 16 possible directions, some of which may be toward more populated areas. There are expected to be a total of 15 people working at the injection well facility in the daytime during the work week, and 3 people present at night and on weekends. All the workers are expected to be inside one of the buildings most of the time, which would provide additional protection if a leak occurred from one of the wells. The potential impacts to workers from a well release are expected to be short-term, negligible to minor effects, since the release duration from a well is estimated to be less than 15 minutes and alarms would immediately sound. The potential impacts to the public are expected to be negligible because they are unlikely to be close to the injection well site(s), which would be surrounded by a controlled access area. Thus, the public could experience only short-term, transient effects such as headaches or irritation from odors if present within an impact zone from a well failure at the time of a release (see Table 3.17-12).  Four Horizontal Injection Wells Scenario The other possible injection well scenario involves up to four separate horizontal wells installed on one pad, but oriented along a different azimuth that is approximately 90 degrees from the two nearest wells. This scenario aligns with the injection well configuration currently proposed by the Alliance as described in Appendix G, Geological Report. Each well would consist of a vertical section to a depth of approximately 3,150 feet through the Potosi Formation, at which point the hole would begin to turn from a vertical to horizontal orientation. At a true vertical depth of approximately 4,030 feet, the hole would be horizontal and extend in two of the wells to approximately 1,500 feet and in the remaining two wells to approximately 2,000 feet. The volumes in the longest horizontal well of 2,000 feet long for all the options were computed using the inner diameters of each casing or tubing string and the estimated temperature and pressure of the CO2 fluid from the pipeline. Two bounding cases were simulated with the SLAB model: (1) the smallest volume using injection tubing with an inner diameter of 3.0 inches for the entire well and (2) an open hole with production casing (6.5-inch diameter) in place for the vertical portions of the well and open hole (9.5 inches diameter) for the turned and horizontal portions of the well. The duration of hypothetical releases from these two well designs differ, but are both estimated to be less than 10 minutes.  The SLAB model was used to simulate CO2, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide at the same concentrations as for the vertical injection wells and pipeline. The predicted vapor plume transport distances for the horizontal injection well cases are shown in Table 3.17-13. Based on the pipeline-walk analysis method, no nearby residents would be affected by an injection well release of CO2 or trace gases from either of the two bounding cases for the horizontal wells. The estimation of the number of people potentially affected by a vapor plume considers the percent of time that all different meteorological conditions occur and the percent of time that the wind blows in each of the 16 possible directions, some of which may be toward more populated areas. The potential impacts to workers would be similar to the estimated effects from a release from the vertical injection well described above. The potential impacts to the public are expected to be negligible, because members of the public are unlikely to be close to the pad where the surface completion of the injection wells are located, which would be surrounded by a controlled access area. The estimated distances where adverse, transient effects could occur from trace gases was greater than 500 feet only for hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide under calm conditions, and only for sulfur trioxide under windier conditions for the open-hole completion case. For these exposures, the public could experience only short-term, transient effects such as headaches or irritation from odors if present within an impact zone from a well failure at the time of a release (see Table 3.17-13). Experience and Potential for CO2 Release from Wells Injection wells have been used in the natural gas storage industry for 100 years (Benson 2009) and for enhanced oil recovery for over 40 years (NETL 2010c). NETL (2012a) recently compiled information on injection wells into a Best Practices Guide covering well siting, design, construction, monitoring, and closure. The annual frequency of a potential failure in one injection well at a given site was estimated based on experience with existing injection wells as 2.02 x 10-5 per year (0.0000202 per year) (IEA 2006a). Two vertical wells are one option to be used for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The annual frequency of a potential failure in either of the two vertical wells is estimated to be 4.04 x 10-5 per year (0.0000404 per year). The estimated probability of a potential failure in either of the two wells over a 30-year operating period would be 1.21 x 10-3 (0.00121). Based on the estimated frequency of a potential well failure, such an occurrence is considered extremely unlikely, which was defined as 1x10-4 per year to 1x10-6 per year or between once in 10,000 years and once in 1 million years.  No separate frequencies for releases from horizontal wells were identified. Horizontal injection wells have been used at four large-scale carbon storage projects: the Sleipner site beneath the North Sea, the In-Salah site beneath the Algerian desert, the Snvit Site beneath the Barents Sea, and the Weyburn-Midale site in Saskatchewan. In 2010, Det Norske Veritas stated that “so far there has been no report of significant leakage of stored CO2 out of the storage formations in any of the current projects” (DNV 2010). The likelihood of a release from the deep horizontal portion of the well is considered to be less Table 3.17-13. Simulated Vapor Plume Transport Distances for Horizontal Injection Well DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 3. AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS than from the vertical portion. One benefit of using horizontal injection wells is that multiple wells can be directionally drilled from a common pad, limiting the surface footprint. However, in a recent Best Practices manual for Carbon Storage Systems and Well Management Activities, the author noted that using multilateral wells requires “significant modeling to maintain adequate reservoir conditions and minimal impact to adjacent formations” (NETL 2012a). Educational Facilities The educational facilities are expected to be located in the vicinity of Jacksonville. Health and safety related impacts are not expected during the operation of these facilities, as hazardous or toxic materials would not be used or stored at these locations, nor would these facilities be located in close proximity to the pipeline or injection wells. 3.17.3.3 Post-Injection Impacts This section addresses potential releases of CO2 and associated trace gases from the subsurface both after their injection into the subsurface storage zone and after injection operations have ceased. The geology of the target CO2 storage formation is described in Section 3.4, Geology. Detailed subsurface plume modeling was conducted by the Alliance with STOMP-CO2 for the currently proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal injection wells for the 20-year injection period. The modeling estimated that the plume would grow to a size of less than 4,000 acres after a 50-year post injection period (Alliance 2013). As a result, DOE used a subsurface plume area of 4,000 acres in the analysis of hypothetical post-injection releases. The evaluation of the potential effects from post-injection releases from the subsurface storage formation was conducted using the following tools:  An Analog database for a previous DOE project (DOE 2007b). The database includes site characteristics of natural CO2 reservoir and operating CO2 storage or EOR sites; results from studies performed at other CO2 storage locations and from sites with natural CO2 accumulations to estimate or measure releases; and results of release estimates for risk assessments at other sites (e.g. two Australian proposed CO2 storage sites in Hooper et al. 2005) for characterizing the nature of potential risks associated with surface leakage due to caprock seal failures, faults, and fractures. The database was also used to predict CO2 release rates based on similarities with the proposed storage reservoir.  USEPA’s SCREEN3 model (USEPA 1995c) was used to estimate the resulting CO2 air concentrations if post-injection releases occurred from slow leaks at low flow rates through abandoned wells or seepage through the caprock and overlying formations. The predicted air concentrations were used to estimate the potential for exposure and any resulting impacts on workers, offsite residents, and sensitive receptors.  Review of recent risk assessment literature was also conducted to identify additional information such as the Vulnerability Evaluation Framework for Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide (USEPA 2008b) and the Best Practices for Risk Analysis and Simulation for Geologic Storage of CO2 (NETL 2011b). These documents address potential release pathways. DOE considered potential releases that could cause acute effects (high concentration over a short duration) and chronic effects (low concentration over a longer duration). Three scenarios could potentially cause acute effects: (1) upward leakage through the CO2 injection wells following closure; (2) upward leakage through a deep oil and gas (or other type) well; and (3) upward leakage through undocumented, abandoned, or poorly constructed deep wells. Six scenarios could potentially cause chronic effects: (1) upward leakage through caprock and seals by gradual failure; (2) release through existing faults due to effects of increased pressure; (3) release through induced faults due to local over-pressure conditions; (4) upward leakage through the CO2 injection wells; (5) upward leakage through deep oil and gas (or other type) wells; and (6) upward leakage through undocumented, abandoned, or poorly constructed wells. Such releases could occur during injection, but are discussed in this separate section.  Table 3.17-14 summarizes the types of potential post-injection releases considered in this analysis. The fluxes (the amounts of CO2 that would flow through a unit area per unit time) for these releases were estimated based on the characteristics of the Mt. Simon Formation and information on the local geologic setting compared to the sites included in the database and information on wells near the injection area. This approach was used in the EIS for a previous carbon capture and storage project (DOE 2007b). Not all potential release pathways apply to the FutureGen 2.0 Project injection wells.  The target injection zone for geologic storage is the Mt. Simon Formation, which is described in Section 3.4, Geology. The caprock for this formation is the 479-foot thick Eau Claire Formation reached at depths of 3,439 and 3,919 feet for the stratigraphic well located in the CO2 storage study area. The formation is underlain by a 13-foot thick conglomerate zone and Pre-Cambrian granite, which was reached at a depth of 4,430 feet in the stratigraphic well. The planned injection zone is between the depths of 4,000 and 4,500 feet into the Mt. Simon Formation, which is classified as a hypersaline aquifer with estimated total dissolved solids of approximately 47,000 parts per million. Thus, it is not considered to be a protected USDW per USEPA UIC regulations, which protect groundwater with less than 10,000 milligrams per liter total dissolved solids. The characteristics that were used to develop the input data for the modeling of potential releases are discussed here. Key properties of the target injection zone include depth, thickness, porosity, permeability, and the caprock. Evidence that the Mt. Simon Formation is a feasible injection zone was provided by the Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium Phase III Large-Scale Field Test. This DOE partnership is using CO2 from Archer Daniels Midland Company’s fuel-grade ethanol production facility in Decatur, Illinois, and has been injecting 1,000 tons per day since November 2011 via an injection well into the Mt. Simon Formation. The purpose of the Archer Daniels Midland project is to demonstrate the ability of the Mt. Simon Formation to accept and retain approximately 1.1 million tons (1.0 million metric tons) of injected CO2 over a 3-year period (DOE 2008b). Table 3.17-14. Potential Types of Releases from CO2 Storage Study Area Exposure Potential Initial Release Scenario Duration Volume Release to Upward leakage through the caprock due to gradual failure and slow release Short term Long term Long term Long term Air Air, Groundwater Air, Groundwater Air, Groundwater Air, Groundwater Air, Groundwater Air, Groundwater Groundwater CO2 = carbon dioxide The top of the Mt. Simon Formation was found at a depth of 3,918 feet and was 499 feet thick in the FutureGen 2.0 Project stratigraphic well. The base of this well as completed was 4,826 feet; a schematic diagram of the planned injection well design and the formations encountered in the stratigraphic well are shown in Figure 2-21. The Mt. Simon Formation is Cambrian in age and varies from fine to coarse-grained sandstone, and is described as quartz sandstone with 95 percent quartz with a low content of calcium, iron, and magnesium. The cement included feldspar, clay, and mica. Permeability in four core samples from this study obtained from depths of 4,000 to 4,150 feet from Illinois, but not the FutureGen 2.0 Project site, ranged from less than 10 to 350 millidarcies at depths of 4,100 to 4,150 feet (O’Connor and Rush 2005). The porosity ranged from 11 to 12.5 percent within this same interval. The porosities are similar to those in other parts of the Mt. Simon Formation within the Illinois Basin (Finley 2005). The early STOMP-CO2 modeling of the Mt. Simon Formation for the FutureGen 2.0 Project used values for horizontal permeability of 37 to 417 millidarcies and porosity of 9.6 to 17.1 percent. The salinity of the Mt. Simon Formation brine was measured as 48,000 milligrams per liter. The overlying formation above the Mt. Simon Sandstone is the Cambrian-age Eau Claire Formation. While this formation is described as shale in other parts of the Illinois Basin, the formation in the stratigraphic well consists of thin sandstone at the base, overlain by a 257-foot thick dolomite, followed by a 156-foot thick siltstone. In addition, there are a series of overlying secondary seals including 244 feet of the regional Franconia Dolomites above the Eau Claire Formation. There are over 1,400 feet of dolomite between the top of the Eau Claire and the base of the St. Peter Sandstone, which is the lowest formation classified by USEPA, but not by Illinois, as a drinking water source. Above the St. Peter Sandstone, there are multiple shale layers, comprising a total of 1,412 feet of shale and limestone. Factors that affect the potential for releases from the storage formation include the presence of faults that cut the caprock(s), active seismicity, deep wells from past oil and gas operations, and abandoned or poorly constructed wells. There are oil fields east of the planned injection zone, gas fields to the southwest, and a gas storage site southwest of Waverly approximately 16 miles from the Alliance’s stratigraphic well and approximate center of the CO2 study area AoR (ISGS 2012d). There are 12 oil and gas wells within the AoR study area, although two of the wells are shallow producing gas wells that are 334 and 342 feet deep (see Table 3.4-1). Three of the oil and gas wells near the estimated location of the injection wells were deeper (814 to 1,530 feet deep). Thus, there would be 2,470 feet or more between the four existing wells and the top of the planned injection zone and 2,388 feet between the bottom of these wells and the top of the target injection formation. While none of the known deep wells extends deep enough to penetrate the Eau Claire Formation (the primary caprock formation), at a depth of approximately 3,439 feet, or the injection zone, potential releases from unknown, poorly constructed, and abandoned deep wells were evaluated as a precaution. One of the deep oil and gas wells was listed as dry and abandoned but was not listed as plugged as were the other two deep wells. The nearest producing gas wells were in the southern part of the CO2 storage study area, approximately 3.6 miles southwest of the stratigraphic well for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. However, these two wells were both relatively shallow (i.e., 334 and 342 feet deep). Most of the water wells in the AoR are shallow, and have depths ranging from 19 feet to 115 feet. However, there are two deeper wells with depths of 405 feet and 1,056 feet, which are still more than 2,900 feet above the injection zone. The nearest major fault system is the Wabash Valley System. The site is approximately 156 miles northeast of one identified fault in this system (ISGS 2012e). There are no known surface ruptures on the faults within the Wabash Valley area (Obermeier and Crone 1994). The injection area is also outside of the area identified as having liquefaction features caused by unknown faults in the Wabash Valley System, which do not extend to the surface and may be associated with the Pre-Cambrian basement (Crone and Wheeler 2000). There are two smaller faults, but neither is close to the storage area (Nelson 1995). One fault is located west of the La Salle Anticline, which is approximately 68 miles to the northeast of the proposed injection area and the other fault is located west of the Salem Anticline and is approximately 85 miles from the proposed injection area. The general seismic activity of the region is low near the CO2 storage study AoR, with a 2 percent probability of a seismic event with a peak acceleration, of 8 to 10 percent of the gravity coefficient within the next 50 years (USGS 2012b). Past earthquakes of 4.5 magnitudes have occurred mostly in the southern part of the state, although the nearest earthquake was centered approximately 25 miles to the northeast (ISGS 2009). Because of low seismic activity and the lack of faults near the injection ROI, potential releases along faults are not expected for the Mt. Simon Formation and were therefore not modeled. The information summarized above on the site conditions and the experiences at other sites from the Analog database were used to identify the likelihood of potential releases and estimated flux rates for the releases. Table 3.17-15 shows the subsurface release flux rates and durations pertinent to potential releases from the likely injection zone. The rate of slow leakage through the caprock and other formations was estimated using data from the Farnham Dome Site in Utah, which has natural CO2 in sandstone and dolomite overlain by an interbedded limestone, shale and siltstone cap. Migration of CO2 through the 1,080 feet of dolomite layers between the Eau Claire Formation and into the lowest USDW, the St. Peter Sandstone, is considered unlikely to result in a release of gas to the ground surface. The SCREEN3 model was used to simulate the resulting ambient air concentrations for CO2 due to gradual, slow seepage of gases through the caprock and other overlying formations. The slow seepage rates were allowed to continue during the modeling run for an extended period up to 5,000 years as a conservative estimate because small leaks could be harder to detect.  DOE used a time period of 5,000 years based on modeling of CO2 storage sites such as the Weyburn site in Saskatchewan, where “after 5,000 years modeling determined that a free supercritical CO2 dense gas phase will no longer exist, having been effectively trapped” (Preston et al. 2005). The modeling results showed that there was a 95 percent probability that 98.7-99.5 percent of the initial CO2-in-place would remain stored in the geosphere for 5,000 years and the likelihood of movement beyond this time period was very low (IEA 2005). Thus, a frequency of occurrence was estimated over 5,000 years for these natural pathways. The frequency unit was listed as 1/5,000 year per event, since the diffuse flux could occur over the entire spatial extent of the subsurface plume. The frequency for a rapid release through the caprock was estimated as <1 x 10-6, since an eruptive release in sedimentary basins has not occurred due to natural pathways (IEA 2006b) and modeling studies of CO2 discharges concluded that there are self-limiting features that prevented an eruptive release powered solely by mechanical energy stored in an accumulation of non-condensable gas, without substantial contributions from thermal energy (Pruess 2006). A higher frequency of 1 x 10-4 was used for gradual releases through the caprock, since low diffuse fluxes have occurred in some natural CO2 areas (e.g. Klusman 2003). However, the proposed target formation for the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the Mt. Simon Formation, has a thick caprock and multiple secondary seals consisting of thick shale and dolomite seals, so a higher frequency than 1 x 10-4 for diffuse leaks was not used for this site. Atmospheric releases of trace gases are unlikely for this release mechanism, because the trace gases in the injected fluid would dissolve in the brine or groundwater in the various layers. Thus, the trace gases would be unlikely to reach the land surface from slow seepage through multiple saturated formations. Since there are no known nearby faults or overpressure zones, neither of these pathways was simulated. The frequency for leaks along faults due to regional overpressure was estimated as 1 x 10-5, as used in the risk assessments for two Australian candidate geologic storage sites in the Latrobe Valley (Hooper et al. 2005) and in previous DOE projects (DOE 2007b). The same frequency was also used for leakage along faults due to local overpressure. The duration for the faults was 30 years, corresponding to the originally proposed active injection period, when pressure in the reservoir is increasing. The analysis was not re-run for the currently proposed 20-year injection period, since it serves as a conservative upper bound for the impact analysis. The frequency unit is shown as 1/5,000 year per fault, since there could be multiple faults within the storage site, although not at this site. Leakage along unknown structural or stratigraphic connections was assigned the same frequency as faults. Lateral migration to a non-target aquifer was assigned a frequency of 1 x 10-6, as used for leakage through a permeable zone in a seal (Hooper et al. 2005). The duration of these types of releases is estimated as 100 years to allow time for “the pressure-perturbed system to relax and return to an equilibrium state, generally long after injection ceases” (Birkholzer et al 2009). Modeling results for the injection into the Mt. Simon Formation show an increase in pressure during active injection, and then show a decrease to 90 percent within the first 100 years (Appendix G, Geological Report). The frequency unit is shown as 1/5,000 year per zone, since there could be multiple higher permeability zones within the storage site, although not at this site. Table 3.17-15. Potential Subsurface CO2 Releases from Wells and Subsurface Storage Formation Mechanism Frequency 1x10-4 < 1x10-6 1x10-5 1x10-6 1x10-5 1x10-5 1x10-3 1x10-3 1x10-3 1x10-3 Frequency Units 1/5,000 year-event 1/5,000 year-fault 1/5,000 year-zone 1/year-well  1/year-well 1/year-well  1/year-well 1/year-well  1/year-well Flux Rate (mol/m2-s) 0.13-0.97 NSa NSb NSc 5,500 MT/yr 550 MT/yr NA NA 2,750 MT/yr 275 MT/yr Flux Area (acres)  NS  NS 4,000 acres (6.25 sq mi) 0.011 0.011 NA NA 0.073 0.073 Duration (years) 5,000 5,000 30 NA 1x10-5  1/5,000 year-fault  NSb  NS  30  1x10-5  1/5,000 year-zone  NSc  4,000 acres (6.25 sq mi)  100  a. Not simulated since release mechanism is considered extremely unlikely (10-4 to 10-6). b. Not simulated since no faults near estimated plume area. c. Not simulated since would not result in emissions to atmosphere. Note: 1 µmol/m2-s = 3.807 g/m2-day, used to represent a flux rate of CO2 through the ground surface. µmol/m2-s = micromole per square meter per second; CO2 = carbon dioxide; g/m2-day = grams per square meter per day; MT/yr = million tons per year; NA = not applicable since release would not reach ground surface; NS = not simulated; sq mi = square mile; year-event = per year per event; year-fault = per year per fault; year-well = per year per well; year-zone = per year per zone Potential leakage from the CO2 injection wells after injection ceased and from unknown abandoned or poorly constructed deep wells either during active injection or after injection ceased were also simulated using SCREEN3, because the flux rates were low and the CO2 gas would not be supercritical. Potential CO2 and trace gas releases at a low flux rate through deep wells were analyzed, although releases of trace gases are less likely. Table 3.17-15 also shows the subsurface release flux rates and durations pertinent to potential releases from wells. A potential future leak through an injection well after injection ceased was based on 1 percent of the amount injected per well into a vertical well on an annual basis for the high rate and 0.01 percent of the amount for the low rate. Following injection, leakage along the vertical portion of a horizontal well is more likely, so this is an upper bound. The high rate for the abandoned wells used was five times the low injection well rate, since they could be older wells with potential damage to the cement used to close the wells, so that the hole diameter could be larger. One-half of the high rate was used as the low rate for abandoned wells. No deep oil or gas wells were simulated, since the known wells and producing reservoirs are shallower than the Mt. Simon Formation, as discussed previously. Frequencies for leaking injection wells during the operational period was estimated as 2 x 10-5 per year-well. This frequency was decreased to 1 x 10-5 per year-well for the injection wells following operation, since these would be new wells constructed for CO2 injection. The duration of the leaks was estimated based on the time to detect a leak and repair the well, a week for high rates to a year for low rates in the future when the locations of the injection wells could be uncertain. The frequency for leaks from abandoned or deep oil and gas wells, since these wells are likely to be older and constructed as standard industrial wells, was set as 1 x 10-3 for leaking wells (Hooper et al. 2005). For leaking abandoned or undocumented wells that may not have been properly plugged, the duration of 100 years was used to represent the time when reservoir pressure would be elevated. The frequency unit for wells is 1/year-well, since the likelihood of leaks along this pathway is a function of the number of wells within the estimated subsurface CO2 plume area. The estimated air concentrations from SCREEN3 due to potential subsurface releases are shown in Table 3.17-16 and Table 3.17-17. The risk ratios were calculated by dividing each exposure concentration for CO2 or a trace gas by the pertinent criteria. A risk ratio of less than one indicates that there is no hazard from that exposure concentration, and all risk ratios were found to be substantially less than one as shown in the tables. Risk ratios are used to evaluate potential toxic effects; they are not used to evaluate carcinogenic effects. The gases evaluated here are not carcinogens. The comparison to the pertinent acute and chronic criteria for CO2, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide indicated that no exceedances at a distance of 300 feet are likely to occur. Most of the risk ratios were less than 0.1 indicating minimal potential for effects from gaseous releases. Thus, no effects to the general public are expected to occur from post-injection releases by these pathways. Potential Radon Releases A potential concern that has been brought up with geologic storage of CO2 is displacement of radon gas from the injection formation or other formations into which the CO2 might migrate. This is more of a concern where the radon in homes exceeds the USEPA action level for radon of 4 picocuries per liter. Morgan County is located in Zone 1 as defined by USEPA (USEPA 2012j), which has a potential to exceed this criteria (IEMA 2009). In Morgan County, a total of 40 homes have been tested, of which 28 were above 4 picocuries per liter (IEMA 2012a). Mitigation systems were implemented in 11 homes in the county, in the Jacksonville area, and in the southeastern corner of the state (IEMA 2012b). None of the mitigation systems were in the proposed area for injection. Due to the thick caprock above the injection formation (479-foot Eau Claire Formation) and multiple low permeability dolomite and shale formations between the caprock and the glacial deposits, it is considered unlikely that the CO2 could displace additional radon in the shallow formations. a. Risk ratios were calculated by dividing each exposure concentration for CO2 or a trace gas by the pertinent criteria. A risk ratio of less than one indicates that there is no hazard from that exposure concentration. b. Deep oil and gas wells were not simulated, since not considered to be likely exposure pathway at this site. AEGL = acute exposure guideline level; CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; MRL = minimal risk level; PEL = permissible exposure limit; ppmv = parts per million volume; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide 3.17.4 Intentional Destructive Acts As with any United States energy infrastructure, the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project facilities could potentially be the target of terrorist attacks or sabotage. However, the potential for such attacks on coal-fueled power plants has not been identified as a threat of comparable magnitude to the concerns about the vulnerability of nuclear power plants to terrorist attacks (Behrens and Holt 2005). Although risks of sabotage or terrorism cannot be quantified because the probability of an attack is not known, the potential environmental effects of an attack can be estimated. Such effects may include localized impacts from releases of harmful materials or gases at the Meredosia Energy Center and associated facilities, similar to those that could occur as a result of an accident or a natural disaster. To evaluate the potential impacts of sabotage or terrorism, failure scenarios are analyzed without specifically identifying the cause of failure mechanism. For example, a truck running over an injection wellhead would result in a wellhead failure, regardless of whether this was done intentionally or through mishap. Releases of harmful chemicals can occur due to failure of a component, human error, a combination of both, or from external events such as plane or rail accidents (e.g., delivery of hazardous chemicals to the site), seismic events, or other natural events such as high winds, tornadoes, floods, ice storms, and natural or human-caused fires. Therefore, the accident analysis conducted for this EIS evaluates the outcome of catastrophic events without determining the motivation behind the incident. The accident analyses included potential releases from accidents at the energy center, CO2 pipeline, and injection wells. These accidents could also be representative of the impacts from a sabotage or terrorism event. a. Risk ratios were calculated by dividing each exposure concentration for CO2 or a trace gas by the pertinent criteria. A risk ratio of less than one indicates that there is no hazard from that exposure concentration. b. Deep oil and gas wells were not simulated, since not considered to be likely exposure pathway at this site. AEGL = acute exposure guideline level; CO2 = carbon dioxide; H2S = hydrogen sulfide; MRL = minimal risk level; PEL = permissible exposure limit; ppmv = parts per million volume; RfC = reference concentration; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SO3 = sulfur trioxide Release scenarios evaluated included: liquid oxygen tank leaks, pipeline rupture or puncture, and injection well failure as described previously. Evaluations of hypothetical releases indicate the following potential impacts:  The most likely individuals to be affected by releases from the energy center equipment or tanks are onsite workers. The estimated number of workers during operations is 87 to 115 people, although not all would be present at any given time in proximity to an incident. A failure of the liquid oxygen tanks at the Meredosia Energy Center was evaluated as a potential impact to workers due to fires or frostbite. The initial vapor cloud from such a release was estimated to be within the energy center property.  CO2 and trace gases could be dispersed into the air and migrate downwind from pipeline ruptures or punctures or injection well failures. The number of individuals from the general population potentially experiencing transient effects from a release event of CO2 or the trace gases hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or sulfur trioxide from the pipeline or injection wells is estimated to be one or less. Under normal operating conditions, the concentration of trace gases are expected to be lower than simulated, in which case there would be no effects from the trace gases to the general public.  Under the highest consequence scenarios, onsite workers would be the individuals most at-risk of injury or death if near a release at the energy center, pipeline, or injection wells. 3.17.5 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change in the status quo with respect to human health and safety conditions within the ROI. 3.18 SOCIOECONOMICS 3.18.1 Introduction This section addresses the socioeconomic conditions most likely to be affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The discussion presents the region’s demographics, economy, sales and tax revenues, per capita and household incomes, sources of income, and housing availability. This section also addresses potential direct and indirect impacts on socioeconomics resulting from the proposed project.  3.18.1.1 Region of Influence The ROI for socioeconomics includes Morgan County (in which project components would be located) as well as the surrounding counties of Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott.  3.18.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered DOE performed the socioeconomic impact analysis in this EIS in the following sequence: (1) DOE reviewed data from the U.S. Census Bureau to determine population and employment trends within the ROI; and (2) DOE overlaid the project, including community services and other impacts identified in other sections of this EIS, onto these existing trends to determine potential socioeconomic impacts. It is likely that workers would reside in the primary population centers surrounding the energy center site. Overall, economic benefits would occur throughout the ROI. DOE assessed the potential for impacts, both beneficial and adverse, based on whether the proposed project would:  Displace existing population or demolish existing housing;  Alter projected rates of population growth;  Affect the housing market;  Displace existing businesses;  Affect local businesses and the economy;  Displace existing jobs; or  Affect local employment or the workforce. 3.18.2 Affected Environment The Meredosia Energy Center is located in Morgan County and is surrounded by Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. For the counties potentially impacted by the FutureGen 2.0 Project, Table 3.18-1 compares the population information, Table 3.18-2 presents the housing data, and Table 3.18-3 presents the employment and income information.  3.18.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center, CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Population and Housing Population Table 3.18-1 provides population information for the counties potentially affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The Meredosia Energy Center and the injection well site(s) are located in Morgan County. Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties (see Figure 3.19-1) surround Morgan County and could also be impacted socioeconomically by the program. Morgan County had a total population of 35,547 in 2010 (USCB 2010e) and lost population as did other counties in the ROI since 2000, while the state population increased. In 2010, the total population for the five counties within the ROI was approximately 77,911 (USCB 2010e). The 2010 population of Illinois was 12,830,632 persons, representing a 3.3 percent increase from 2000 (USCB 2010e). The 2010 United States estimated population was 308,745,538, representing a 9.7 percent increase from 2000. Based on the trends within the region, the population is anticipated to grow at a slower rate than the United States and Illinois. These trends reflect a continuing decline in the population of northern Midwest rural areas with the nationwide shift in population to sunbelt states. Approximately 24.3 percent of United States residents and 24.3 percent of Illinois residents were under the age of 18 in 2009, versus 21 percent of the population in Morgan County and 16.8, 24.9, 22.3, and 22.7 percent in Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties, respectively (USCB 2010e). Approximately 12.4 percent of Illinois residents and 12.9 percent of United States citizens were over the age of 64 in 2009 versus 16.2 in Morgan County and 11.8, 15.6, 19.3, and 18.4 percent in Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties, respectively (USCB 2010e); therefore, Morgan County and most surrounding counties give indications of an older population compared to the state and nation. As discussed in Chapter 2, the Meredosia Energy Center suspended operations at the end of 2011. No substantial population changes are expected to result from the suspension of the facility. Housing Table 3.18-2 provides total housing and vacant units for the counties potentially affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. In 2010, there were 15,515 existing housing units in Morgan County and 34,223 within the ROI as a whole (USCB 2010f). Of the existing housing units within the ROI, 3,897 units were vacant, with Morgan County accounting for 1,411 of those units (USCB 2010f). The rental vacancy rate is 28.4 percent in Morgan County and 20.7 percent within the ROI. As discussed in Chapter 2, the Meredosia Energy Center suspended operations at the end of 2011. There would be no changes in housing expected due to the suspension of the Meredosia Energy Center. Table 3.18-1. Population Data Population 65 and Persons Under 18 Change Jurisdiction Total Population over per (percent) 2000 to 2010 (percent) Household (percent) 6,937 16.8 11.8 2.09 -0.2  13,642 24.9 15.6 2.56 -0.4 35,547 21.0 16.2 2.23 -2.9  16,430 22.3 19.3 2.34 -5.5 5,355 22.7 18.4 2.22 -3.3 77,911 21.7 16.5 NA -2.7 12,830,632 24.6 12.4 2.62 3.3 308,745,538 24.3 12.9 2.60 9.7 Source: USCB 2010f NA = not applicable Table 3.18-2. Housing within the Region of Influence Homeowner Rental Vacancy Total Housing Vacant Housing Jurisdiction Vacancy Rate Rate  Units Units (percent) (percent) 2,462 363 3.3 12.7 5,836 566 6.0 24.7 15,515 1,411 4.6 28.4 7,951 1,312 1.9 13.9 2,459 245 4.1 15.9 34,223 3,897 3.7 20.7 5,292,016 512,387 2.4 7.3 129,969,653 17,324,523 2.4 7.4 Source: USCB 2010f Regional Economy (Income, Workforce, and Unemployment) Table 3.18-3 provides information about the workforce and per capita and median household incomes for the counties potentially affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project. In 2010, the unemployment rate was 13.4 percent for the ROI and 9.4 percent for Morgan County, compared to an unemployment rate of 8.9 percent in both the United States and Illinois (USBLS 2011). Thus, the unemployment rate within Morgan County and the ROI is higher than that for Illinois and the United States.  In 2009, Morgan County had a median household income of $42,672 and a per capita income of $23,404 (USCB 2010a). The median household income for the entire ROI was $42,855 and the per capita income was $21,620 (USCB 2010a). In comparison, the median household income for the United States was $52,221 and the per capita income was $27,041 (USCB 2010a). The state of Illinois had a median household income of $53,974 and a per capita income of $28,469 (USCB 2010a). Based on 2009 Census data, both Morgan County and counties within the ROI have per capita incomes lower than both Illinois and the United States. The Meredosia Energy Center employed 57 people prior to its suspension of operations at the end of 2011. Since the suspension of operations, all 57 positions were eliminated. Currently, only security personnel work at the energy center, with a few Ameren employees onsite from time to time to perform maintenance. Sources: USCB 2010a; USBLS 2011 NA = not applicable 3.18.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.18.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Population and Housing There would be a negligible to minor impact on population and housing from construction of the oxycombustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center. To the extent impacts occur, they are expected to be short term and generally beneficial to the ROI.   The need for construction workers would be limited to the estimated 42-month construction period. Between 100 and 300 workers would be needed for the first 12 months; 300 to 500 workers for the second 12 months; 200 to 425 workers for the third 12 months; and up to 75 workers for the final 6 months. Work would peak in June through December 2015, with approximately 400 to 500 construction and craft workers at the site on any given day. Within the five-county ROI, an estimated 2,173 workers were employed in the construction industry between 2006 and 2010 (USCB 2010g). Based on the number of unemployed individuals in each of the counties within the ROI and the percentage of construction workers within each county, roughly 100 to 200 construction workers are presumed to be unemployed within the ROI and available to work on the project. Although DOE anticipates that most of the potential workers for the construction phase would already reside in the ROI, additional workers would be needed from outside the ROI. These workers would be expected to commute to the construction site on a daily basis (e.g., from the Springfield metropolitan area), while others may relocate to the area for the duration of the construction period. Therefore, a minor, temporary increase in population may occur. The minor temporary increase in population would affect local housing demand commensurately and would have a minor beneficial short-term impact on the housing market. The ROI has approximately 3,897 vacant housing units, with Morgan County accounting for approximately 1,411 of these units. Even if all the construction workers relocated to the area, ample housing would be available. Depending upon the percentage of construction jobs that would be filled by existing residents, the increase of employees from outside the ROI could increase the occupancy rate for vacant housing units and hotels within the ROI. This would result in a positive, direct impact for the rental market and hotel industry within the ROI. Additionally, area residents may rent available rooms to supplement their household incomes, thereby contributing to a beneficial effect. Economy and Employment There would be a moderate, short-term, beneficial impact to the economy and employment within the ROI from construction at the Meredosia Energy Center. Construction of the facility would directly create up to 500 full-time and part-time construction jobs over the proposed 42-month duration of the effort. These workers would be paid consistent with wages in the area for similar trades. Direct, short-term impacts to employment would occur from jobs related to construction. Indirect employment (e.g., restaurant and other services staff) from incidental spending due to this increase in jobs may also be created in the ROI. DOE used the Regional Input-Output Modeling System II (RIMS II), which was developed for the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, to evaluate the indirect economic impact on employment from constructing the Meredosia Energy Center. RIMS II provides two types of multipliers, final-demand and direct-effect, for estimating the impacts of changes on employment. An estimate of the change in the total number of jobs in the region’s economy was calculated by multiplying the initial change in jobs by a direct-effect employment multiplier. By adding up to 500 full-time equivalent (FTE) construction positions, the analysis showed that 577 secondary jobs would be created as a result of the construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center (BEA 2012). This would reduce the unemployment rate in the region and temporarily benefit the regional economy and employment. Therefore, a moderate, short-term beneficial impact on employment rates and income would occur within the ROI during the construction period. The purchase of building materials, construction supplies, and construction equipment, as well as spending by the construction workers, would add income to the local economy. These expenditures commonly include gasoline, automobile servicing, food and beverages, laundry, and other retail purchases undertaken in the immediate area because of convenience and access during the course of the business day. Therefore, a short-term, beneficial impact to economic activity within the ROI would occur during the construction period. No displacement of existing businesses would be expected as a result of construction for the project. Taxes and Revenue There would be a moderate, short-term, beneficial impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center. Construction of the project would generate revenue through state and local taxes over the duration of the effort. Local entities would benefit from temporarily increased sales tax revenues resulting from project-related spending on payroll and construction materials. It is anticipated that construction workers would spend their wages on short-term housing, food, and other personal items within the ROI. Additional sales tax revenues could result from taxes that are embedded in the price of consumer items such as gasoline. Therefore, an indirect and beneficial, short-term impact could be expected for the local economy from increased spending and related sales tax revenue. CO2 Pipeline and CO2 Storage Study Area Population and Housing There would be a negligible to minor impact on population and housing from construction of the CO2 pipeline for either the southern or northern route, and for construction of the CO2 injection well site(s). To the extent impacts would occur, they are expected to be short term and generally beneficial to the ROI. The acquisition of ROWs for construction of the pipeline would not require the displacement of population or demolition of existing housing. Between 150 and 300 workers would be needed for the construction of the pipeline and approximately 55 workers would be needed for the construction of the injection well site(s). Construction workers mainly would come from within Morgan County and would be hired from county labor pools. Within the five-county ROI, an estimated 2,173 workers were employed in the construction industry from 2006 to 2010 (USCB 2010g). Based on the number of unemployed individuals in each of the counties within the ROI and the percentage of construction workers within each county, roughly 100 to 200 construction workers are presumed to be unemployed within the ROI. A smaller number of temporary construction workers with specialized training, and workers employed by contractors from outside the ROI, would also likely be employed to construct the pipeline. Some of these workers would be expected to commute to the construction site on a daily basis, while others may relocate to the area for the duration of the construction period. Therefore, a negligible to minor, temporary increase in population may occur. The minor temporary increase in population would increase local housing demand commensurately and would have a negligible beneficial short-term impact on the ROI’s housing market as described above for the Meredosia Energy Center, because ample housing is available. Depending upon the percentage of construction jobs that would be filled by existing residents, the increase of employees from outside the ROI could increase the occupancy rate for vacant housing units and hotels within the ROI. This would result in a positive, direct impact for the rental market and hotel industry within the ROI. Additionally, area residents may rent available rooms to supplement their household incomes, thereby contributing to a beneficial effect. Economy and Employment There would be a moderate, short-term, beneficial impact to the economy and employment within the ROI from construction of the CO2 pipeline along either the southern or northern route, and for construction of the CO2 injection well site(s). Construction of the CO2 pipeline would directly create up to 300 full-time and part-time construction jobs and the construction of the injection well site(s) would directly create up to 55 full-time jobs over the proposed construction period, for a total of approximately 355 jobs. These workers would be paid consistent with wages in the area for similar trades. Direct, short-term impacts to employment would occur from jobs related to construction. Indirect employment (e.g., restaurant and service staff) from incidental spending due to this increase in jobs may also be created in the ROI.  By adding 150 to 300 FTE construction positions, the RIMS II analysis showed that approximately 173 to 346 secondary jobs would be created as a result of construction of the CO2 pipeline (BEA 2012). By adding 55 FTE construction positions, the RIMS II analysis showed that up to 63 secondary jobs would be created as a result of construction of the injection well site(s) (BEA 2012). This would reduce the unemployment rate in the region and temporarily benefit the economy and employment in the ROI. Therefore, a moderate, short-term beneficial impact on employment rates and income would occur within the ROI during the construction period. Additional short-term, beneficial effects on the economy in the ROI would result from purchases of materials, supplies, and services during construction, as described above for the Meredosia Energy Center. No existing businesses or jobs are expected to be displaced by acquisition of ROWs or construction of the pipeline. Taxes and Revenue There would be a moderate, short-term, beneficial impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from construction of the CO2 pipeline and the CO2 injection well site(s). Construction of the project would generate revenue through state and local taxes over the duration of the effort. Local entities would benefit from temporarily increased sales tax revenues resulting from project-related spending on payroll and construction materials. It is anticipated that construction workers would spend their wages on short-term housing, food, and other personal items within the ROI. Additional sales tax revenues could result from taxes that are embedded in the price of consumer items such as gasoline. Therefore, an indirect and beneficial short-term impact could be expected for the local economy from increased spending and related sales tax revenue. Educational Facilities Population and Housing There would be a negligible to minor impact on population and housing from construction of the educational facilities in Morgan County. To the extent impacts occur, they are expected to be short term and generally beneficial to the ROI. The acquisition of property for construction of the educational facilities would not require the displacement of population or demolition of existing housing. Approximately 87 workers would be needed for the design and construction of the educational facilities in Morgan County. Construction workers would come mainly from within the county and would be hired from local county labor pools as described above for the CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection well site(s). Even if all 87 workers were hired externally and relocated to the ROI, the effect on population and housing in the ROI would be negligible and temporary. Economy and Employment There would be a minor, short-term, beneficial impact to economy and employment within the ROI from construction of the educational facilities in Morgan County. Construction of the educational facilities would directly create up to 87 full-time construction jobs (40 for the training facility and 47 for the visitor and research center) over the proposed construction period. These workers would be paid consistent with wages in the area for similar trades. Direct, short-term impacts to employment would occur from jobs related to construction. Indirect employment (e.g., restaurant staff) from incidental spending due to this increase in jobs may also be created in the ROI.   By adding up to 87 FTE construction positions, the RIMS II analysis showed that up to 100 secondary jobs (46 due to the training facility and 54 due to the visitor and research center) would be created as a result of construction of the educational facilities (BEA 2012). This would reduce the unemployment rate in the region and temporarily benefit the economy and employment in the ROI. Therefore, a minor, short-term beneficial impact on employment rates and income would occur within the ROI during the construction period. Also, as described above for the CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection well site(s), secondary spending during the construction effort on materials and supplies, as well as by workers for food and services, would result in short-term, beneficial impacts on economic activity. No existing businesses or jobs would be displaced as a result of construction. Taxes and Revenue There would be a minor, short-term, beneficial impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from construction of the educational facilities in Morgan County. The project would generate revenue through state and local taxes over the duration of construction. Local entities would benefit from temporarily increased sales tax revenues as described above for the CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection well site(s). Therefore, an indirect and beneficial, short-term impact could be expected for the local economy from increased spending and related sales tax revenue. 3.18.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center Population and Housing There would be a negligible to minor impact on population and housing in the ROI from operation of the Meredosia Energy Center. The project would require approximately 87 to 115 full-time employees. It is anticipated that most of the employees would be drawn from the workforce residing within the ROI. Housing for any workers relocating to the area would likely be distributed between owned and rental accommodations.  Even if all of the required staff relocated to the ROI, the increase in population would be very small. Based on the 2010 estimated population and the average household size (2.5 people per household) within the ROI, the relocation of 87 to 115 employees could result in a population increase of 218 to 288 people, representing a 0.28 to 0.37 percent increase in population within the five-county ROI. Any influx of employees from outside the ROI could increase the occupancy rate for vacant housing units within the ROI. Ample housing exists within the ROI to support this increase in population. The ROI has approximately 3,897 vacant housing units, with Morgan County accounting for approximately 1,411 of these units. If all 87 to 115 employees relocated to the ROI, this would represent only a 2.2 to 3.0 percent decrease in available housing. Economy and Employment A moderate long-term, beneficial impact to economy and employment would occur within the ROI from operation of the Meredosia Energy Center. The operational phase of the project would have annual operation and maintenance needs that would benefit the ROI. Local contractors could be hired to complete specialized maintenance activities that could not be undertaken by permanent staff, and items such as repair materials, water, and chemicals could be purchased within the ROI. This would have a beneficial impact on the economy in the ROI. The operational phase of the project would also have a direct and beneficial impact on employment by creating approximately 87 to 115 permanent jobs in the ROI. These new jobs would represent a 3.2 to 4.2 percent decrease in the unemployed workforce of the ROI. In addition, operation of the Meredosia Energy Center could replace many of the 57 jobs that were lost following the suspension of operations at the facility in 2011. Each new operational job created by the project would generate secondary jobs, both indirect and induced. An indirect job supplies goods and services directly to the project. An induced job results from the spending of additional income from indirect and direct employees. By adding up 87 to 115 FTE permanent jobs, the RIMS II analysis showed that approximately 107 to 142 secondary jobs would be created as a result of operation of the Meredosia Energy Center (BEA 2012). This would further reduce the unemployed workforce in the region by an additional 3.9 to 5.2 percent and benefit the economy and employment in the region. Therefore, a moderate, beneficial impact on employment rates and income would occur within the ROI during operations. No existing businesses or jobs would be displaced by energy center operations. Taxes and Revenue There would be a long-term, beneficial impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from operation of the Meredosia Energy Center. The estimated 87 to 115 employees who would fill new jobs created by the project could generate income tax revenues, as well as sales and use tax revenues within the ROI. Local entities would benefit from increased sales tax revenues resulting from spending on payroll, supplies, and materials. Therefore, an indirect and beneficial long-term impact could be expected for the local economy from increased spending and related sales tax revenue. CO2 Pipeline and CO2 Storage Study Area Population and Housing There would be a negligible impact to population and housing from operation of the CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection well site(s). Operation of the injection well site(s) would increase the number of employees by approximately 21 full-time positions. Even if all of the staff relocated to the ROI, the increase in population would be very small. Based on an analysis comparable to that described above for the Meredosia Energy Center, the relocation of 21 employees could result in a 0.03 percent increase in population within the five-county ROI and cause a 0.5 percent reduction in available housing.  Economy and Employment There would be a minor, long-term, beneficial impact to the economy and employment within the ROI from operation and maintenance needs for the CO2 pipeline and CO2 injection well site(s). Local contractors could be hired to complete specialized maintenance activities that could not be undertaken by permanent staff, and items such as repair materials, water, and chemicals could be purchased within the ROI.   The operational phase of the project would also have a direct and beneficial impact on employment by creating approximately 21 permanent jobs in the ROI. These new jobs would represent a 0.8 percent decrease in the unemployed workforce of the ROI, and each new operations job created by the project would generate secondary jobs, both indirect and induced, as described above for the Meredosia Energy Center.   By adding 21 FTE permanent jobs, the RIMS II analysis showed that approximately 18 secondary jobs would be created as a result of operation of the injection well site(s) (BEA 2012). This may further reduce the unemployed workforce and benefit the economy and employment in the region. Taxes and Revenue There would be a long-term, beneficial impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from operation and maintenance of the injection well site(s). The estimated 21 employees who would fill new jobs created by the project could generate income tax revenues, as well as sales and use tax revenues within the ROI. In addition, sales tax would be levied on materials and supplies purchased for energy center operations.  Educational Facilities Population and Housing There would be a negligible impact to population and housing from operation of the educational facilities. Operation of the educational facilities would require approximately 22 new full-time positions. Even if all of the staff relocated to the ROI, the increase in population would be very small. Based on an analysis comparable to that described above for the Meredosia Energy Center, the relocation of 22 employees with families could result in a 0.07 percent increase in population within the five-county ROI and cause a 0.6 percent reduction in available housing. Economy and Employment There would be a minor, long-term, beneficial impact to the economy and employment within the ROI from operation of the educational facilities. Daily spending by employees for food and services would positively affect the area, as would spending for materials and supplies to support facilities’ operations. By attracting visitors interested in the technologies applied at the Meredosia Energy Center and the injection well site(s), the educational facilities would benefit the regional economy indirectly. Visitors would likely purchase food and refreshments at nearby establishments and utilize other services in the ROI. The operational phase of the project would have a direct and beneficial impact on employment by creating approximately 22 permanent jobs in the ROI. These new jobs would represent a 0.8 percent decrease in the unemployed workforce within the ROI, and each new operations job created by the project would generate secondary jobs, both indirect and induced, as described above for the Meredosia Energy Center.   By adding 22 FTE permanent jobs (15 for the training facility and 7 for the visitor and research center), the RIMS II analysis showed that approximately 24 secondary jobs (15 due to the training facility and 9 due to the visitor and research center) would be created as a result of the operation of the educational facilities (BEA 2012). This would further reduce the unemployed workforce of the ROI by 0.9 percent and benefit the economy and employment in the region.  Taxes and Revenue There would be a long-term, beneficial, impact to taxes and revenue within the ROI from operation of the educational facilities. The estimated 22 employees who would fill new jobs created by the operation of the educational facilities could generate income tax revenues, as well as sales and use tax revenues within the ROI. In addition, sales tax would be levied on materials and supplies purchased for operation of the educational facilities. 3.18.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no change to socioeconomic conditions, as well as no potential benefits from the construction and operation of the energy center, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 3.19 ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE 3.19.1 Introduction This section identifies low-income and minority communities potentially affected by the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and analyzes potential direct and indirect impacts on environmental justice resulting from the proposed project. 3.19.1.1 Region of Influence The proposed project would be located in Morgan County, which is surrounded by Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott counties. The ROI was selected to include the census tracts and block groups that would be most directly affected by the construction and operation of FutureGen 2.0 Project components. These include the land areas within a 5-mile radius around the Meredosia Energy Center, and the land areas affected by the CO2 pipeline corridor, the CO2 storage study area, and the educational facilities. This land area includes all or part of Brown, Cass, Morgan, Pike, and Scott counties (see Figure 3.19-1). The compositions of minorities and low-income residents within these areas were considered in comparison to the compositions of minorities and low-income residents in the general population of Morgan County, adjacent counties (Brown, Cass, Pike, and Scott), Illinois, and the United States in accordance with CEQ guidelines for purposes of identifying the potential for disproportionately adverse impacts. 3.19.1.2 Method of Analysis and Factors Considered Census data to support environmental justice analyses typically are compiled at the census tract level and the block group level. DOE used block group data to characterize minority populations and census tract data to characterize low-income populations. The analysis for environmental justice in this EIS was performed as follows. First, DOE collected demographic information from the U.S. Census Bureau to characterize low-income and minority populations. DOE then used potential environmental, socioeconomic, and health impacts identified in other sections of this EIS to assess potential impacts to environmental justice communities that could occur with the proposed construction and operation of the project. Finally, DOE utilized the CEQ’s December 1997 Environmental Justice Guidance (CEQ 1997), which provides guidelines regarding whether human health effects on minority or low-income populations are disproportionately high and adverse. Under this guidance, agencies are advised to consider the following three factors to the extent possible:  Whether the risks or rates of health effects (which may include bodily impairment, infirmity, illness, or death) are significant (as considered by NEPA), or above generally accepted norms;  Whether the risk or rate of hazard exposure by a minority population, low-income population, or Indian tribe to an environmental hazard is significant (as considered by NEPA) and appreciably exceeds or is likely to appreciably exceed the risk or rate to the general population or other appropriate comparison group; and  Whether health effects occur in a minority population, low-income population, or Indian tribe affected by cumulative or multiple adverse exposures from environmental hazards. DOE assessed the potential for impacts based on whether the proposed project would:  Cause a significant and disproportionately high and adverse effect on a minority population; or  Cause a significant and disproportionately high and adverse effect on a low-income population. 3.19.1.3 Regulatory Framework EO 12898, “Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations,” provides that “each federal agency shall make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and addressing, as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority populations and low-income populations” (EO 12898). DOE (2012) defines “environmental justice” as: The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people—regardless of race, ethnicity, and income or education level—in environmental decision making. Environmental Justice programs promote the protection of human health and the environment, empowerment via public participation, and the dissemination of relevant information to inform and educate affected communities. Department of Energy Environmental Justice programs are designed to build and sustain community capacity for meaningful participation for all stakeholders in Department of Energy host communities. In its guidance for the consideration of environmental justice under NEPA, the CEQ defines a “minority” as an individual who is American Indian or Alaskan Native, Black or African American, Asian, Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, Hispanic or Latino. CEQ characterizes a “minority population” as existing in an affected area where the percentage of defined minorities exceeds 50 percent of the population, or where the percentage of defined minorities in the affected area is meaningfully greater (25 percent higher) than the percentage of defined minorities in the general population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis. The CEQ guidance further recommends that low-income populations in an affected area should be identified using data on income and poverty from the U.S. Census Bureau (CEQ 1997). Low-income populations are populations where households have an annual household income below the poverty threshold, which was $17,050 for a family of four at the time of the 2000 Census (HHS 2000) and $22,050 for a family of four at the time of the 2010 Census (HHS 2010). 3.19.2 Affected Environment 3.19.2.1 Meredosia Energy Center Minority Populations As shown in Table 3.19-1 and Figure 3.19-1, the majority of the population within Morgan County, in which the Meredosia Energy Center is located, is white (90.9 percent), as compared to the state of Illinois (71.5 percent) and the United States (72.4 percent). The overall population in Morgan County is generally less racially and ethnically diverse (less than 10 percent non-white) than the general population of the state and far more homogeneous than the United States; therefore, a “minority population” as defined by CEQ does not exist in Morgan County. The percentage of minority individuals living in Census Tract 9514, in which the Meredosia Energy Center is located, is 1.5 percent (USCB 2010f). This is lower than the percentages in Morgan County, the state as a whole, and the United States (USCB 2010e). As discussed in Chapter 2, the Meredosia Energy Center suspended operations at the end of 2011. The minority population distribution in the area is not expected to change as a result of the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center.   CO2 = carbonn dioxide 308,745,538 72.4 12.6 0.9 4.8 0.2 16.3 14.3 Source: USCB 2010e Z = Denotes a value greater than zero but less than half unit of measure shown Note: Some of the minority population counted themselves as more than one ethnic background or as “other,” thus the counts do not add up to 100 percent. Low-Income Populations Table 3.19-1 compares the minority percentages and low-income percentages of all counties in the ROI with those of the state of Illinois and the United States in general. Figure 3.19-2 presents the low-income population distributions within the FutureGen 2.0 Project area. The percentage of low-income individuals within Morgan County (14.1 percent), in which the Meredosia Energy Center is located, is generally comparable to the percentage in the state (13.3 percent) and slightly lower than the United States (14.3 percent) percentage (see Table 3.19-1). The other counties within the ROI are comparable to Morgan County, with Brown and Pike counties having a slightly higher percentage of low-income individuals (15.9 percent and 17.1 percent, respectively) than Illinois and the United States; and Cass and Scott counties having a slightly lower percentage of low-income individuals (12.5 percent and 10.4 percent, respectively) than Illinois and the United States. The percentage of low-income individuals living in Census Tract 9514, in which the Meredosia Energy Center is located, is 12.6 percent. This is lower than the percentages in Morgan County, the state as a whole, and the United States (USCB 2010g). There are no anticipated changes in low-income populations that would be attributable to the suspension of operations at the Meredosia Energy Center. 3.19.2.2 CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities Minority Populations No “minority population” as defined by the CEQ exists within the proposed CO2 pipeline corridor from the energy center to the CO2 storage study area or within the CO2 storage study area. The percentages of minorities within the block groups comprising the CO2 pipeline corridor and within the storage study area are 2 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively, which are lower than the percentages in Morgan County. % = percent; CO2 = carbon dioxxide Depending on the location selected for the educational facilities, minority populations may exist nearby; however, given the demographics of Morgan County (90.9 percent white), the presence of CEQ-defined minority populations is unlikely. Low-Income Populations The percentage of low-income individuals within Morgan County overall is 14.1 percent. This percentage is not substantially higher than the percentage in the state (13.3 percent) and is nearly the same as the percentage in the United States (14.3 percent) (see Table 3.19-1). The percentages of low-income individuals within the census tracts comprising the CO2 pipeline corridor and storage study area are 8 percent and 4.2 percent, respectively. These are lower than the percentages for Morgan County, the state as a whole, and the United States (USCB 2010e). Depending on the location selected for the educational facilities, low-income populations may exist nearby. 3.19.3 Impacts of Proposed Action 3.19.3.1 Construction Impacts Meredosia Energy Center As discussed in Section 3.19.2.1, there are no areas of minority populations, as defined by EO 12898 and CEQ guidance, located within the ROI for the Meredosia Energy Center. Therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts to minority populations are anticipated during construction for the proposed project. No census tracts within the ROI have low-income populations that are proportionately greater than those of the general populations in Morgan County, surrounding counties, the state, and the United States; therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts are anticipated to low-income populations. Construction impacts that may affect the local population, such as impacts to air quality, surface water, transportation, and noise, would be minor and temporary in nature (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.6, Surface Water; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). Short-term beneficial impacts may include an increase in employment opportunities and potentially higher wages or supplemental income through jobs created during facility construction, as well as the opportunity for homeowners to rent rooms for temporary construction worker lodging (see Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). Environmental justice impacts (or lack thereof) associated with the construction of the oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Energy Center would be the same when compared to both the historical baseline (prior operation of the energy center) and the projected baseline (post-suspension of operations at the energy center). CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities As discussed in Section 3.19.2.2, there are no areas of minority populations, as defined by EO 12898 and CEQ guidance, located within the ROI for the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 storage study area, or the educational facilities. Therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts to minority populations are anticipated. As discussed in Section 3.19.2.2, no census tracts within the ROI have low-income populations that are proportionately greater than those of the general populations in Morgan County, surrounding counties, the state, and the United States; therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts are anticipated to low-income populations. Construction impacts that may affect the local population, such as impacts to air quality, surface water, transportation, and noise, would be minor and temporary in nature (see Section 3.1, Air Quality; Section 3.6, Surface Water; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration). Short-term beneficial impacts may include an increase in employment opportunities and potentially higher wages or supplemental income through jobs created during facility construction, as well as the opportunity for homeowners to rent rooms for temporary construction worker lodging (see Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). 3.19.3.2 Operational Impacts Meredosia Energy Center As described in Section 3.19.2.1, no areas of minority or low-income populations, as defined by EO 12898 and CEQ guidance, are located within the ROI for the Meredosia Energy Center. Aesthetics, transportation, noise, and socioeconomic impacts resulting from operations would not have a disproportionately high and adverse effect on minority and low-income populations (see Section 3.11, Aesthetics; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration; and Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). The potential health risks from a pipeline rupture or puncture, or a catastrophic accident, terrorism, or sabotage are described in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety. Census tracts and block groups in closest proximity to the Meredosia Energy Center would be most at risk in the event of a release resulting from an accident or intentional destructive act at the energy center. As described in Section 3.19.2.1, no minority or low-income populations exist in these census tracts and block groups at higher concentrations than in the general population. Therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts to minority and low-income populations would be anticipated from an accident or intentional destructive act. A small, long-term, beneficial impact to low-income populations would be anticipated due to an increase in employment opportunities and potentially higher wage jobs associated with facility operation (see Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). Environmental Justice impacts (or lack thereof) associated with the operation of the Meredosia Energy Center are the same when compared to both the historical baseline and the projected baseline. CO2 Pipeline, CO2 Storage Study Area, and Educational Facilities As described in Section 3.19.2.2, no areas of minority or low-income populations, as defined by EO 12898 and CEQ guidance, are located within the ROI for the CO2 pipeline, the CO2 storage study area, or the educational facilities. Aesthetics, transportation, noise, and socioeconomic impacts resulting from operations would not have a disproportionately high and adverse effect on minority and low-income populations (see Section 3.11, Aesthetics; Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration; and Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). The potential health risks from a CO2 pipeline rupture or puncture, or a catastrophic accident, terrorism, or sabotage involving the pipeline or CO2 injection wells are described in Section 3.17, Human Health and Safety. Census tracts and block groups in closest proximity to the CO2 storage study area and the associated CO2 pipeline would be most at risk in the event of a release resulting from an accident or intentional destructive act along the pipeline or at the injection wells. As described in Section 3.19.2.2, no minority or low-income populations exist in these census tracts and block groups at higher concentrations than in the general population. Therefore, no disproportionately high and adverse impacts to minority and low-income populations would be anticipated from an accident or intentional destructive act.  A small, long-term, beneficial impact to low-income populations would be anticipated due to an increase in employment opportunities and potentially higher wage jobs associated with the project operations.  3.19.4 Impacts of the No Action Alternative Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in this EIS, DOE assumed the no action alternative is equivalent to the no-build alternative. Therefore, the project would not be constructed and there would be no adverse impact to environmental justice populations. In addition, the no action alternative would not provide the potential for beneficial economic impacts associated with the proposed project. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 4 SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES This chapter contains the following sections:  Section 4.1 Comparative Impacts of Alternatives  Section 4.2 Measures to Mitigate Adverse Impacts  Section 4.3 Potential Cumulative Impacts  Section 4.4 Incomplete and Unavailable Information  Section 4.5 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments  Section 4.6 Relationship between Short-Term Uses of the Environment and Long-Term Productivity 4.1 IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES As described in Chapter 2, the FutureGen 2.0 Project considers two alternatives: the no action alternative and the proposed action. Under the no action alternative, DOE would not provide cost-shared funding for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Although the Alliance may still elect to construct and operate the project in the absence of DOE cost-shared funding, for the purposes of the analysis in the EIS, DOE assumed that the no action alternative is equivalent to a no-build alternative. The proposed project consists of the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test and the CO2 Pipeline and Storage Reservoir as described in Section 2.5. DOE evaluated the potential impacts of the no action alternative and the proposed action in relation to the baseline conditions. Detailed discussion of baseline conditions and potential impacts are provided in Chapter 3. Table 4.1-1 summarizes the potential impacts for each of the 19 resource areas for the no action alternative and for the proposed action. The EIS uses the following descriptors to qualitatively characterize impacts on respective resources:  Beneficial – The impacts would benefit the resource.  Negligible – No apparent or measurable impacts are expected; may also be described as “none” if appropriate.  Minor – The action would have a barely noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource.  Moderate – The action would have a noticeable or measurable adverse impact on the resource. This category could include potentially significant impacts that would be reduced to a lesser degree by the implementation of mitigation measures.  Substantial – The action would have obvious and extensive adverse effects that could result in potentially significant impacts on a resource despite mitigation measures. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Air Quality  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0  proposed project would:  Result in emissions of criteria pollutants or hazardous air pollutants that would exceed relevant air quality or health standards;  Baseline conditions would not change.  Project would result in short-term, minor, localized increased tailpipe and fugitive dust emissions. Because the proposed project would occur in an area listed as either in “attainment” or “unclassified" for all criteria pollutants, Clean Air Act conformity requirements are not applicable and thus there are no emissions thresholds that pertain to the construction phase of this project. Emissions would be concentrated at the   Cause an adverse change in air quality  construction sites and would steadily decrease with distance.  related to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards or Illinois standards;  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During normal operations of the oxy-combustion facility, the gas quality control system would incorporate state-of-the-art flue gas   Violate any federal or state permits;  scrubbing technology to minimize criteria pollutant emissions from the stack.   Affect visibility and regional haze in Class I  Beneficial impacts could result from overall lower emissions, as electricity generated by  areas; or  this project may displace electricity generated by traditional coal-fired power plants that   Conflict with local or regional air quality  emit significantly higher levels of pollutants.  management plans to attain or maintain  compliance with the federal and state air  quality regulations.  Climate and Greenhouse Gases  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Direct Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0  proposed project would:  Cause an increase (or decrease) in GHG  Indirect Adverse Impacts related to  Project would generate approximately 44,408 tons (40,411 metric tons) of CO2 emissions over the multi-year construction period.   emissions of 75,000 tons per year (68,250  not furthering  Operations: Beneficial Impacts: The capture and geological storage of GHG emissions  metric tons per year) CO2-equivalent or  commercial-scale  by the project would produce a beneficial cumulative effect on a national and global  more; or  advanced oxy scale. Operation of the project components would result in approximately 150,316 tons   Threaten to violate federal, state, or local laws or requirements regarding GHG emissions.  combustion coal-based power generation technologies with CO2 capture and sequestration. Further, without the project, regional electricity needs would likely be met by conventional coal- or natural gas-based electric power  per year (136,661 metric tons per year) of new CO2 emissions (net after CO2 capture and storage). The proposed project would capture and sequester approximately 1.2 million tons per year (1.1 million metric tons per year) of CO2 emissions from the generation of 168 MWe (99 MWe net) of electric power, which would generate approximately 90 percent lower GHG emissions compared to a similarly sized conventional coal-fired power plant, or approximately 70 percent lower compared to a natural-gas fired power plant. The reduction in CO2 emissions resulting from the project would incrementally reduce the rate of GHG accumulation in the atmosphere and help to incrementally mitigate climate change related to atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. On a broader scale, successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread acceptance and deployment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage of CO2, thus fostering a long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States. Operation of the project components would   generation.   COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES 4.1-2 DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Climate and Greenhouse Gases (continued)  Therefore, regional  result in approximately 150,316 tons per year (136,661 metric tons per year) of new  GHG emissions  CO2 emissions (net after CO2 capture and storage).  would likely be  greater in the  absence of the  proposed project.  Physiography and Soils  Impacts were assessed based upon whether  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0  the proposed project would:  Result in permanent and/or temporary soil removal;  Baseline conditions would not change.  Project would increase the potential for soil erosion and compaction, increase the amount of impermeable surfaces, and withdraw some prime farmland soils from agricultural production. Overall, construction of the proposed project would disturb a total of 364 acres of soil classified as prime farmland; however, all but 25 acres (93 percent)   Cause the permanent loss of prime  would be restored to its preconstruction state or reused for agriculture. Construction at  farmland soil or farmland of statewide  the Meredosia Energy Center would disturb (both temporary and permanent) 136 acres  importance (through conversion to  of soils classified as farmland of statewide importance (though this soil is not currently  nonagricultural uses);  used for agricultural purposes and is likely no longer suitable for agricultural use), 19   Result in significant soil erosion;  acres of Urban soils, and 3 acres of hydric soils. Construction of the CO2 pipeline route would disturb approximately 250 acres of soils, the majority of which is classified as   Cause soil contamination due to spills of  prime farmland. Approximately 28 acres of soils would be disturbed to construct the  hazardous materials; or  injection well site(s), monitoring wells, and associated facilities; up to 64 acres would be   Change soil characteristics and  disturbed to build the access roads to the injection well site(s); and between 20 to 32  composition.  acres of soils would be disturbed to connect the injection wells to the CO2 pipeline. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During operations, 96 acres of soils would be permanently disturbed at the Meredosia Energy Center, and 25 acres would be withdrawn from agricultural use at the injection well site(s). Where practicable, the property above the CO2 pipeline would be returned to agricultural use after the construction period ends.  Geology  Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Cause or be damaged by geologic-related events (e.g., earthquake, landslides, sinkholes);  Reduce the value of mineral or petroleum resources or unique geologic formations, or render them inaccessible;   No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change; the stratigraphic well would be closed.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction at the Meredosia Energy Center and CO2 pipeline may require excavation of glacial materials. Construction of the injection well site(s) would result in removal of geologic media through the drilling process. This process would not be unique to the area and would not affect the availability of local geologic resources. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility and CO2 pipeline would not affect geologic resources. At the injection wells, the potential of CO2 migrating out of the injection zone is considered highly unlikely. Computer modeling   COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES 4.1-3 DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered  No Action  Proposed Project  Geology (continued)  conducted by the Alliance for their proposed injection well configuration of four horizontal wells installed at one injection well site predicted that the CO2 plume would expand to encompass an area of approximately 4,000 acres within the CO2 storage study area over the 20-year injection period. During injection, the Alliance would monitor the formation pressure to ensure that injection-induced seismicity would not occur. The Alliance would also follow a USEPA-approved MVA plan, and conduct extensive studies and monitoring to minimize this potential long-term impact. As required by the UIC permits, appropriate mitigation strategies would be implemented should such CO2 migration be identified.  Groundwater  Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Deplete groundwater supplies on a scale that would affect available capacity of a groundwater source for use by existing water rights holders, or interfere with groundwater recharge;  Conflict with established water rights, allocations, or regulations protecting groundwater for future beneficial uses;  Contaminate shallow aquifers due to chemical spills, well drilling or well completion failures;  Conflict with regional or local aquifer management plans or the goals of governmental water authorities; or  Contaminate USDWs through acidification of an aquifer due to migration of CO2 or toxic metal dissolution and mobilization, displacement of naturally occurring brine (saline groundwater) due to CO2 injection, or chemical spills, well drilling, well development, or well failures.  No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change.  Construction: Negligible Impacts: Construction at the Meredosia Energy Center and pipeline corridor would not include onsite discharges to groundwater and would follow the updated National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure plans to minimize any potential for groundwater contamination. Construction of the injection wells would follow the construction plan in the UIC permits so that local groundwater aquifers would not be impacted from drilling. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the Meredosia Energy Center would withdraw approximately 124,000 gallons of groundwater per day from three onsite groundwater wells, which is less than the historical use at the energy center site (between 212,000 and 982,000 gpd), and less than 4 percent of the historical use by the industrial plants in the Meredosia area. The potential for groundwater contamination would be minimized during operations by implementing a Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure Plan and implementing the procedures in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. Operation of the pipeline would have negligible impacts as it would not be expected to affect groundwater. At the injection well site(s), the potential for CO2 migration upward through fractures in the caprock seal is considered highly unlikely, and extensive vertical movement into drinking water aquifers would not be expected. As part of the UIC permit applications, the Alliance would provide an MVA plan, which would detail the procedures that the Alliance would use to monitor and contain the CO2 within the injection zone.  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Surface Water  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the oxy-combustion facility and  proposed project would:  Alter stormwater discharges, which could adversely affect drainage patterns, flooding, erosion, and sedimentation;  Baseline conditions would not change.  barge unloading facility has the potential to increase sedimentation in the Illinois River and increase the potential for surface water contamination from material spills. If the Alliance undertakes activities related to the barge unloading facility that would disturb the river bottom, then water quality could be reduced by increased turbidity and sedimentation during streambed disturbance. While all perennial streams and the   Alter or damage existing farmland drainage  majority of intermittent streams would be avoided using trenchless technologies for  infrastructure;  pipeline construction, trenching could occur during pipeline construction at certain   Alter infiltration rates, which could affect (substantially increase or decrease) the volume of surface water that flows downstream;  ephemeral and intermittent streams that are seasonally-dry at the time of construction. However, these features would be restored to pre-construction conditions after construction activities were completed. Construction of the injection well site(s) could increase the potential for contamination from material spills.   Conflict with applicable stormwater management plans or ordinances;  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility would require approximately 95 percent less (217 mgd for historical operations compared with an estimated 11.4 mgd for proposed operations) process water withdrawal from the   Violate any federal, state, or regional water  Illinois River compared to historical energy center operations. Additionally, facility  quality standards or discharge limitations;  activities associated with the proposed project would result in significantly less treated   Modify surface waters such that water  process wastewater being discharged to the Illinois River compared to historic  quality no longer meets water quality  conditions. There would be no operational impacts associated with the barge area, as  criteria or standards established in  this area would be returned to pre-existing conditions after construction activities at the  accordance with the Clean Water Act, state  Meredosia Energy Center were completed. The proposed project would increase the  regulations, or permits; or  potential for stormwater runoff due to increased impervious area at the proposed oxycombustion facility site and would increase the potential for contamination from material   Change the availability of surface water  spills. Operation of the pipeline and injection well site(s) would not affect surface water,  resources for current or future uses.  other than increasing the potential of material spills during maintenance.  Wetlands and Floodplains  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Negligible to Minor Adverse Impacts: No impacts to wetlands would  proposed project would:  Cause filling of wetlands or otherwise alter drainage patterns that would affect wetlands;  Baseline conditions would not change.  occur at the Meredosia Energy Center as a result of the proposed project. If the Alliance undertakes activities related to the proposed barge unloading facility that would disturb the river bottom, then temporary impacts would occur resulting in potential increased sedimentation of the Illinois River. For the CO2 pipeline, the southern route operational ROW contains no open water wetlands; while the northern route contains   Cause wetland type or classification conversions due to alterations of land cover attributes;  0.2 acre of open water wetlands. While all wetlands, perennial streams, and the majority of intermittent streams would be avoided using trenchless technologies, trenching could occur during pipeline construction at certain ephemeral and intermittent streams which are seasonally-dry at the time of construction. Construction of the pipeline at these locations, which although dry may still be considered USACE-jurisdictional features, would cause temporary disturbance of the stream channel bed  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Wetlands and Floodplains (continued)   Alter a floodway or floodplain or otherwise  and bank. However, these features would be restored to pre-construction conditions  impede or redirect flows such that human  after construction activities were completed. Likewise, no impacts to wetlands are  health, the environment, or personal  anticipated at the CO2 injection well site(s).   property could be affected;  Construction within the 100-year floodplain would primarily occur only in areas that are   Conflict with applicable flood management  currently developed at the Meredosia Energy Center; therefore, additional impacts are  plans or ordinances; or  not expected. If the Alliance undertakes activities related to the proposed barge   Conflict with the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s national standard for floodplain management (i.e., maximum allowable increase of water surface elevation of 1 foot for a 1 percent annual chance [100-year recurrence interval] flood event).  unloading facility, temporary placement of facilities within the 100-year floodplain would occur during construction, and the area would be returned to pre-construction conditions after construction activities are completed. Construction of the CO2 pipeline would cross 100-year floodplains and may result in small ancillary structures being placed in the 100-year floodplain, resulting in minor impacts. Construction at the CO2 injection well site(s) is not anticipated to impact floodplains; as per the siting criteria, these areas would be avoided.  Operations: Negligible to Minor Adverse Impacts: There would be no operational impacts to wetlands as maintenance of the ROW (e.g., mowing or vegetation clearing) would not occur within wetland areas. Mainline block valves would be placed on either side of streams and other wetland features, as needed.    Biological Resources  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor to Moderate Adverse Impacts: Up to approximately 512 total  proposed project would:  Cause displacement of terrestrial or aquatic communities or loss of habitat;  Baseline conditions would not change.  acres would be disturbed during the construction phase of the entire proposed project, of which approximately 174 acres would be permanently disturbed or converted to other uses for the project, which represents approximately 34 percent of the total project disturbance area. Agricultural land would experience the greatest impact from the   Diminish the value of habitat for wildlife or  proposed project, with a potential maximum of 309 impacted acres of agricultural land  plants;  (i.e., 217 acres within the proposed northern CO2 pipeline route’s temporary ROW and   Cause a decline in native wildlife populations;  92 acres at the CO2 injection well site[s]). However, with the exception of the 25 acres permanently dedicated for the siting of the injection wells and associated infrastructure, all agricultural lands could be returned to their current, productive use after   Interfere with the movement of native  construction.  resident or migratory wildlife species;  Proposed construction activities within the Illinois River could disturb riverbed   Conflict with applicable management plans  sediments and release buried contaminants, including polychlorinated biphenyls and  for terrestrial, avian, and aquatic species  mercury. This release could have an adverse impact on local and downstream aquatic  and their habitat;  resources, including protected species. After finalizing the CO2 pipeline route and prior   Cause the introduction of noxious or  to construction, the Alliance would conduct species-specific surveys for migratory bird  invasive plant species;  species and all protected species known to occur in Morgan County. Through coordination with the USACE, USFWS, and IDNR, the Alliance would develop and implement appropriate mitigation measures to ensure potential adverse impacts remain  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered  No Action  Proposed Project  Biological Resources (continued)  at acceptable levels. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During operation, the 50-foot wide CO2 pipeline operational ROW would be kept free of woody vegetation to permit access for inspection and maintenance activities. This would leave the vegetation in the operational ROW in a persistent herbaceous state, creating a permanent habitat conversion in areas that were previously forested. Clearing of forested areas would cause a small degree of habitat fragmentation. In total, the proposed southern route would result in the loss of up to 8 acres of forested lands. The proposed northern CO2 pipeline route would result in the loss of up to 21 acres of forested lands. Due to the comparatively small areas of forest to be permanently converted, these potential fragmentation effects would be minor.  Cultural Resources  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Negligible Adverse Impacts: DOE has not identified any cultural  proposed project would cause the loss, isolation, or alteration of:  Archaeological resources eligible for NRHP listing;  Baseline conditions would not change.  resources that would be impacted by the project. However, any potential impacts to cultural resources would be avoided or mitigated in accordance with a Programmatic Agreement to be executed by the DOE, the Alliance, and the SHPO. In addition, other historic resources within the applicable area of potential effects would not be expected to incur any apparent or measurable impacts as the project would not be expected to   Historic sites or structures eligible for NRHP listing, either directly or by introducing visual, audible, or atmospheric elements that would adversely affect the historic resource;  Native American resources, including graves, remains, and funerary objects, either directly or by introducing visual, audible, or atmospheric elements that would adversely affect the resource’s use;  Paleontological resources eligible for listing as a National Natural Landmark; or  Cemeteries.  alter the setting or other aspects of integrity of these resources. The project would not introduce visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that diminish the integrity of the resource’s significant historic features. Operations: No Impacts: Operation of the proposed project would not be expected to have an adverse impact on cultural resources.  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered  No Action  Proposed Project  Land Use  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Since there are no applicable zoning and land  proposed project would:  Be incompatible with land use adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center and within and adjacent to the CO2 pipeline corridor,  Baseline conditions would not change.  use plans in unincorporated Morgan County, construction of the proposed project would not conflict with any designated county zoning plans. The educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would be designed to abide by the existing zoning and comprehensive plan.  CO2 storage study area, and associated  The Meredosia Energy Center property offers sufficient infrastructure to support most of  components/facilities;  the construction activities required for the oxy-combustion facility. Additional land area   Result in land use restrictions on adjacent properties; or  outside of the energy center would be used for construction staging and equipment laydown, but that land area would only be temporarily impacted as it would revert back to its original condition after construction. Impacts due to construction of the CO2   Conflict with regional or local land use  pipeline and injection well site(s) would be negligible to minor. Short-term impacts  plans and zoning.  would result from temporarily restricting access and disrupting the ability to use the land for existing purposes (e.g., agricultural crops); land would be returned to its original condition after construction to the extent practicable. Long-term impacts would occur in areas that require conversion of land, such as vegetated land, for the pipeline ROW and for the 25-acre CO2 injection well site(s). Construction of the educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would have negligible impacts since the Alliance would follow stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance. Operations: Negligible Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility would not conflict with any designated county zoning plans. Additionally, operation of the oxy-combustion facility would be compatible with the developed, industrial land use within and adjacent to the Meredosia Energy Center; therefore, impacts would be negligible. Impacts due to operation of the CO2 pipeline and injection well site(s) would be negligible to minor. Most of the land along the pipeline is agricultural and would continue to be used for agricultural purposes during operations. Operation of the injection well site(s) would result in minor impacts associated with permanently removing approximately 25 acres of mostly agricultural land from existing use. To the extent practicable, the Alliance would avoid net reductions in agricultural land. To replace acreages of land potentially removed from agricultural use due to the project, the Alliance would designate land that is currently not farmed as agricultural land. Land potentially placed into new agricultural use would be in the immediate vicinity of land taken out of agricultural use. Operation of the educational facilities in the city of Jacksonville would have negligible impacts since the Alliance would follow stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance.  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Aesthetics  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor to Moderate Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed  proposed project would:   Block or degrade a scenic vista or viewshed;  Baseline conditions would not change.  FutureGen 2.0 Project would result in temporary minor adverse impacts from increased visibility of construction activities to nearby sensitive receptors, as well as from fugitive dust, transportation, and noise. Temporary moderate impacts would occur as a result of the lighting required to support well drilling on a 24-hour per day basis.   Degrade or diminish a federal, state, or local scenic resource;  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operations of the project would result in minor impacts to aesthetics from the introduction of new buildings to the viewshed, including a   Change the area’s visual resources;  450-foot stack and associated steam plume. Minor impacts would occur to the   Create glare or illumination that would be obtrusive or incompatible with existing land use; or  viewshed from new utility lines constructed to the injection well site(s), placement of pipeline markers along the CO2 pipeline, and from the introduction of the new surface facilities at the injection well site(s). Additional minor impacts would occur from the permanent conversion of natural areas (i.e., forests or grasslands) to typically   Create visual intrusions or visual contrasts  revegetated grass in the areas of the pipeline ROW and injection well site(s). Periodic  affecting the quality of a landscape.  vegetation clearing and other maintenance activities would also result in negligible impacts.   Materials and Waste Management  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Negligible Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen  proposed project would:  Cause new sources of construction materials and operational supplies to be developed, such as new mining areas, processing plants, or fabrication plants;  Baseline conditions would not change.  2.0 Project would require the use of structural and other materials in quantities that would have negligible impact on local or regional supplies. Generation of construction wastes would be minimized through material management practices such as spill prevention for petroleum products and segregation of recyclable materials. Adequate disposal capacity exists in the region to handle any construction wastes that would be generated.   Affect the capacity of existing material suppliers and industries in the region;  Operations: Minor to Moderate Adverse Impacts: Project operation would require the following materials in the largest quantities: coal (approximately 700,000 tons per year),   Create wastes for which there are no  lime (approximately 43,000 tons per year), and trona (approximately 800 tons per year).  commercially available disposal or  These and other materials required to operate the proposed project are widely  treatment technologies;  available; their use in the project would not have a noticeable impact on local and   Create the need for a hazardous waste  regional supplies.   treatment, storage, or disposal permit for  The largest waste streams from operation of the project would consist of fly ash  the project;  (approximately 200,000 tons per year) and bottom ash (approximately 12,000 tons per   Affect the capacity of waste collection services, and treatment, storage, and disposal facilities;  year). The Meredosia Energy Center would attempt to sell fly ash by-product to local and regional businesses. Bottom ash, and any fly ash that is not beneficially reused, would be disposed of in permitted landfills. Disposal of these waste streams could have minor to moderate impact on local and regional disposal capacity. The project also has  the potential to generate small amounts of hazardous waste and non-hazardous municipal solid wastes from the oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, injection well  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered  No Action  Proposed Project  Materials and Waste Management (continued)  site(s), and educational facilities. These would be generally similar to waste streams historically generated at the energy center. These wastes would be collected and transported offsite for disposal in accordance with applicable regulations, and the amounts generated would not substantially affect local and regional treatment and disposal capacity.  Traffic and Transportation  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0  proposed project would:  Substantially increase daily vehicular traffic on key roadway segments and thereby degrade the level of service to exceed traffic-handling capacity;  Baseline conditions would not change.  Project would cause temporary and localized congestion, particularly on roadways close to the Meredosia Energy Center, and to a lesser extent, on roadways close to the other construction sites. However, construction would be temporary, and all roadways in the ROI have the capacity to accommodate traffic increases associated with the construction of all components of the proposed project without substantially degrading the level of service. Limited adverse effects due to additional barge traffic and   Substantially increase daily barge traffic on  offloading would be expected.  the Illinois River to exceed capacity and interfere with other users; or  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project would have long-term minor adverse effects on transportation resources resulting from   Conflict with regional or local transportation  increased vehicle and truck traffic. Operation would cause long-term but localized  improvement plans.  congestion, particularly on roadways close to the Meredosia Energy Center. The level of service would not change on any roadways during operations, when compared to a no-build scenario. The number of barge deliveries during operations is expected to be similar to or less than historical frequencies, and thus, adverse effects due to barge traffic transporting coal would be negligible. All roadways and waterways in the area would have the capacity for all traffic associated with operation of all components of the proposed project.  Noise  Impacts were assessed based on whether the proposed project would:  Conflict with any state or local noise ordinances;  Cause perceptible increases in ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors during construction—from either mobile or stationary sources;  No Impacts. Baseline conditions would not change.  Construction: Minor to Moderate Adverse Impacts: Construction noises at the Meredosia Energy Center could have a minor to moderate impact on the few nearest residences; however, due to the nature of construction, the noise would be intermittent and temporary until the construction phase is over. Construction of the pipeline would result in minor to moderate, short-term, and intermittent increases in noise and vibrations at receptors near the pipeline ROW due to construction equipment activity and increased truck traffic. Not accounting for natural attenuation, receptors at distances greater than approximately 830 feet during typical pipeline construction, or approximately 2,330 feet during trenchless boring activities,  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Noise (continued)   Cause long-term perceptible increases in  would hear the construction noise at levels below 65 dBA, which is the limit deemed as  ambient noise levels at sensitive receptors  normally acceptable to residential receptors. At the injection well site(s), the primary  during operations—from either mobile or  sources of noise during construction would be from drilling the wells and construction of  stationary sources; or  the supporting facilities. The drilling of the injection wells would occur over a   Cause excessive ground-borne vibration to persons or property.  continuous, 24-hour duration, 7 days a week, for approximately 13 weeks (90 days), and because of the duration, would be the dominant noise source. The Alliance would construct earthen noise berms around the well pad to mitigate the noise impact to the  nearest residences during this period. Ground vibrations from well drilling activities are expected to have negligible impact to nearby structures. Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: During operations, noise from the Meredosia Energy Center would either remain the same or be reduced in comparison to historical energy center operations. Similarly, noise levels during operations are expected to stay at the same level in comparison to current (post-2011) ambient conditions, since local noise levels are and will continue to be dominated by the existing Cargill facility and the highway IL-104. There would, however, be an increase in truck noise in the near vicinity of the energy center due to increased usage of trucks for coal delivery under the proposed project, compared to the historical use of barges as the primary means for coal delivery. The volume of truck traffic transporting feedstock (mainly coal and limestone) and removing wastes (mainly fly ash and bottom ash) would total approximately 88 daily roundtrips. This represents almost 50 additional roundtrips a day when compared to historic truck traffic volumes. Operations at the injection well site(s) under normal operating conditions would be dominated by the booster pumps and typical heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems. Since the nearest sensitive receptors at the injection well site(s) are expected to be farther than 500 feet away, the noise impacts from operational equipment at the injection well site(s) would be minor.  Utilities  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: Construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0  proposed project would:  Impact the effectiveness of existing utility infrastructure or cause temporary failure;  Baseline conditions would not change.  Project would result in increased demand for potable and process water, increased generation of wastewater, and increased electricity consumption. In addition, the placement of new electrical lines and the upgrade of electrical infrastructure would be required to support operation of the proposed project. Construction-related impacts to   Affect the capacity and distribution of local  water supplies would be short term and minor, while construction-related impacts to  and regional utility suppliers to meet the  wastewater treatment would be negligible. Overall impacts to utilities during  existing or anticipated demand; or  construction would be minor.   Require public utility system upgrades.  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Operation of the oxy-combustion facility would result in demand for potable and process water, generation of wastewater, electricity consumption and generation, and the potential need to upgrade electrical infrastructure  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES 4.1-11 DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project  Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project  Utilities (continued)  to operate the injection well site(s). Existing utilities have adequate capacity to handle additional demands. Operation of the injection well site(s) and educational facilities would result in increased demand for potable water and electricity, and increased generation of wastewater. Operations impacts to water supplies would be negligible. Overall impacts to utilities during operations would be minor.  Community Services  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Negligible Adverse Impacts: A temporary workforce of up to 1,000 would  proposed project would:  Displace, impede effective access to, or increase demand beyond available capacities of emergency response services, fire protection, law enforcement, healthcare facilities, and school systems in the ROI; or  Baseline conditions would not change.  be required during peak construction of the proposed project. These workers would likely be drawn from the existing workforce of the area; however, an undeterminable number of workers and associated families may relocate to the area temporarily. Existing community services (i.e., law enforcement, emergency response, hospitals, and education) are expected to be adequate to address the needs of the population in the ROI, including project personnel and their dependents. Existing emergency response capabilities are expected to be adequate to address potential accidents and other risks. Negligible impacts on community services would be expected.   Conflict with local and regional plans for emergency response services, fire protection, law enforcement, healthcare facilities, or school systems.  Operations: Negligible Adverse Impacts: Long-term operation of the project would require up to 158 new employees. It is likely that these workers would be drawn from the existing workforce of the area; however, an undeterminable number of workers and associated families may relocate to the area permanently. Existing community services (i.e., law enforcement, emergency response, hospitals, and education) are expected to be adequate to address the needs of the population in the ROI, including project personnel and their dependents. Existing emergency response capabilities are expected to be adequate to address potential accidents and other risks. Negligible impacts on community services would be expected.  Human Health and Safety  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Minor Adverse Impacts: The potential for worker injuries would be  proposed project would:  Increase worker health risks due to industrial accidents, injuries, or illnesses  Baseline conditions would not change.  present during construction of the proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project. Based on the incident rate for utility system construction, the number of lost work days is estimated to be 12.5 over the entire construction period for all project components.   during construction and normal operating  Operations: Minor Adverse Impacts: Accidents and lost work days during operation of  conditions;  the oxy-combustion facility could occur. The two liquid oxygen tanks at the facility pose   Increase public health risks due to accidental releases of CO2 or other trace gases associated with captured CO2 during transport, active geologic storage activities,  the highest potential consequences if an accident were to occur, which could affect workers, but not the general public. However, such accidents are extremely unlikely to occur (i.e., the potential for an accident to occur is between once in 10,000 years and once in a million years).  and following closure of the injection wells;  The potential for accidents involving the CO2 pipeline are considered to be unlikely (i.e.,  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES 4.1-12 Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered No Action Proposed Project DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES or  Increase public health risks due to intentional destructive acts. the potential to occur between once in 100 years and once in 10,000 years). Workers in the vicinity of a pipeline puncture or rupture would be most susceptible to harm due largely to potential physical effects related to high-pressure and the velocity of the release, as well as from exposure to extreme temperature drops which could cause frost-bite. In addition, high concentrations of CO2 would be present in the narrow band of CO2 escaping from the leak site. Immediate life threatening effects related to asphyxiation from short-term exposure to these high concentrations (i.e., exposure to CO2 at concentrations that exceed 100,000 ppmv) could occur; however, workers would likely be able to flee the areas with high concentration due to the visual, physical, and audible signs associated with the event. A pipeline rupture or puncture would potentially cause exposure and risk to the public as the CO2 expands and disperses creating a vapor plume. The potential maximum reasonably foreseeable accident scenario or exposure distances would occur with a pipeline rupture under calm meteorological conditions. There would be no effects to the general public from this type of rupture beyond a distance where CO2 concentrations would exceed 5,000 parts per million, which over a 60-minute time period, could extend to a distance of up to 1,301 feet. Transient effects, which include temporary symptoms such as headache, dizziness, sweating, and/or vague feelings of discomfort, could occur within these distances. Irreversible or serious adverse effects could occur within exposure distances of up to 118 feet from the rupture site, and the potential for life-threatening effects from exposures could occur within up to 58 feet. The Alliance pipeline siting criteria includes a minimum distance of 150 feet from any occupied structure, which is greater than the distances at which exposures would result in serious adverse effects or life-threatening effects. Exposure distances would be much shorter under meteorological conditions with wind levels greater than calm, when more air movement and subsequent chemical dissipation would occur. Potential health impacts from accidental releases of CO2 from the injection wells, considered to be extremely unlikely events, would be limited in extent to 92 feet from the well site. Release of CO2 following the end of injection operations are not expected to result in ambient air concentrations above established health criteria; thus health effects to the public would not be expected. Potential health effects could occur from exposure to trace gases in the pipeline and injection wells (hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfur trioxide); however, under normal operating conditions these components are not expected be present in measurable concentrations.  Potential effects from catastrophic or intentional destructive acts are expected to be similar to the above impacts. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES COMPARATIVE IMPACTS OF ALTERNATIVES Table 4.1-1. Summary of Environmental Impacts by Alternative for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Criteria Considered  No Action  Proposed Project  Socioeconomics  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Beneficial Impacts: Spending and employment for the proposed project  proposed project would:  Displace existing population or demolish existing housing;  Baseline conditions would not change.  would generally result in net beneficial impacts to socioeconomic conditions during construction. A temporary increase in population caused by a slight influx of construction workers from outside the ROI would not have an adverse impact on population and housing. There is adequate capacity in the region to meet the labor   Alter projected rates of population growth;  force demand and the project is expected to benefit the regional economy.   Affect the housing market;  Operations: Beneficial Impacts: Spending and employment for operations of the proposed project would generally result in net beneficial impacts to socioeconomic conditions. In addition, the potential influx of workers for project operations would not have a substantial effect on regional population and housing.   Environmental Justice  Impacts were assessed based on whether the  No Impacts.  Construction: Negligible Adverse Impacts: No disproportionately high and adverse  proposed project would:  Cause a significant and disproportionately  Baseline conditions would not change.  impacts to minority and low-income populations are anticipated during construction of the project.  high and adverse effect on a minority  Operations: Negligible Adverse Impacts: No disproportionately high and adverse  population; or  impacts to minority and low-income populations are anticipated during operation of the   Cause a significant and disproportionately  project.  high and adverse effect on a low-income  population.  CO2 = carbon dioxide; dBA = A-weighted sound level in decibels; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; GHG = greenhouse gas; gpd = gallons per day; I-# = Illinois Highway; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; mgd = million gallons per day; MVA = monitoring, verification, and accounting; MWe = megawatt electrical;  NRHP = National Register of Historic Places; ppmv = parts per million by volume; ROI = region of influence; ROW = right-of-way; SHPO = State Historic Preservation Office; UIC = Underground Injection Control; USACE = U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; USDW = underground sources of drinking water 4.2 MEASURES TO MITIGATE ADVERSE IMPACTS 4.2.1 Introduction The CEQ NEPA regulations direct the lead agency for an EIS to “include appropriate mitigation measures not already included in the proposed action or alternatives” (40 CFR 1502.14(f)). The regulations further define “mitigation” (40 CFR 1508.20) to include: (a) Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action. (b) Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation. (c) Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment. (d) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action. (e) Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments. Per established protocols, procedures, and requirements, the Alliance would comply with all applicable federal, state, or municipal regulations and ordinances, as well as associated permitting processes, through the implementation of standard operating procedures and BMPs. These are generally required by environmental regulatory mandates applicable to the design, construction, and operation of the project. The Alliance has also incorporated additional measures into the project to reduce impacts. Therefore, as the lead agency for the EIS, DOE considers that these mitigation measures are “already included in the proposed action or alternatives” consistent with 40 CFR 1502.14(f). DOE has also explored the range of reasonable mitigation measures, beyond those included in the proposed action or alternatives. If DOE decides to proceed with the proposed action, the ROD will “state whether all practicable means to avoid or minimize environmental harm from the alternative selected have been adopted, and if not, why they were not” in conformance with the CEQ NEPA regulations (40 CFR 1505.2(c)). For those additional mitigation measures deemed appropriate in its ROD, DOE will adopt and describe a monitoring and enforcement program to ensure that the measures would be implemented (40 CFR 1505.2(c)). 4.2.2 Mitigation Measure Summary by Resource Area This section provides a consolidated summary of the mitigation measures applicable to each environmental resource area, which are also described for each resource area in Chapter 3 of this EIS. For each resource area, both for the construction and operation phases, Table 4.2-1 summarizes the measures that would be implemented by the Alliance to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, as well as additional measures that the Alliance would incorporate into the project to further reduce potential impacts. These are the measures that DOE considers to be already included in the proposed action. In a final grouping under construction and operation respectively for each resource area, Table 4.2-1 outlines possible additional measures identified to further reduce impacts. Other measures also may be identified as appropriate during public review and comment on the Draft EIS. The Alliance will collect additional information about the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of other available mitigation measures during final design. If DOE decides to proceed with the proposed action after publication of the Final EIS, the ROD will identify any additional specific mitigation measures selected as appropriate for implementation and funding in conjunction with the proposed action, and DOE will state why other measures would not be adopted. The additional mitigation measures would be the subject of a monitoring and enforcement program for the implementation of the proposed action. Resource Mitigation Measures Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures Climate and Construction Greenhouse Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances: Gases  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Use appropriate BMPs to reduce equipment and vehicle emissions (including GHGs) by such practices as maintaining engines according to manufacturers’ specifications, minimizing idling of equipment while not in use, and using electricity from the grid if available to reduce the use of diesel or gasoline generators for operating construction equipment. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Develop and implement a USEPA-approved site-specific monitoring, reporting, and verification plan for CO2 injection wells per Subpart RR of the Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gases Rule. The plan would assure that the GHGs are being sequestered safely and according to design and permit requirements; thereby serving to effectively reduce GHG levels in the atmosphere. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Use appropriate BMPs to reduce equipment and vehicle emissions (including GHGs) by such practices as maintaining engines according to manufacturers’ specifications and minimizing idling of equipment while not in use. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Resource Mitigation Measures Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures Geology Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Obtain UIC Class VI permits from the USEPA and construct the injection wells in accordance with Class VI well construction standards and UIC permit requirements to prevent movement of fluids into or between USDWs or other zones and prevent drilling mud from infiltrating shallower aquifers during the construction of the wells. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Use CO2-resistive cement in the injection and confining formations to prevent CO2 leaks.  Install surface casing through the base of the lowermost USDW and cemented to the surface to maintain well integrity and to prevent the upward migration of CO2.  Ensure a competent cement seal along the length of the injection wells through the caprock formation and into the top of the Mt. Simon Formation to maintain well integrity and to prevent upward migration of CO2. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Operate wells in accordance with the UIC permits, which would specify operating and monitoring criteria for the CO2 injection to prevent the migration of CO2 from the injection zone and to ensure the protection of USDWs.  Implement the MVA plan and use subsurface monitoring to assess the potential for migration of CO2 out of the injection zone.   Conduct mechanical integrity testing on the injection wells by continuously monitoring injection pressure, flow rate, and injected volumes, and annular pressure and fluid volume.   Conduct annual testing using down-hole geophysical logs or surveys to verify CO2 retention. Annual testing may decrease to once every 5 years with each successful test.   Temporarily halt CO2 injection and assess the situation if well integrity issues are identified, if there are seismic effects, or if there are abnormal readings in order to ensure CO2 retention in the reservoir.  Reevaluate the AoR at least every 5 years after the issuance of a UIC Class VI permits, as required under 40 CFR 146.84(b)(2)(i). This reevaluation would consider the volume of CO2 that has been injected during the previous 5 years, the pressure at which it has been injected, and the resulting CO2 plume, as determined by ongoing monitoring in accordance with the UIC permits. Any changes to the AoR as a result of the reevaluation could also trigger changes to the MVA monitoring protocol. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Sample groundwater from up to 10 nearby farm/residential wells to verify that the project has no adverse environmental impacts.  Install a multi-level monitoring well to monitor the pressure and geochemical changes in the injection zone to assess the potential for excessive pressure build up and injection-induced seismicity.  Use remote sensing technology or install surface tiltmeters. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Resource Mitigation Measures Surface Water Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Comply with the CWA Section 404 permitting process to avoid, reduce, and mitigate potential impacts to waters of the U.S. during construction. Mitigation would follow the USACE Compensatory Mitigation Policy for Illinois and would be determined through Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures coordination with both the USACE St. Louis and Rock Island Districts as applicable.  Comply with the NPDES and Section 401 Water Quality Certification permitting process via the IEPA to reduce and prevent potential impacts to waters of the U.S. during construction of the proposed project.  Develop and implement an IEPA-approved SWPPP (to address erosion prevention measures, sediment control measures, permanent stormwater management, dewatering, environmental inspection and maintenance, and final stabilization) as required by the IEPA, in accordance with a general NPDES Permit for construction. The SWPPP would incorporate principles of the Illinois Urban Manual (AISWCD 2012) and would direct the mitigation of potential impacts from stormwater runoff and discharges during construction.    Pursuant to 40 CFR 112 of the CWA, the existing SPCC plan at the Meredosia Energy Center would be modified within six months of beginning construction to reflect new facility operations regarding the storage and managements of petroleum, oils, and other lubricants at the facility. The SPCC plan would implement measures to prevent releases of oil to adjacent surface waters, and would identify and determine response action procedures to reduce impacts in the event of a spill. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Use soil stabilization measures (e.g., seeding, mulching, or matting) to reduce erosion of soils exposed during construction to prevent sedimentation impacts to streams during storm events.  Stabilize temporary access roads, haul roads, parking areas, laydown, material storage and other onsite vehicle transportation routes as soon as practicable after grading to reduce the erosion potential.  Preserve natural vegetation as much as practicable, but especially in critical areas such as on steep slopes and in areas adjacent to watercourses, swales, or wetlands to reduce potential for sedimentation impacts to streams during storm events.  Maximize use of existing roads in planning site access to reduce vegetation disturbance and the potential for erosion and sedimentation impacts to streams during storm events.  Keep construction materials, debris, construction chemicals, construction staging, fueling, etc. at a safe distance from surface waters. Remove spoil, debris, piling, construction materials, and any other obstructions resulting from or used during construction as soon as practicable. These measures would reduce the potential for contamination of surface waters from accidental spills and would reduce the potential for construction debris to enter surface waters.  Use trenchless technologies, such as horizontal directional drilling and jack and bore tunneling, for crossings of all waterbodies to avoid impacts to surface waters.   In the event that trenching is used for crossings of dry stream (ephemeral and intermittent) channels, design pipeline crossings using the most direct route and construct water crossings during periods of low flow conditions to the extent practicable. Use crossing sites that have low, stable banks, a firm stream bottom, and minimal surface runoff when possible. These measures would reduce disturbance to streambeds and surface waters during pipeline installation.  Any stormwater runoff exposed to the coal storage and ash area (including coal pile runoff, coal handling dust suppression water, coal handling equipment wash-down water, and stormwater from the coal yard) would be diverted to the new lined settling basin through berms and above-ground conveyance systems. The basin would be lined to detain water and provide settling for removal of suspended solids. After an appropriate detention time, the wastewater would flow to the wastewater treatment system for treatment and then would be discharged to the Illinois River in accordance with an NPDES permit. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  Where practical, consider weather and ground conditions when scheduling construction activities to reduce potential impacts to surface waters, such as erosion and the spread of contaminants that may be exacerbated by sheet flow during storm events. Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  The CWA requirement for the development and implementation of an SPCC plan during operation of the project would direct prevention, control, and response to releases of oil that could potentially contaminate surface waters.  The project would operate under the existing NPDES Permit (NPDES Permit IL0000116) which would impose monitoring requirements and effluent discharge standards to protect water quality in the Illinois River.  In accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard 31.44 (ASME 31.44) and 49 CFR 195, MLBVs would be installed along the CO2 pipeline approximately every 15 miles to isolate and contain any leak and would also be installed on either side of major river crossings, at other waterbody crossings of more than 100 feet wide from high water mark to high water mark, and optionally at major road crossings. These measures would serve to prevent and reduce adverse impacts to surface waters in the unlikely event of a pipeline rupture. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Provide proper drainage systems to and from paved arterial roads to the injection wells to the extent heavy vehicle traffic is expected.  Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  Use water conservation measures to the maximum extent practicable (e.g., efficient landscaping and recycling wastewater). Resource Mitigation Measures Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  To avoid potential violations of the MBTA, the Alliance would perform initial land clearing activities and vegetative maintenance activities either outside of the migratory bird nesting season (April 1 to July 31) or would conduct a survey for migratory bird nests immediately prior to land clearing activities. Should any nests be found, the Alliance would either re-design the appropriate project component or alter the construction schedule to avoid the take of any individuals.  To avoid potential violations of the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act, a survey for bald eagle nests would be performed prior to the commencement of land clearing activities in the vicinity of the Meredosia Energy Center. The Alliance would coordinate with the USFWS on the results of the survey to determine whether any mitigation or permitting measures should be employed or pursued.  If the Alliance undertakes activities related to the barge unloading facility that would disturb the river bottom, then prior to initiating construction within the proposed barge unloading area, a survey for the ebonyshell (a state-listed threatened species) would be performed by a qualified biologist. Should the species be found, the area would be avoided, if practicable, or coordination would occur with USFWS and IDNR to determine the appropriate course of action. Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures  Once the proposed CO2 pipeline route and injection well site(s) are identified, surveys for federal- and state-listed species would be performed by a qualified biologist in areas where suitable habitat could be present. Should any federal- or state- threatened or endangered species be found, the proposed project would be sited to avoid potential impacts, or coordination would occur with USFWS to determine the appropriate course of action.  To avoid potential violations of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, and as requested by IDNR, a Conservation Plan would be developed and implemented for the Illinois chorus frog and any other protected species. The plan would summarize the measures that would be taken should any protected species be encountered during construction activities. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  Implement measures to avoid the spread of invasive plants, such as washing long-term construction equipment prior to being brought to the construction site to reduce the potential for introduction of invasive seeds that may have been picked up at other locations. Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  In accordance with Section 316(b) of the CWA, maintain withdrawal rates for the river water intake at the Meredosia Energy Center at or below a maximum velocity of 0.5 feet per second to reduce the number of fish trapped against intake screens. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures Land Use Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Comply with pipeline siting protocol in 49 CFR 195 (“Transportation of Hazardous Liquids by Pipeline”) and 220 ILCS 20 Illinois Gas Pipeline Safety Act which require pipeline ROWs to avoid, as far as practicable, areas containing private dwellings, industrial buildings, and places of public assembly per 49 CFR 195.210 (“Pipeline Location”). The pipeline would not be located within 50 feet of any private dwelling, or any industrial building or place of public assembly in which persons work, congregate, or assemble, unless it is provided with at least 12 inches of soil cover in addition to that prescribed in 49 CFR 195.248 (“Cover Over Buried Pipeline”).  Obtain necessary legal ROW easements for utility corridors.  The Alliance would abide by stipulations of the Jacksonville Zoning Ordinance in locating the proposed educational facilities within the corporate limits of Jacksonville and contiguous territory within 1.5 miles beyond. Additionally, the Jacksonville comprehensive plan and future land use plans would be used during site coordination and selection, and the Alliance would coordinate with the Jacksonville Regional Economic Development Corporation during the site identification process. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Adhere to IDOA Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies outlined in the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement to help preserve the integrity of any agricultural land that would be impacted by pipeline construction.  The Alliance would reduce potential impacts on agricultural production and land use within and adjacent to the ROW for the pipeline by conducting construction activities outside of the planting and growing seasons to the extent practicable.  To the extent practicable, the Alliance would locate the pipeline no closer than 150 feet from residences, which surpasses the 50-foot separation distance required by 49 CFR 195. Examples of when a shorter distance would be used (but not less than 50 feet as required by federal law) would include when necessary to avoid a sensitive environmental resource or at the request of an affected landowner.  To the extent practicable, the pipeline would be located along existing ROWs. In addition, access to the construction ROW for the pipeline would be provided from existing roads that cross the pipeline route to the extent practicable.  In cases where the pipeline would bisect a property, the pipeline would be designed to incorporate suitable crossings by placing the pipeline underground, engineering the pipeline to withstand the weight of typical rural or residential vehicles (i.e., cars, trucks, tractors), and maintaining property owner access throughout the entire property.  Potential impacts to agricultural land crossed by the pipeline would be mitigated by restoring the land to its original condition to the extent practicable and allowing the current land use to resume after construction.  Arrangements would be made between landowners and the Alliance to reduce the longterm impacts on agricultural land use or other activities around the proposed injection facilities.  To the extent practicable, avoid net reductions in agricultural land, including taking measures to replace lands taken out of agricultural use with land that can be placed into agricultural use. Land placed into new agricultural use would be in the immediate vicinity of land taken out of agricultural use. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Utility and transportation corridors would be maintained in accordance with ROW Resource Mitigation Measures provisions that would incorporate the objectives of the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with IDOA for the avoidance of impacts on agricultural lands. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  The Alliance would reduce potential impacts on agricultural production and land use within and adjacent to the operational ROW for the pipeline by conducting maintenance activities outside of the planting and growing seasons to the extent practicable. Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Transport construction materials and wastes in accordance with DOT and IDOT regulations pertaining to proper packaging, labeling, and response to releases.  Manage wastes in compliance with RCRA regulations pertaining to storage, labeling, containment, and disposal.  Develop and implement an SPCC plan per the Oil Pollution Prevention regulation under the CWA to prevent, control, and respond to releases of oil. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Reduce the storage of hazardous materials and generation of hazardous wastes at construction sites to the extent practicable.  Remove construction and demolition waste materials from construction sites on a regular basis and recycle whenever possible.  Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures  Restrict use of oil, solvents, and other hazardous materials to designated areas equipped with spill containment measures (e.g., secondary containment) appropriate to the hazard and volume of material being stored on the construction site.  Cover hazardous material storage areas.  Include adequate valving, interlocks, safety systems (fogging, foaming, secondary containment, berms, spill prevention, instrumentation, ambient monitoring systems, alarms, etc.) in the design and engineering of reagent and other chemical feed storage systems.  Install process drains, sumps, and secondary containment structures to capture any inadvertent spills, leaks, and washdown of the area and/or equipment.  Synthetic (plastic) sheeting (30-mil thick or greater) would be laid down beneath mud pits (steel tanks) and associated circulation equipment, including mud pumps to prevent releases of drilling fluids to the ground surface. The drilling contractor would also install a synthetic liner beneath the rig (rig underliner).  The drilling contractor would maintain an inventory of absorbent materials (e.g., pads and booms) in order to respond to any release of engine oil, hydraulic oil, diesel fuel, gasoline, antifreeze, drilling fluids or any other contaminants as a result of the driller’s activities.   Any spills involving fuel or other liquid or dry chemicals would be cleaned up immediately, including any affected soil. Used spill cleanup materials as well as any affected soil would be contained and disposed of properly. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  Conduct transportation of materials and wastes in accordance with DOT regulations pertaining to proper packaging, labeling, and response to releases.  Manage wastes in compliance with RCRA regulations pertaining to storage, labeling, containment, and disposal.  Develop and implement an SPCC plan per the Oil Pollution Prevention regulation under the CWA to prevent, control, and respond to releases of oil during operations. Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  Perform refueling, lubrication, and degreasing of vehicles and heavy equipment in designated areas. Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Resource Mitigation Measures Noise Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  During construction of the injection wells, noise mitigation berms would be constructed around the drill rig site to reduce noise levels at nearby receptors during drilling operations.  Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  To the extent practical, onsite project construction work that would generate noise would be limited to daylight hours when people are generally less sensitive to noise.   The Alliance would evaluate potential mitigation measures to ensure that noise effects to sensitive receptors remain less-than-significant, particularly due to the 24-hour operational schedule associated with pipeline trenchless boring techniques and injection well drilling. Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Utilities  Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  To reduce the possible interference with existing overhead or buried utility lines, proposed construction ROWs would have sufficient width to allow for the safe addition of construction equipment and proposed project-related infrastructure and facilities.  Resource Mitigation Measures Construction Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  Assess the sufficiency of local first responders to support project needs and develop and implement a plan to fill any identified gaps. Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated Into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Resource Mitigation Measures Socio-Construction economics Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None Table 4.2-1. Mitigation Measures for the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project Resource Mitigation Measures  Operations Measures Required by Laws, Regulations, Permits, and Ordinances:  None Measures Incorporated into the FutureGen 2.0 Project to Reduce Impacts:  None Possible Additional Measures Identified to Further Reduce Impacts:  None ANSI = American National Standards Institute; AoR = Area of Review; API = American Petroleum Institute; ASSE = American Society of Safety Engineers; BMP = best management practice; CFR = Code of Federal Regulations; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CWA = Clean Water Act; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; DOT = U.S. Department of Transportation; GHG = greenhouse gas; IAC = Illinois Administrative Code; IDOT = Illinois Department of Transportation; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; IDOA = Illinois Department of Agriculture; IEPA = Illinois Environmental Protection Agency; ILCS = Illinois Compiled Statutes; MBTA = Migratory Bird Treaty Act; MLBV = mainline block valve; MVA = monitoring, verification, and accounting; NHPA = National Historic Preservation Act; NETL = National Energy Technology Laboratory; NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; NRCS = Natural Resource Conservation Service; NWI = National Wetland Inventory; RCRA = Resource Conservation Recovery Act; ROW = right-of-way; SCADA = supervisory control and data acquisition; SHPO = State Historic Preservation Office; SOP = standard operating procedure; SPCC = Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures; SWPPP = Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan; UIC = Underground Injection Control; U.S. = United States; USACE = U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; USDA = U.S. Department of Agriculture; USDW = underground source of drinking water; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 4.3 POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS 4.3.1 Background Compliance with NEPA requires an analysis of cumulative impacts for each alternative (40 CFR 1508.25(c)(3)). Cumulative impacts are the collective result of the incremental impacts of an action that, when added to the impacts of other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions, would affect the same resources, regardless of what agency or person undertakes those actions (40 CFR 1508.7). Cumulative impacts can result from actions that have individually minor impacts but that collectively impose significant impacts over a period of time. DOE considers a reasonably foreseeable action to be a future action that has a realistic expectation of occurring. These include, but are not limited to, actions under analysis by a regulatory agency, proposals being considered by state or local planners, plans that have begun implementation, or future actions that have been funded. Humans have been altering the area in which the FutureGen 2.0 Project would be constructed and operated since people began settling the region more than 7,000 years ago (Illinois State Museum 2012). In combination with natural processes, these past and ongoing activities have produced the affected environment, which is described in detail in Chapter 3 of this EIS. The impacts of the proposed project on the existing environment are also described in Chapter 3. In this section, DOE describes the potential for cumulative impacts of the project and reasonably foreseeable future actions in the region that would or could affect the same environmental resources. The following subsections describe the process DOE used to identify potential cumulative impact issues and the reasonably foreseeable future development actions potentially occurring in the area. 4.3.2 Analysis Methodology DOE analyzed potential cumulative impacts on environmental resources within the ROIs defined for respective resource areas in Chapter 3. Depending on the resource area, the ROI consists of a human community or political boundary (e.g., a county, city, or neighborhood); an area based on typical natural resource boundaries (e.g., a watershed or defined ecological region); a resource as described on a regional, national, or global level (e.g., air quality within an AQCR); or an area of effect dependent on locations of project disturbances (e.g., the footprint of disturbance for the CO2 pipeline ROW). Instances where the ROI was defined as an area of project disturbance in Chapter 3 also generally include areas of disturbance anticipated for the foreseeable future actions. DOE assigned levels of importance for potential cumulative impacts on respective environmental resources by beginning with the potential impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project on each environmental resource, as described in Chapter 3. Cumulative impacts relate to the incremental effects of multiple actions occurring in the same ROI; therefore, DOE next considered other ongoing and foreseeable actions affecting the same ROI for each resource that would add incrementally to the potential impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Finally, DOE considered public comments received during scoping, the interests of governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and past experience with other similar proposed projects in assigning levels of importance to a resource subject. Accordingly, DOE considered the potential for cumulative impacts affecting resource subjects as high, intermediate, or low in importance, based on the criteria discussed below. DOE considered cumulative impacts affecting a resource to be of high importance if the following occurred:  The incremental effect of the FutureGen 2.0 Project alone as analyzed in Chapter 3 would cause a significant impact in the context of NEPA review and analysis.  An analysis of cumulative impacts for this issue would be necessary to support a reasoned decision among the alternatives.  Society, in general, has a history or record of being concerned about this type of cumulative impact and two or more of the factors of intermediate importance are present. DOE considered cumulative impacts affecting a resource to be of intermediate importance if the following occurred:  The incremental addition by the FutureGen 2.0 Project to the impacts of other foreseeable actions may cause a regulatory/resource threshold or physical limit (e.g., utility capacity) to be exceeded or approach an exceedance, and this effect would be significant from the viewpoint of NEPA review, federal decision making, and public disclosure.  There is a governmental organization or nationally recognized nongovernmental organization that has a history or record of being concerned about the potential cumulative effect.  The cumulative effect issue was raised during the scoping process by either a governmental organization or by more than one nongovernmental entity or person, and the particular issue is not irrelevant or inconsequential in federal decision making.  The issue is indicated to be important judging by the fact that one or more governmental or nongovernmental organizations have published statistics or trends on the issue. DOE considered cumulative impacts affecting a resource to be of low importance if the following occurred:  The potential impact does not exhibit any of the indicators listed in the two categories above.  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would contribute no impacts, negligible impacts, or would result only in beneficial impacts. By applying the above criteria to the environmental resources analyzed in Chapter 3, and considering the potential impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project as described therein, DOE assigned the levels of importance to resource subjects as listed in Table 4.3-1.  Table 4.3-1. Levels of Importance of the Potential for Cumulative Impacts by Resource Level of Environmental Resource Principal Basis for Level of Importance Importance Air Quality Intermediate have published statistics and identified trends on the issue. An analysis of cumulative impacts would be necessary to support a Climate and Greenhouse High reasoned decision for the proposed project, because effects on Gases global climate are recognized to be cumulative in nature. Physiography and Soils Intermediate in the region. An analysis of cumulative impacts would be necessary to support a reasoned decision for the proposed project, because cumulative Geology High effects of geologic CO2 storage from multiple sources in the same geologic formation have regional implications and the public has a history of concern about the issue. Groundwater Intermediate Wetlands and Floodplains Table 4.3-1. Levels of Importance of the Potential for Cumulative Impacts by Resource Environmental Resource  Level of Importance  Principal Basis for Level of Importance  Surface Water  Intermediate  Government and nongovernmental organizations have a history of concern about potential cumulative effects on surface waters and have published statistics and identified trends on the issue.  Biological Resources Cultural Resources Land Use Aesthetics Materials and Wastes Traffic and Transportation Noise and Vibration Utilities Community Services Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate Low Low Human Health and Safety Intermediate The FutureGen 2.0 Project would contribute net beneficial impacts Socioeconomics Low to the effects on socioeconomic conditions. Environmental Justice Low CO2 = carbon dioxide; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy DOE focused the cumulative impacts analysis for the FutureGen 2.0 Project in this EIS on the resources considered as having high or intermediate potential for cumulative effects in Table 4.3-1. These resources and potential impacts are described further in Section 4.3.4. The two environmental resources considered to have a high potential for cumulative impacts, Climate and GHGs, and Geology, are discussed in greater detail at the end of that section. DOE considered the following four environmental resources as having a low potential for cumulative impacts:  Utilities   Community Services  Socioeconomics   Environmental Justice In the case of each of these resources, the low potential for cumulative impacts is based on the negligible to beneficial impacts caused by the FutureGen 2.0 Project, which would result in no substantive incremental effects when added to the impacts of ongoing and foreseeable future actions. As cumulative impacts are not expected for these four resources identified as having a low level of importance, they are not discussed further in the cumulative impact analysis for this EIS. 4.3.3 Foreseeable Future Actions Considered For this cumulative impacts analysis, the predicted environmental effects of specific actions were considered together with those of the FutureGen 2.0 Project to produce a description of the combined or cumulative environmental impacts. To identify specific actions that might impose cumulative environmental effects in the region, DOE sought information on specific projects, developments, or activities, which might have effects on environmental resources that would overlap with those of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. This effort included a search for electric power projects, CO2 geologic storage projects, large industrial facilities, transportation projects, large commercial developments, municipal projects, and other such projects in the Morgan County area. DOE focused primarily on actions within a 30-mile radius of FutureGen 2.0 Project components, while also considering the ROI established for each respective resource area. DOE also searched for foreseeable future energy-related projects beyond this radius that could have a potential cumulative impact on air quality, climate and GHGs, and geology. Seven reasonably foreseeable projects were identified as described in Table 4.3-2. Distance to Project Action Location Description Available Documentation Feature DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS Facility third-party entity. This sale included the fuel oil storage tanks, the current unloading facility, and the pipeline connecting these two features, as well as a parcel of land directly south of the fuel oil storage tanks. The land south of the tanks includes the meadow located south of the ash haul road between the closed fly ash pond to the west and the wooded area to the east. The new ownership plans to construct a new truck unloading facility on the parcel of land south of the storage tanks. Fuel would be transported to the tanks by river vessels and would then be distributed from the tanks to trucks. The trucks would traverse between the chemical plant and the energy center; not through the energy center property. Table 4.3-2. Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions Considered Action  Location  Distance to Project Feature  Description  Available Documentation  US-67  Meredosia, IL  3 miles (from  The purpose of this project is to provide a modern highway  http://www.dot.state.il.us/desenv/rt67i  Improvements  area  Meredosia Energy  from Macomb to Jacksonville and improve transportation  mpact/us67_hp.html  Center) Less than 1 mile (from CO2 pipeline)  continuity and efficiency, enhance economic stability and development, and upgrade rural access. The construction schedule is not currently available but is underway near the project area1 .  and http://www.dot.state.il.us/us67/index.ht ml     Midwest  Decatur, IL  60 miles (east of CO2  The purpose of the project is to demonstrate the ability of the  http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/nepap  Geological  storage study area)  Mt. Simon Formation to accept and retain approximately  ub/nepa_documents/RedDont/EA- Sequestration  1.1 million tons (1.0 million metric tons) of injected CO2 over  1626-FEA-2008.pdf  Consortium Phase III Large-Scale Field Test  a 3-year period. Construction included a CO2 compression/dehydration facility, one injection well, monitoring and verification wells, and associated infrastructure (pipeline, ductwork, etc.). CO2 is being  and http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/pr ess/2011/111121_co2_injection.html  (i.e., Illinois  obtained from Archer Daniels Midland’s existing fuel-grade  Basin-Decatur  ethanol production facility. Construction is completed and  Project)  CO2 injection began in November 2011. The CO2 injection  rate at this location is approximately 1,100 tons per day  (1,000 metric tons per day).  DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS 1 http://www.gettingaroundillinois.com/gai.htm?mt=ann Distance to Project Action Location Description Available Documentation Feature DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS CO2 = carbon dioxide; IGCC = Industrial Carbon Capture and Sequestration; IL = Illinois; kV = kilovolt; MGSC = Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium 4.3.4 Cumulative Impacts 4.3.4.1 Summary of Cumulative Impacts DOE determined potential cumulative impacts on individual resource areas by combining the anticipated impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project with other foreseeable future projects, as listed in Table 4.3-2, using publicly available information on those projects. The effects of past actions are already encompassed within the affected environment as described in Chapter 3 of this EIS; however, a general description of the history of development in the region follows for the purpose of summarizing trends. Historically, the general area of the proposed project consisted of bottomland deciduous forests and swamp forests, upland mixed oak forests, and extensive prairie grassland communities. Following European settlement, the natural land cover and vegetation communities have been considerably altered for agricultural uses with more than 75 percent of the land area currently used as cropland or pastureland. There is some oil and gas production, and some areas have been affected by extensive surface and underground coal mining; however, historical mining activity peaked about a century ago. The area contains numerous perennial streams and rivers with major waterways, such as the Illinois River, having a large influence on the surrounding landscape (Commission for Environmental Cooperation 2011). There are relatively small scattered municipalities, with Jacksonville being the largest in Morgan County, though urban land covers are not extensive in the area. Native Americans had first settled the region and began farming nearly 7,000 years before the first European settlers began arriving in Morgan County in 1818 (the year Illinois gained statehood) (Illinois State Museum 2012). Jacksonville was established as the Morgan County seat in 1825, and the attraction of fertile Illinois soils brought settlers to the area at a fast pace. In the early 1830s, Jacksonville was the most populous municipality in the state. In the 1850s, the Jacksonville area grew considerably, primarily on the continued expansion of agricultural activities, including the production of wheat, pork, and cattle, and the expansion of railroad access, which provided means to transport local products and import from other areas of the country. During the 1900s, numerous businesses started operation in Morgan County, which were mainly associated with agricultural activities. Numerous non-agricultural manufacturing businesses were also developed in Morgan County, primarily in the Jacksonville area, such as the Eli Bridge Company, the world's oldest manufacturer of Ferris wheels and other amusement rides, and the current Pactiv, LLC manufacturing facility, which produces a number of plastic storage and waste management products (City of Jacksonville 2012d). The overall population of Morgan County has remained relatively constant since 1900, which reflects the agrarian nature of the area. The population of the county was approximately 36,400 in 1900 and 35,500 in 2010 and has not fluctuated below 33,500 or above 37,500 during that time; the high occurred in 1910 (USCB 1994; USCB 2010e). Thus, the historic trend of land alteration from natural cover types to human altered types was likely related primarily to the rate at which agricultural lands were developed. Typically, agricultural activities involve the conversion of naturally vegetated areas to stands of monolithic crops (e.g., corn and soybeans). In the case of animal grazing in pastureland, the activities of the animals generally make areas unsuitable for typical native vegetation through directly consuming plants and trampling on and compacting soils. In addition, agricultural activities occurring near surface waters can have substantial negative effects on surface waters through nonpoint source pollution caused by use of fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides as well as the generation of animal wastes. Table 4.3-3 describes cumulative impacts on each resource area that DOE assigned as having high or intermediate potential for cumulative environmental impacts. The impact analyses presented in Table 4.3-3 use the same characterizations for impacts (beneficial, negligible, minor, moderate, substantial) as defined in Section 4.1, Comparative Impacts of Alternatives. The table is followed by discussions of Climate and Greenhouse Gases as well as Geology, which are the only resource areas considered to be of high importance with respect to potential cumulative impacts. DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Level of Importance High  Climate and  GHGs in the atmosphere  The oxy-combustion facility would  Based on a review of  The oxy-combustion facility would  Greenhouse  absorb solar energy that would  result in a net decrease in GHG  environmental documents  result in a net decrease in GHG  Gases  be emitted back into space if  emissions compared to equivalent  available (see Table 4.3-2),  emissions compared to equivalent  (See Section 4.3.4.2 for further discussion)  they were not present, which results in the planet being warmer than it would otherwise be (known as the “greenhouse  generation by a conventional coal or natural gas power plant. The capture and geological storage of existing GHG emissions by the  none of the reasonably foreseeable future actions would be expected to generate GHGs in significant amounts  generation by a conventional coal or natural gas power plant. Further, the successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread  effect”). During the past  project would produce a beneficial  during operation. Activities  acceptance and deployment of  century, humans have  cumulative effect on a national and  related to the construction of  oxy-combustion technology with  substantially added to the  global scale. The proposed project  these projects could result in a  geologic storage of CO2, thus  amount of GHGs in the  would reduce CO2 emissions from  temporary increase in GHG  fostering a beneficial long-term  atmosphere, mainly by burning  the generation of 168 MWe (gross)  emissions, but the amounts  reduction in the rate of CO2  fossil fuels. The added gases,  of electric power by at least 1.2  would be negligible compared  emissions from power plants  primarily CO2 and methane,  million tons (1.1 million metric tons)  to regional and national  across the United States. It is  increase the natural  per year compared to conventional  emissions rates. Both the  currently impossible to determine  greenhouse effect and likely  coal and natural gas combustion  Archer Daniels Midland and  the exact nature and magnitude of  contribute to an increase in  plants without CO2 capture and  Taylorville Energy Center  the resulting effect on the global or  global average temperature  storage. This reduction would  projects would reduce GHGs  regional climate. See Section 3.2,  and related climate changes.  incrementally reduce the rate of  that would otherwise be emitted  Climate and Greenhouse Gases,  Overall, climate change would affect economic activities, people’s behavior, environmental conditions, and infrastructure globally. Potential impacts may include: rising sea levels, increases in heat waves, increases in number and intensity of extreme weather events, and increases in drought conditions and wildfires.   GHG accumulation in the atmosphere and help to incrementally mitigate climate change related to atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. On a broader scale, successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread acceptance and deployment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage of CO2, thus fostering a long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States.  during operations. Overall, it is likely that GHG emissions globally will continue to increase for some time, thus exacerbating the potential for adverse climate change-related impacts. Any strategies to curtail global climate change will require a global approach to controlling GHG emissions.  for further information. Other projects in the ROI that would include combustion of additional fossil fuels or other sources of GHG emissions (e.g., the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project) would cumulatively emit additional incremental amounts of GHGs within the ROI. Compared to regional and national GHG emissions rates, cumulative impacts would be low; their effect on the regional and global climate  is currently indeterminable.  Potential climate change impacts  that would affect the proposed  FutureGen 2.0 Project and other  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Climate and  reasonably foreseeable future  Greenhouse  actions may include water supply  Gases  disruptions due to more severe and  (continued)  frequent drought and hazardous  conditions or disruptions of  construction of operational  activities due to more frequent or  severe weather.  See Section 4.3.4.2 for further  discussion.  Geology  The sedimentary bedrock in  There would be negligible to minor  There would be no noticeable  Negligible cumulative impacts  (See Section 4.3.4.3 for further discussion)  central and southern Illinois was formed within the Illinois Basin, which stretches from northwest Illinois to Kentucky  impacts from construction to the geologic resources, primarily from displacing or moving glacial materials for cut and fill  impact to the geologic resources from the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement, US-67  would be expected from construction of the proposed project and the foreseeable future actions, as most of the impacts  and Tennessee. Glacial and  procedures.  improvements, or the Illinois  would be related to the  modern alluvial deposits are draped over the bedrock formations, and create the topographic relief while providing the source material for soils. The Mt. Simon, Eau Claire, and St. Peter formations are laterally extensive bedrock formations that stretch through the Illinois Basin and are found in deep well cores throughout Illinois.   There would be minor impacts during operation, as 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) per year of CO2 is injected into the Mt. Simon Formation. The presence of primary and secondary confining zones and the use of multiple monitoring and verification procedures would ensure that the CO2 is stored safely within the injection zone formations.  Rivers Transmission Project based on a review of associated environmental documentation (see Table 4.3-2). There are two geologic CO2 storage projects located in Decatur, 60 miles east of the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 storage study area. The MGSC Phase III Large-Scale Field Test and ICCS Area 1 would be injecting  earthmoving needed for each and would not overlap. There would be minor cumulative effects on regional geology from operation of the proposed project and other CO2 storage projects in the Illinois Basin. The respective CO2 plumes would not interact, because they would only extend for a few miles or less at each injection well. Although the CO2 pressure front could extend tens of  There are three historical oil  into the Mt. Simon Formation.  miles from large-scale injection  and gas fields in Morgan  Also, the proposed Taylorville  well sites in open aquifer systems  County: the Prentice field,  Energy Center may include  (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011),  which is located south of  geologic CO2 storage in the Mt.  pressure would decrease with  Ashland, has 25 oil and gas  Simon Formation approximately  distance from the injection wells,  wells and is located  45 miles from the FutureGen  and there are no fault systems  approximately 1.5 miles east of  2.0 CO2 storage study area.  between the proposed project and  the CO2 storage study area;  The CO2 plumes for these  Decatur or Taylorville. Capacity  the Jacksonville field, located  projects would not overlap with  estimates predict that the Illinois  directly east of the city of  the plume as modeled for the  Basin and the Mt. Simon Formation  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Geology  Jacksonville, contains more  FutureGen 2.0 Project.  could safely accommodate 20  (continued)  than 75 wells and is located approximately 3 miles south of the CO2 storage study area; and the Waverly field natural-gas storage site in the southeast corner of Morgan County, located approximately 15 miles south of the CO2 storage study area.  None of the other projects are anticipated to affect the FutureGen 2.0 Project with respect to geologic resources.  individual storage projects, each injecting 5.5 million tons (5 million metric tons) per year of CO2 for 50 years, which is well above the capacity of the projects described here (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011).  See Section 4.3.4.3 for further discussion.  Level of Importance – Intermediate  Air Quality  Currently, the ROI is an attainment area for all criteria pollutants. There are ambient air monitors within 50 miles of the project. Monitoring results show ambient concentrations for all criteria pollutants below the NAAQS. Therefore, by definition, the effects on air quality from all previous activities have been less than significant in this area. This includes the historical operation of the energy center.  This project would result in increased emissions of all criteria pollutants when compared to post-suspension conditions at the energy center; however, emissions would be at a much lower level when compared to historical conditions. Emissions increases resulting from construction would be temporary and would end with the construction phase. The proposed energy center emissions would not cause regional criteria pollutant concentrations to exceed the NAAQS.   Cumulative increases in concentrations of air pollutants would continue to remain below the NAAQS. No large-scale projects or proposals have been identified that would jeopardize the attainment status of the region.  The proposed project, when combined with all operations in the region, would not cause or contribute to a violation of the NAAQS or interfere with the attainment status of the region. It is further not expected that the proposed project, when combined with past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions, would lead to an exceedance of the NAAQS or change in attainment status of the region. Therefore, cumulative effects on air quality would not be significant.   Physiography  A principal issue relating to  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would  Based on available  Incrementally, in combination with  and Soils  Physiography and Soils  have minor impacts on  environmental documentation  other ongoing and foreseeable  regionally is the potential effect  Physiography and Soils,  (see Table 4.3-2) all of the  actions, the FutureGen 2.0 Project  on prime farmland soils, which  predominantly related to the  reasonably foreseeable future  would have a minor cumulative  are extensive throughout  increased potential for soil erosion  actions would cause an  impact to the soil resources of the  Illinois. In Morgan County, the  and the temporary displacement of  increased potential for erosion  region. The amount of permanently  total land for farming has  farmland during construction  through soil disturbance, as  affected prime farmland soils would  increased from 306,000 acres  activities. There would also be  earthmoving activities would be  be a negligible percentage of the  in 1997 to 321,000 acres in  permanent loss of farmland soil  required during construction.  soils in Illinois, and a very small  2007. The average farm size  use within the fenced area of the  Prime farmland soils would  amount of the soils in Morgan  also increased from 372 to 433  CO2 injection well site(s) and other  likely be displaced, particularly  County, particularly when  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Physiography  acres (USDA 1999; USDA  permanent surface structures (e.g.,  for the US-67 improvements, as  compared to the increase in  and Soils  2009).  access roads). In total,  the road would be expanded  farmland acreage that has  (continued)  approximately 122 acres of soil would be permanently removed as a result of the proposed project, as summarized in Section 4.1, Comparative Impacts of Alternatives. The main impacts on Physiography and Soils would be generally confined to the areas disturbed during construction for the proposed project.  from the existing structures. The impacts related to the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project and Illinois Rivers Transmission Project would likely be lower, because the projects would be in previously disturbed areas (bridge replacement), or would only displace small footprints over the overall corridor (Illinois Rivers Transmission Project).  occurred in the county in recent decades. Most of the disturbed soils would also occur on industrial property, directly adjacent to roads, or in previously disturbed areas.  Groundwater  Groundwater use in Illinois is primarily from shallow sand and gravel aquifers, shallow bedrock aquifers, and occasionally deep (>500 feet) bedrock aquifers (ISWS 2012). Municipal users in northern Illinois withdraw groundwater from the St. Peter and Mt. Simon Formations, which have lower total dissolved solids concentrations and are located closer to the surface than in the south. In Morgan County, the majority of public and industrial groundwater use is from the Illinois River Basin aquifer, although individual users may withdraw from shallow, unconnected aquifers. The recharge capacity for the area around Meredosia is very high, because the aquifer is hydraulically connected to the Illinois River in highly  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would have minor impacts on groundwater resources within the ROI. New and existing groundwater wells onsite would be used at low flow rates (less than 0.2 mgd) to support construction needs and would likely be supplemented by water trucked to the site from the village of Meredosia. Therefore, adverse impacts to the local aquifer, which is connected to the Illinois River, are expected to be temporary and minor. The impacts to groundwater during energy center operations would be minor, as the Meredosia Energy Center would withdraw water at lower rates compared to historical facility operations. The presence of confining zones and the use of multiple monitoring and verification procedures would ensure that the CO2 is stored safely within the injection zone  All of the projects would require some water use, mainly for employee consumption and to reduce fugitive dust emissions. It is anticipated that water would be trucked in from off the construction sites or supplied by nearby water utilities, and would not substantially impact the current groundwater capacity locally. The MGSC Phase III Large-Scale Field Test and ICCS Area 1 Project, as well as the potential Taylorville Energy Center, would also be injecting CO2 into the Mt. Simon Formation subject to the same UIC permitting process intended to protect potable groundwater resources as applicable to the proposed project.  There would be minor cumulative impacts to groundwater resources from constructing the proposed project in combination with other reasonably foreseeable future actions. Both the FutureGen 2.0 Project and the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project would obtain water locally in the Meredosia area during construction, but the combined requirements would not substantially affect local groundwater capacity. Other construction projects would likely require trucking in groundwater from available sources, which would occur at different times and not impose substantial overlapping demands. There would be negligible cumulative impacts to groundwater from the operations of the proposed project and the other  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Groundwater  permeable sand and gravel  formations and away from the  planned or potential CO2 storage  (continued)  deposits (IEPA 2011c). In  deepest USDW; therefore, no  projects in Decatur and Taylorville.  Morgan County, the Mt. Simon  impacts to groundwater from the  The CO2 plume for FutureGen 2.0  aquifer is not a USDW because  operation of the CO2 injection wells  would not overlap with the plumes  it has total dissolved solids  would occur.  of other projects based on  concentrations of 48,000  modeling results.  milligrams/liter. The St. Peter aquifer is a federally defined USDW because it has total dissolved solids concentrations less than 10,000 milligrams/liter; however, it is not considered as a source for potable water in the county.  The shallow groundwater aquifers are not directly connected, so any near-surface contamination from material spills during construction or operation would not add incrementally to the impacts at other project sites.  Surface Water  The Lower Illinois River Basin, within which the project components are located and which serves as the ROI for the project, encompasses nearly 18,000 square miles. More than 85 percent of the land use within the Lower Illinois River Basin is agricultural. The most common surface water quality problems include excess sedimentation and nutrients from farming impacts as well as toxic chemicals and low dissolved oxygen resulting from urban stormwater and treated sewage discharges.  Minor impacts from the proposed project may result in increased sedimentation (turbidity) of surface water features resulting from soil erosion during earth-moving activities associated with construction. These impacts would be mitigated through the use of best management practices and adherence to permit conditions, as applicable. Horizontal directional or jack and bore drilling would be utilized for perennial streams and certain intermittent streams (those with flowing or standing water at the time of construction) encountered during the CO2 pipeline installation, which would minimize impacts and disturbance of these features. Trenching would occur within ephemeral and intermittent stream channels encountered during installation of the CO2 pipeline which are seasonally dry at the time of  Development of the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project would cause minor construction impacts, including soil erosion and increased sedimentation. Demolition of the current bridge, depending on the method used, could result in minor to significant short-term impacts to water quality through the introduction and removal of debris. The US-67 improvements would require four to six surface water crossings within the ROI. The crossings would result in minor impacts occurring during construction, operation, and maintenance. Impacts include soil erosion and sedimentation; loss of streambanks through culverts; increased stormwater runoff via increased impervious surfaces; salt and sand spray  The addition of the FutureGen 2.0 Project in combination with current and reasonably foreseeable future projects would not result in any substantial cumulative impacts to surface water quality. Minor, short-term cumulative adverse impacts would be expected for surface water quality during construction and operation of the reasonably foreseeable future actions and the FutureGen 2.0 Project due to increased sedimentation (turbidity) of surface water features resulting from soil erosion during earth-moving activities associated with construction and from stormwater discharges associated with operations. These impacts would be mitigated to the extent possible through the use of best management practices and adherence to permit conditions, as  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Surface Water  construction. Such features would  and runoff during snow and ice  applicable.   (continued)  be restored to their original conditions after construction; therefore, impacts would be minor and temporary.  removal. The Illinois Rivers Transmission Project would consist of a linear power transmission line  None of the foreseeable actions in combination with the FutureGen 2.0 Project are expected to have long-term cumulative adverse  Similarly, only minor impacts to surface water would be expected during operations and would include water quality impacts to local streams from stormwater runoff generated at these facilities. Adequately designed stormwater collection and distribution systems and pollution prevention measures would reduce or eliminate the potential for these operational impacts to surface water resources.  installation across the ROI; however, very minor impacts to surface water are anticipated. The utility lines would be overhead design and tower construction footprints would be small and selective. The spacing and variability of tower placement would allow surface water features to be avoided. The clearing and maintenance of vegetation along the route should have negligible impacts on surface water features. Construction equipment may result in negligible to minor temporary impacts to surface waters through sedimentation and erosion. None of the other projects are expected to interact with the FutureGen 2.0 Project with respect to surface water impacts.  impacts on surface waters greater than those described in Chapter 3.  Wetlands and  Prior to European settlement, it  As a result of the FutureGen 2.0  Based on available  Development of the US-67  Floodplains  is estimated that wetlands  Project, no wetlands would be  environmental documentation  improvements and the Illinois  covered more than 8 million  directly altered or filled at the  (see Table 4.3-2) development  Route 104 Bridge Replacement  acres of Illinois, of which  Meredosia Energy Center or within  of the US-67 improvements  Project would cause a relatively  approximately 10 percent  the CO2 storage study area. For  would cause approximately 32  small amount of wetland loss. The  remain (Suloway and Hubbell  the CO2 pipeline, the southern  acres of wetland loss (IDOT  FutureGen 2.0 Project would not  1994). Throughout the  route contains no wetlands, while  2002). Development of the  be expected to contribute to  conterminous United States,  the northern route operational  Illinois Route 104 Bridge  wetland loss in the area.  the rate of wetland loss has  ROW contains 0.2 acre of open  Replacement Project would  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Wetlands and  declined in recent decades. In  water wetland. Wetlands (with the  cause approximately 4 acres of  The US-67 improvements, Illinois  Floodplains  the time period of 2004 – 2009,  exception of seasonally-dry  wetland loss (IDOT 2011).  Route 104 Bridge Replacement  (continued)  the overall area of freshwater wetlands increased, though different wetland types experienced different results (e.g., gains in ponds and continued loss of forested wetlands) (Dahl 2011).  Following European settlement in Illinois, waterways served as the focal point of growth and commerce; consequently, in many areas, homes, buildings, businesses, and entire  ephemeral and intermittent streams as discussed in Section 3.6, Surface Water) would not be disturbed by the project through the use of trenchless technology; therefore, no direct impacts to open water wetlands would be expected. In dry streambeds where trenching does occur, impacts would be minor and temporary, as such features would be restored to their original conditions after pipeline installation.  Development of the US-67 improvements would include crossing a number of floodplains including those associated with the Illinois River; no significant adverse impacts would occur due to use of design measures to provide adequate waterway openings (IDOT 2002). Development of the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project would cause a minimal increase in  Project, and the FutureGen 2.0 Project may have some effect on floodplains of the Illinois River; however, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would not be expected to cause any long-term impacts. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would not add incrementally to potential impacts on wetlands and floodplains. Required permitting for impacts on flood hazards would greatly minimize the potential for any significant flood hazard  communities have been  Negligible long-term impacts to  flood heights; however, this  impacts to occur as a result of any  developed in floodplains.  floodplains would be expected, as  would not result in significant  future floodplain development in  Currently, it is estimated that,  no structures would be located  adverse impacts on flood  the area.  in Illinois, over 250,000  within floodplains. Some areas of  hazards (IDOT 2011).  buildings are located in floodplains. This development has the effect of increasing flood hazards for people and property in those floodplains as well as increasing flood  impervious surfaces may be developed in floodplains at the Meredosia Energy Center, which could cause a negligible adverse impact by reducing the flood storage capacity of the area.  None of the other projects are expected to interact with the FutureGen 2.0 Project with respect to wetland and floodplain impacts.  hazards in other areas (IDNR  During construction, the periodic  2006).   presence of moored barges during  materials unloading may represent  very short-term obstructions to  normal flood flows if a flooding  event were to occur; however, it is  assumed that materials deliveries  would not occur during such an  event.  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Biological  Prior to European settlement,  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would  Based on available  Development of the US-67  Resources  the land cover in the Morgan  have minor impacts on Biological  environmental documentation  improvements and the Illinois  County area consisted  Resources based on the fact that  (see Table 4.3-2) development  Route 104 Bridge Replacement  primarily of forest and prairie  no protected species are  of the US-67 improvements  project would involve the loss of  terrestrial vegetated habitats. A  anticipated to be affected on the  would cause a loss of  natural terrestrial wildlife habitat  relatively small amount of land  Meredosia Energy Center property.  approximately 340 acres of  and, potentially, small degrees of  cover consisted of open water,  Also, surveys for protected species  natural habitats (e.g., forest and  aquatic habitat degradation  predominantly in the major  would be performed in areas that  grassland). Potential impacts to  causing minor impacts of  river systems. Since European  would potentially be disturbed  decurrent false aster,  vegetation loss and associated  settlement, the vast majority of  along the CO2 pipeline route and  Patterson’s bindweed (Stylisma  animal habitat loss/degradation.  pre-existing terrestrial habitats  coordination with the USFWS and  pickeringii), and Illinois chorus  The FutureGen 2.0 Project  have been converted to  IDNR would be conducted to  frog are possible, though  contribution would be minor and  agricultural use. Currently, the  ensure that potential impacts would  impacts would ultimately be  would not cause substantial  terrestrial landscape is  be avoided or appropriately  avoided or mitigated (IDOT  cumulative impacts.  dominated by cropland, with relatively much smaller areas of grassland and forest. The overall area of open water has reduced slightly since presettlement times, though human modification of some major features (e.g., damming) has altered their characteristics considerably (IDNR 2001).  mitigated. The loss of potential wildlife habitat would be relatively small as summarized in Section 4.1, Comparative Impacts of Alternatives. The main impacts on Biological Resources would be generally confined to the areas disturbed during construction for the proposed project.   2002). Development of the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project would cause a loss of approximately 7 acres of forested habitat. No impacts to protected species would be expected; a survey for Illinois chorus frog showed none present in potential disturbance areas. A portion of the Meredosia National Wildlife Refuge would be crossed by the bridge; however, USFWS has agreed to a land exchange to mitigate the loss of land (IDOT 2011).  Development of the US-67 improvements has the potential to impact protected species; however, consultation with regulators and conservation planning has been performed, thus, no impacts to protected species populations would be expected.  The FutureGen 2.0 Project is in the process of consultation and conservation planning, and it is expected that, if necessary, any potential impacts would be mitigated to acceptable levels. No adverse impacts on protected species populations would occur.  None of the other projects are expected to interact with the  Any cumulative adverse impacts are anticipated to be minor.  FutureGen 2.0 Project with  respect to biological resources  impacts.  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Cultural  Historically, the quality and  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would  Each of the reasonably  Based on the project’s planned  Resources  quantity of cultural resources in  result in the disturbance of  foreseeable future actions may  mitigation and implementation of a  the ROI has been diminished  previously undisturbed land along  cause some degree of cultural  Programmatic Agreement, a low  by land development.  the pipeline corridor and in the CO2  resource disturbance. Thus,  likelihood of cumulative adverse  storage study area. Cultural surveys  minor cumulative impacts would  effects to cultural resources is  would be conducted prior to  be expected on cultural  expected.   construction activities. Appropriate  resources.  mitigation (avoidance or recovery)  would be implemented. The  Meredosia Energy Center is a  previously disturbed site and it is  not anticipated that cultural  resources would be present.  Land Use  Land use in Morgan County is largely agricultural and rural, which is consistent with much of the state of Illinois. The Meredosia Energy Center is located in an industrial area south of the village of Meredosia. The industrial development has been present for the past century. The proposed CO2 pipeline and injection wells would be located in northern Morgan County, which has traditionally been  Construction and operation of the oxy-combustion facility would cause short-term minor impacts and negligible long-term impacts since construction would be consistent with the industrial nature of the Meredosia Energy Center. Temporary, minor impacts would occur due to the short-term change in land use during the construction phase. Such land would be restored to its original state after construction.  A portion (approximately 3.75 miles) of Alternative E of the US-67 improvements project would require the same stretch of existing ROW on US-67 as the FutureGen 2.0 Project southern pipeline route. Additionally, there would be a possibility for induced development as increased travel along the expanded highway could lead to further commercial and retail development.  Improvements to a portion of US67 commenced on June 17, 2011, and are planned to be completed by the end of 2013. The FutureGen 2.0 Project is anticipated to begin construction in 2014, so it is unlikely that both project schedules would coincide and require construction in the same ROW along US-67 at the same time. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would not contribute incrementally to any induced development along the highway attributable to the US-67  dominated by agricultural land use.  Permanent, minor impacts would occur due to conversion of land use, such as vegetated land, for portions of the pipeline ROW and the CO2 injection wells and associated surface facilities.  The Illinois Route 104 River Bridge Replacement Project would realign a portion of Illinois Route 104 on the east side of the river away from Meredosia’s downtown area  improvement project. Most of the Illinois Route 104 bridge alignment would stay within its existing corridor but a portion will change land use from residential and commercial to  approximately one-half block to the north. The Illinois Rivers Transmission Project would construct a  transportation use. The new alignment would also convert some agricultural land adjacent to the existing roadway to transportation use. The land area affected by the  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Land Use  330-mile transmission line that  Illinois 104 Bridge Replacement  (continued)  would likely cross the Illinois  Project is not within the project  River at Meredosia and involve  area for the FutureGen 2.0 Project,  portions of land in Morgan  but is within Morgan County. The  County.  FutureGen 2.0 Project would not  None of the other projects are expected to interact with the FutureGen 2.0 Project with respect to land use impacts.  contribute incrementally to cumulative impacts on land use conversions and compatibility with surrounding land uses.  Both the Illinois Rivers  Transmission Project and the  FutureGen 2.0 Project would  require acquisition of easements  for the transmission lines and CO2  pipeline, respectively. Therefore, it  is likely that some land within  Morgan County would subject to  ROW easements as a result of  both projects, which would cause a  minor cumulative effect on land  use. In areas where a transmission  line or pipeline would be  constructed on agricultural land,  the Illinois Department of  Agricultural guidelines would be  followed, and cumulative effects on  compatibility with surrounding land  uses would be minor.  Aesthetics  Construction of the Meredosia Energy Center began in 1941. The 526-foot-tall chimney stack was built in 1979. Other industrial structures have been constructed and operated in the village for the past century. Northern Morgan County has traditionally been farmland or open land with few residences  During construction, temporary minor adverse impacts would occur from increased visibility of construction activities to nearby sensitive receptors, as well as from fugitive dust, transportation, and noise. Temporary moderate impacts would occur as a result of drilling of the injection wells on a 24-hour per day, 7-day per week  Construction of the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement could result in adverse aesthetic impacts to residences in the village of Meredosia as a result of increased visibility of construction activity and traffic. Although a specific route has not been determined, siting and construction of the Illinois  Moderate cumulative impacts to the local viewshed could occur to sensitive receptors in Meredosia as a result of increased visibility of large construction equipment and processes during the construction of the FutureGen 2.0 Project and the replacement of the Illinois 104 Meredosia Bridge. These include the combined nuisance effects of  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Aesthetics  or structures.  basis, which would require lighting  Rivers Transmission Project  traffic congestion, dust generation  (continued)  There are no designated scenic vistas in any part of the proposed project area.  during the overnight hours. During operation, minor impacts would occur from the introduction of a new 450-foot stack to the viewshed, as well as the associated steam plume. Minor impacts to the  could result in adverse impacts due to increased visibility of surface structures (i.e., utility infrastructure) in a typically rural, flat portion of Morgan County.  during construction, and overnight lighting, as well as the introduction of new, permanent infrastructure to the viewshed (stack, bridge, and overhead utilities). The Illinois Rivers Transmission  viewshed would occur from new  None of the other projects are  Project could result in minor  utility lines constructed to the  expected to interact with the  cumulative impacts as a result of  injection well site(s), as well as from  FutureGen 2.0 Project with  increased visibility of utility  the introduction of the new surface  respect to aesthetics impacts.  infrastructure in typically flat areas  facilities at the injection wells. In  when combined with the visual  addition, moderate adverse impacts  impacts from the utility  could occur to receptors closest to  infrastructure that would be  the energy center as a result of  constructed under the FutureGen  increased visibility of energy center  2.0 Project.   operations due to tree clearing  needed for the stormwater  management basin.  Materials and  In general, construction and  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would  Several of the reasonably  The FutureGen 2.0 Project would  Wastes  process materials used in  obtain coal from existing  foreseeable future actions  add incrementally to the nationwide  energy generation have been  commercial mines in Illinois and the  involve construction of new  demands for coal but without  common and relatively easy to  Powder River Basin (Wyoming),  facilities and infrastructure, or  substantially affecting the available  acquire for years. Landfills and  which have adequate capacity to  modifications and  capacities or operations at existing  other waste disposal facilities  meet the needs of the project  improvements to existing  mines.   in the area of the project have had sufficient past disposal capacities to meet increasing waste disposal needs that generally coincide with historic land development trends.  Coal has been mined commercially within the United States, including within the states of Illinois and Wyoming, for many years, and the available reserves are  without requiring changes in mining operations.  The operation of the oxycombustion facility would generate approximately 200,000 tons of fly ash and bottom ash per year, over a 20-year period. The Alliance would seek opportunities for beneficial reuse of the ash, including recycling; however, any ash that cannot be beneficially reused would be disposed of in a commercial non- facilities and infrastructure. Therefore, it is likely that they would generate wastes that could potentially be disposed of within the ROI, and therefore, negatively impact available landfill capacity. However, these impacts would be limited to the period of construction and would not be expected to exceed landfill capacity within the ROI.  Minor to moderate adverse cumulative impacts on regional landfill capacity could occur as a result of the proposed project and the foreseeable future projects. Generation of construction-related wastes from these projects, when combined with fly ash and bottom ash generated by the proposed project, could reduce landfill capacity available to local municipalities and businesses.  considered abundant to serve  hazardous solid waste landfill.  Operation of the reasonably  These adverse impacts could be  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Materials and  the foreseeable energy needs  Disposal of the volume of ash that  foreseeable projects would not  mitigated through beneficial reuse  Wastes  of the nation. The impacts of  would be generated from the project  result in the generation of  of some of the major waste  (continued)  coal mining are well-known and  could have potential negative  hazardous or non-hazardous  streams generated by the  documented.  impacts on landfill capacity. Given  wastes in quantities that could  proposed project.  the existing disposal capacity in the ROI, the severity of these impacts is anticipated to be negligible.  have an adverse impact on regional landfill capacity.  None of the foreseeable actions in combination with the FutureGen 2.0 Project are expected to have  Generation of other types of waste  long-term cumulative adverse  during construction and operation  impacts on waste disposal capacity  would have a negligible impact on  greater than those described in  hazardous and non-hazardous  Chapter 3.  waste treatment and disposal  capacity in the ROI.  Traffic and  Overall, the development of  During construction, traffic would  There are no foreseeable future  Cumulative impacts associated  Transportation  transportation resources  increase at the energy center,  projects anticipated to generate  with transportation and traffic  generally followed the historic  along the CO2 pipeline corridor,  significant volumes of traffic in  would be minor. The introduction of  trend of land development,  and within the CO2 storage study  the vicinity of the energy center.  a temporary increase in traffic  particularly with respect to the  area due to additional construction  However, the recent purchase  during construction would be easily  increased use of motor  vehicles and traffic delays near the  of the fuel oil tanks at the  accommodated by the existing  vehicles and railways. The  proposed sites. These effects  Meredosia Energy Center by  road systems with only minor  areas potentially affected by  would be temporary in nature and  Sunrise Ag Energy, LLC, and  temporary disruptions.   the project generally consist of rural land uses, including agriculture and associated rural residences. Historically, the Meredosia Energy Center received Illinois coal by truck with substantially  would end with completion of the construction phase. During operations, all roadways in the area would have the capacity to accommodate the additional operational traffic generated at the energy center. The pipeline and  the plan to construct a new truck loading facility, will increase truck traffic in the vicinity. Based on the size of the facility, any increase in traffic would result in negligible impacts.   Operation of the oxy-combustion facility, the CO2 pipeline, and the CO2 injection wells would have minor effects as a relatively small number of commuting employees and support trucks would be added.  higher traffic volumes than in recent years.  CO2 injection wells would not generate substantial traffic during their operation, and transportation-related effects associated with these activities would be negligible. Incremental changes to traffic volumes would have no appreciable effect on overall traffic in the area when compared to  Neither the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project nor the US-67 improvements would have long-term significant adverse effects to traffic and transportation following completion. These infrastructure improvement projects would be expected to improve traffic conditions in the  No large-scale projects or proposals have been identified that, when combined with the project, would cause impacts on traffic substantially greater than those described for the proposed project in Chapter 3.  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Traffic and  existing conditions.  area. However, both projects  Transportation  would have short-term adverse  (continued)  impacts on traffic during construction.  Noise and  The historical noise  Construction of the oxy-combustion  Temporary increases in noise  Cumulative impacts associated  Vibration  environment around the  facility would have negligible to  to sensitive receptors in the  with noise would be negligible. It is  Meredosia Energy Center has  minor short-term impacts from  vicinity would occur during  highly unlikely that any of the  included industrial noises from  increased sound levels on  construction of the reasonably  reasonably foreseeable future  boilers, turbines, generators,  sensitive receptors. Also, the  foreseeable future actions,  actions would occur at the same  fans, and heavy truck, vehicle,  operation of the facility would have  including those projects that  location and at the same time as  railroad, and barge traffic.  negligible long-term impacts on  may occur within 1 mile of the  the proposed project; however, if  The noise environment of the region through which the pipeline would travel, as well as the CO2 storage study area, has generally followed the historical trend of land development, particularly with respect to the increased presence and use of motor vehicles and railways. The areas potentially affected by  nearby receptors. Construction of the CO2 pipeline and injection and monitoring wells would have minor to moderate impacts on sensitive receptors from increased sound levels as well as potentially perceptible vibrations due to trenchless boring techniques used to install the pipeline, and drilling of the wells. Sensitive receptors near these  Meredosia Energy Center, such as the Illinois Rivers Transmission Project, the Illinois Route 104 Bridge Replacement Project and the US-67 improvements. Operational noise impacts would be associated with any increased traffic resulting from these infrastructure improvements.  they did overlap, there would be a minor cumulative impact of increased noise temporarily during construction activities. No cumulative impact in operational noise would be anticipated.  the project generally consist of  activities would likely experience  None of the other projects are  farmlands and rural residential  elevated noise and vibration levels  expected to interact with the  areas.  temporarily.  FutureGen 2.0 Project with  Operation of the oxy-combustion  respect to noise impacts.  facility would likely result in minor  increases in sound levels for  sensitive receptors compared to  post-2012 conditions, but with no  noticeable change from historical  conditions when the energy center  was operational. Operation of the  pipeline would create no increase  in noise levels.  POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS DOE/EIS-0460D FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT 4. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES Table 4.3-3. Summary of Cumulative Impacts Resource Area  Pertinent Historical Information and Impacts of Past Actions  Contribution of Proposed Project (as described in Chapter 3 and summarized in Section 4.1)  Contribution of Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions  Cumulative Impacts  Human Health  The Meredosia Energy Center  The short-term effects on worker  The planned projects on or  None of the foreseeable future  and Safety  included four units, of which three were coal-fired and one, Unit 4, was oil-fired. The units came on-line in June 1948, 1949, 1960, and 1975 (Ameren 2012). At the end of 2011, operations were suspended at the Meredosia Energy Center. Prior to suspension, the energy center employed 57 workers to operate the four units. The Alliance is in the process of acquiring Unit 4, and plans to repower this unit as an oxycombustion facility that would produce 168 MWe of electricity, while capturing at least 90 percent of the flue gas CO2.  safety during construction and operations for the proposed project would be minor. Workers, but not the general public, could be affected by a potentially significant accident at the facility, such as an accident involving the two liquid oxygen tanks; but statistically such accidents are extremely unlikely to occur (i.e., potential to occur between once in 10,000 years and once in a million years). The potential for accidents involving pipeline operations is considered unlikely statistically (i.e., potential to occur between once in 100 years and once in 10,000 years). Potential impacts from injection well operations are  adjacent to the energy center property, such as the Illinois Rivers Transmission Project and the truck unloading facility, create the potential for additional workers to be affected if a serious accident were to occur at the energy center or along the pipeline close to the energy center. These facilities may also increase traffic in the area, which could affect the safety of hazardous material delivery vehicles accessing the energy center. None of the other projects are expected to interact with the FutureGen 2.0 Project with  actions would add incrementally to the potential impacts of the FutureGen 2.0 Project to an extent that long-term cumulative adverse impacts on human health and safety would be considerably greater than those described in Chapter 3.   considered to be extremely unlikely events (as defined above) and a release of CO2 following the end of injection operations is not expected to result in ambient air concentrations above established health criteria; thus health effects to the public would not be anticipated as a result of CO2 pipeline or injection operations.  respect to human health and safety impacts.  > = less than; CO2 = carbon dioxide; GHG = greenhouse gas; ICCS = Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; mgd = million gallons per day; MGSC = Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium; MMT = million metric tons; MWe = megawatt electrical; NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Standards; ROI = region of influence; ROW = right of way; US-# = U.S. Highway; UIC = Underground Injection Control; USDW = underground source of drinking water; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service POTENTIAL CUMULATIVE IMPACTS 4.3.4.2 Climate and Greenhouse Gases Impacts of Greenhouse Gases on Climate Climate is usually defined as the “average weather” of a region, or more scientifically as the statistical description of a region’s weather in terms of the means and variability of relevant parameters over periods ranging from months to thousands of years. The relevant parameters include temperature, precipitation, wind speed and direction, and dates of meteorological events such as first and last frosts, beginning and end of rainy seasons, and appearance and disappearance of pack ice. GHGs in the atmosphere absorb energy that would otherwise radiate into space; anthropogenic (humancaused) releases of these gases could result in warming that would eventually alter global climate (IPCC 2007). Potential impacts of GHGs on climate are essentially cumulative impacts, because no single source of GHG emissions is substantial enough to affect climate independently. In addition, CO2, the primary anthropogenic GHG, tends to mix quickly and evenly throughout the lower atmosphere; therefore, it is currently not possible to predict the effect of increases or decreases in GHG emissions from an individual source on regional or global climate. Changes in climate are difficult to detect because of the complex variability in natural meteorological patterns over long periods of time and across broad geographical regions. There is much uncertainty regarding the extent of global climate change caused by anthropogenic GHGs and the appropriate strategies for stabilizing the concentrations of GHGs in the atmosphere. The World Meteorological Organization and United Nations Environment Programme established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to provide an objective source of information about global warming and climate change. The panel’s reports are generally considered an authoritative source of information on these issues. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report, “Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level” (IPCC 2007). The report found that the global average surface temperature has increased by approximately 1.3°F in the last 100 years; global average sea level has risen approximately 6 inches over the same period; and cold days, cold nights, and frosts over most land areas have become less frequent during the past 50 years. The report concluded that most of the temperature increase since the middle of the 20th century “is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic [GHG] concentrations.” The 2007 report estimated that, at present, CO2 accounts for approximately 77 percent of the global warming potential attributable to anthropogenic releases of GHGs, with the vast majority (74 percent) of this CO2 coming from the combustion of fossil fuels. Although the report considers a wide range of future scenarios regarding GHG emissions, CO2 would continue to contribute more than 70 percent of the total warming potential under all of the scenarios. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change therefore believes that further warming is inevitable, but that this warming and its effects on climate could be mitigated by stabilizing the atmosphere’s concentration of CO2 through the use of (1) “low-carbon technologies” for power production and industrial processes; (2) more efficient use of energy; and (3) management of terrestrial ecosystems to capture atmospheric CO2 (IPCC 2007). Environmental Impacts of Climate Change The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the United States Global Change Research Program (formerly the U.S. Climate Change Science Program) have examined the potential environmental impacts of climate change at global, national, and regional scales. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report states that, in addition to increases in global surface temperatures, the impacts of climate change on the global environment may include:  More frequent heat waves, droughts, and fires;  Rising sea levels and coastal flooding;  Melting glaciers, ice caps, and polar ice sheets;  More severe hurricane activity and increases in frequency and intensity of severe precipitation;  Spread of infectious diseases to new regions;  Loss of wildlife habitats; and  Heart and respiratory ailments from higher concentrations of ground-level ozone (IPCC 2007). On a national scale, average surface temperatures in the United States have increased, with the last decade being the warmest in more than a century of direct observations (CCSP 2008). Potential impacts on the environment attributed to climate change observed in North America include:  Extended periods of high fire risk and large increases in burned area;  Increased intensity, duration, and frequency of heat waves;  Decreased snow pack, increased winter and early spring flooding potentials, and reduced summer stream flows in the western mountains; and  Increased stress on biological communities and habitat in coastal areas (IPCC 2007). The United States Global Change Research Program recently reported the following impacts and trends in the Midwest region of the United States, including Illinois, associated with climate change (USGCRP 2009):  During the summer, public health and quality of life will be negatively affected by increasing heat waves, reduced air quality, and increasing insect and waterborne diseases. In the winter, warming will have mixed impacts.  The likely increase in precipitation in winter and spring, more heavy downpours, and greater evaporation in summer would lead to more periods of both floods and water deficits.  While the longer growing season provides the potential for increased crop yields, increases in heat waves, floods, droughts, insects, and weeds will present increasing challenges to managing crops, livestock, and forests.  Native species are very likely to face increasing threats from rapidly changing climate conditions, pests, diseases, and invasive species moving in from warmer regions. Addressing Climate Change Concern regarding the relationship between GHG emissions from anthropogenic sources and changes to climate has led to a variety of federal, state, and regional initiatives and programs aimed at reducing or controlling GHG emissions from human activities as discussed in Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases.  Because climate change is considered a cumulative global phenomenon, it is generally accepted that any successful strategy to address climate change must rest on a global approach to controlling these emissions. In other words, imposing controls on one industry or in one country is unlikely to be an effective strategy. In addition, because GHGs remain in the atmosphere for a long time, and industrial societies will continue to use fossil fuels for at least the next 25 to 50 years, climate change cannot be avoided. As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report states: “Societies can respond to climate change by adapting to its impacts and by reducing [GHG] emissions (mitigation), thereby reducing the rate and magnitude of change” (IPCC 2007). According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, there is a wide array of adaptation options. While adaptation will be an important aspect of reducing societies’ vulnerability to the impacts of climate change over the next two to three decades, “adaptation alone is not expected to cope with all the projected effects of climate change, especially not over the long term as most impacts increase in magnitude” (IPCC 2007). Therefore, it will also be necessary to mitigate climate change by stabilizing the concentrations of GHGs in the atmosphere. Stabilizing atmospheric concentrations will require societies to reduce their annual emissions. The stabilization concentration of a particular GHG is determined by the date that annual emissions of the gas start to decrease, the rate of decrease, and the persistence of the gas in the atmosphere. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report predicts the magnitude of climate change impacts for a range of scenarios based on different stabilization levels of GHGs. “Responding to climate change involves an iterative risk management process that includes both mitigation and adaptation, taking into account actual and avoided climate change damages, co-benefits, sustainability, equity, and attitudes to risk” (IPCC 2007). Climate Change, Greenhouse Gases, and the Proposed FutureGen 2.0 Project  The capture and geological storage of GHG emissions by the FutureGen 2.0 Project would produce a beneficial cumulative effect on a national and global scale. Use of the oxy-combustion process combined with CO2 injection and permanent underground storage would remove approximately 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) per year of CO2 that would otherwise be emitted to the atmosphere, while producing 168 MWe of electricity. CO2 emissions from the Meredosia Energy Center would decrease from historical levels of 1.4 million tons (1.3 million metric tons) per year or more to approximately 0.1 million metric tons per year. Over its 20 year operational lifespan, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would remove a total of approximately 24 million tons (22 million metric tons) of CO2 in the production of electricity from coal. These reductions in emissions alone would not appreciably reduce global concentrations of GHG emissions. However, these emissions changes would incrementally affect (reduce) the atmosphere’s concentration of GHGs, and, in combination with past and future emissions from all other sources, contribute incrementally to future change in atmospheric concentrations of GHGs. At present, there is no methodology that would allow DOE to estimate the specific effects (if any) this increment of change would produce near the project area or elsewhere. On a broader scale, successful implementation of the project may lead to widespread acceptance and deployment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage of CO2, thus fostering a long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States. 4.3.4.3 Geology The potential for cumulative impacts associated with geological resources relates to the use of the Mt. Simon Formation as a repository for injected CO2. Besides the FutureGen 2.0 Project, there are three operational or planned CO2 storage projects using the Mt. Simon Formation for the geologic storage of CO2. One carbon capture project has been proposed at Taylorville, Illinois, and two projects (Illinois Basin-Decatur and Illinois Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage) are located at the Archer Daniels Midland plant in Decatur, Illinois. The Illinois Basin-Decatur project has been operating for the past year, injecting 367,000 tons (333,000 metric tons) per year as part of a 3-year injection test (NETL 2012c). The Illinois Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage project would expand the geologic CO2 storage facility to accommodate commercial-scale carbon sequestration capacity by capturing and geologically storing 1 million tons (0.9 million metric tons) of CO2 annually from the company’s ethanol facility. The Archer Daniels Midland plant is located approximately 60 miles east of the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 storage study area. The Taylorville Energy Center project included a plan for local CO2 storage just north of Taylorville, Illinois; however, the project has been placed on indefinite hold pending state legislative action. The Taylorville Energy Center planned to inject 2.3 million tons (2.1 million metric tons) of CO2 per year adjacent to the new Taylorville Energy Center which would be located approximately 45 miles southeast of the FutureGen 2.0 CO2 storage study area.  The maximum modeled CO2 underground plume radius for the Illinois Basin-Decatur project is projected to be approximately 2,000 feet after 100 years (DOE 2008c). The Illinois Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage project used the projected pressure front radius for the AoR (2 miles), which would include the predicted CO2 plume radius of 5,900 feet (DOE 2008c). If the Taylorville Energy Center project were to proceed and inject CO2, the plume was projected to occupy approximately 20 square miles. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would inject 1.2 million tons (1.1 million metric tons) of CO2 annually, which would result in a plume size of 4,000 to 5,000 acres (6.25 to 7.81 square miles). DOE has estimated that the CO2 storage capacity for the Mt. Simon Formation is approximately 30 to 120 billion tons (27 to 109 billion metric tons) of CO2 (NETL 2010a). Pressure studies have modeled 20 projects injecting a total of 100 million tons (91 million metric tons) per year for 50 years, in the central Illinois Basin, representing one-third of the total current emissions from large stationary CO2 sources in the region (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011). The project sites were assumed to be approximately 30 miles apart, and the model showed that not only could the Mt. Simon Formation contain the CO2, the pressure changes stayed within the fractional buildup thresholds deemed safe by the natural gas entities in the region thus causing no increase in potential for induced seismicity (Zhou and Birkholzer 2011). Given the substantial spatial separation predicted for the CO2 plumes from the FutureGen 2.0 Project and the other three CO2 injection and storage projects, the overall seismic stability of the region, and the CO2 storage capacity of the Mt. Simon Formation, negligible cumulative impacts would be expected. 4.4 INCOMPLETE AND UNAVAILABLE INFORMATION Under NEPA, federal agencies must disclose incomplete or unavailable information if such information is essential to a reasoned choice among alternatives in an EIS, and must obtain that information if the overall costs of doing so are not exorbitant (40 CFR 1502.22). If the agency is unable to obtain the information because overall costs are exorbitant or because the means to obtain it are not known, the agency must do the following:  Affirmatively disclose that such information is unavailable;  Explain the relevance of the unavailable information;  Summarize existing credible scientific evidence that is relevant to the agency’s evaluation of significant adverse impacts on the human environment; and  Evaluate the impacts based upon theoretical approaches or research methods generally accepted in the scientific community. This section discloses areas where information was unavailable or incomplete during preparation of the Draft EIS and discusses its relevance to the range of environmental impacts. The FutureGen 2.0 Project is in the preliminary design phase, and certain aspects of the project are still under development or otherwise evolving (e.g., the specific locations of certain project features). As a result, some details regarding project plans and design are in development and were incomplete and unavailable during Draft EIS preparation, or are potentially subject to revision as the design process moves forward. To account for uncertainties caused by incomplete and unavailable information, DOE developed bounding conditions and assumptions based on the most current and available data and project plans in evaluating the range of potential impacts that could occur under the proposed project consistent with the fourth item in the list above. Project features and their relevance to the resource-level analysis presented in this Draft EIS include:  Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test Design. Initial design plans and air permitting documents for the FutureGen 2.0 Project were based on a 200 MWe system. The Alliance subsequently determined that a 168-MWe capacity system would be more appropriate and is in the process of revising the design. DOE based its analyses on updated project design characteristics reflecting the 168 MWe system for all the project components with the exception of the air quality analysis. Because the construction air permit application for the 168 MWe system has not yet been prepared, DOE based its air quality analysis on the current construction air permit application which reflects the 200 MWe system. This evaluation provides a conservative estimate, or upper bound, for potential impacts, as the revised FutureGen 2.0 design would be reduced in size and correspondingly be expected to have lower emissions. However, emissions dispersion characteristics may differ due to potential changes in emissions stack height, exit velocity, and gas characteristics. These topics are considered and described in Section 3.1, Air Quality.  Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test General Arrangement and Site Plan. Details related to site grading and site drainage for the FutureGen 2.0 Project at the Meredosia Energy Center were still under development when this Draft EIS was prepared. To assess the potential for physical impacts at the energy center, DOE used generalized disturbance area maps provided by the Alliance and Ameren. These maps depict boundaries within which development would occur, and thus provide a conservative, or upper bound, estimate of potential impacts. Design details beyond general location were also unavailable for the proposed stormwater management basins. DOE considered potential impacts related to this feature based on its general location, sensitive features present near that location, and measures that would be taken by the Alliance and Ameren with respect to the sensitive features. These topics are addressed in Section 3.6, Surface Water; Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains; and Section 3.8, Biological Resources.   CO2 Pipeline Routes. The Alliance identified two potential pipeline routes to the CO2 storage study area, the southern route (preferred) and the northern route (alternative), both within a 4-mile wide pipeline corridor. The Alliance was still in the process of planning the pipeline route as the Draft EIS was prepared, and portions of the proposed routes could be adjusted within the 4-mile corridor to avoid sensitive features or to address other constraints. Because access to the proposed pipeline ROWs was not available during Draft EIS preparation, field studies for cultural resources, sensitive biological species, and wetlands were unavailable at the time. In addition, pipeline routes within the CO2 storage study area were not yet defined in the absence of specific injection well locations and, therefore, DOE used hypothetical routes to develop the potential range of impacts. DOE relied on data available within the pipeline corridor and prospective ROWs and the CO2 storage study area (e.g., federal and state mapping data) to determine the likely presence of resources and the potential range of impacts that could occur. DOE considered efforts that would be conducted as part of ongoing consultation processes and through other programmatic commitments. These topics are addressed in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains; Section 3.8, Biological Resources; and Section 3.9, Cultural Resources.  CO2 Injection and Monitoring Wells. The Alliance was in the process of preparing permit applications for the UIC Class VI injection wells during Draft EIS preparation. Because this aspect of the project was still in progress when the Draft EIS was prepared, the specific locations of the proposed injection and monitoring wells within the CO2 storage study area were not yet identified. As a result, DOE used conceptual design data, proposed footprints, and siting criteria to assess the potential impacts given the resources present in the CO2 storage study area. Further, the Alliance has stated that, when complete, the permit applications could include a description of the number, type, and location of proposed injection and monitoring wells that differ from the injection configuration described and analyzed in the Draft EIS. Any changes would be based on continued site characterization efforts, CO2 dispersion modeling results, and other supporting studies. However, a revised configuration is not likely to result in a larger plume size (i.e., it would remain approximately 4,000 to 5,000 acres) and surface facilities would likely have a smaller footprint than those described in the Draft EIS. These topics are addressed in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils; Section 3.6, Surface Water; Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains; Section 3.8, Biological Resources; Section 3.9, Cultural Resources; and Section 3.10, Land Use.  Educational Facilities. The Alliance had not identified the specific location of the proposed educational facilities during Draft EIS preparation; however, the general location was expected to be in the vicinity of Jacksonville, Illinois. DOE considered the Alliance’s conceptual design and the siting criteria that would be used for locating the facilities in order to evaluate the range and types of potential impacts that could occur from this project component. These potential impacts are addressed in each resource section of Chapter 3 as appropriate. As indicated above, DOE has evaluated the potential range of impacts based upon the best available information for the FutureGen 2.0 Project and information on affected environment that could reasonably be obtained. In the absence of design data or specific location data for a project feature, DOE developed a range of potential impacts based on conceptual design data, siting criteria, other available project plans and commitments, and available baseline data for each resource area. DOE’s analysis was conducted in order to provide a range of potential impacts, including an upper bound, so as to provide decision-makers with information that would support a reasoned choice among the alternatives. As the design process progresses, and new data become available, DOE will review the analysis conducted in the Draft EIS to confirm that the analysis properly bounds the range of impacts identified for each alternative. 4.5 IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENTS This section describes the amounts and types of resources that would be irreversibly or irretrievably committed for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. A resource commitment is considered irreversible when primary or secondary impacts from its use limit concurrent or future use options. Irreversible commitment applies primarily to nonrenewable resources such as minerals or A resource commitment is irreversible when primary or secondary impacts from its use limit concurrent or future use options and is irretrievable when its use or consumption is neither renewable nor recoverable for use by future generations. cultural resources, and to those resources that are renewable only over long time spans, such as soil productivity or mature forests. A resource commitment is considered irretrievable when the use or consumption of the resource is neither renewable nor recoverable for use by future generations. Irretrievable commitment applies to the loss of production, harvest, or natural resources. Once consumed, the resource is no longer available for future generations. The principal resources that would be committed by the proposed project are the lands required for the construction and operation of the proposed oxy-combustion facility, CO2 pipeline, injection wells, and the educational facilities. Other resources that would be committed to the project include construction materials (e.g., steel and concrete), process materials (e.g., trona and lime), and fuels (e.g., coal and natural gas) used for construction and operations. In addition, the proposed project would commit the Mt. Simon Formation beneath Morgan County to permanent use for geologic storage of CO2. Surface lands would be irreversibly committed throughout the approximately 20-year operational life of the proposed project. After this time and upon future decommissioning, proposed project components could be removed and the surface lands again made available to be re-used for another purpose.  At the Meredosia Energy Center, all of the land required for the operation of the oxy-combustion facility is currently owned by Ameren and would be purchased by the Alliance. Therefore, there would be no loss of these lands, as they would be used for their current purpose. Onsite construction laydown areas would be leased for the duration of construction. The proposed CO2 pipeline would be constructed and operated by the Alliance. Construction ROWs such as laydown areas would be leased or used pursuant to short-term easements with landowners. Operational ROWs would be acquired through long-term easements with landowners. Lands used for agricultural production could be returned to that use after completion of pipeline construction. The Alliance would purchase the land required for the injection wells and associated infrastructure and the subsurface pore space into which the CO2 would be injected. Land required for monitoring wells would be purchased or leased by the Alliance depending on the type of monitoring well and landowner preference. The proposed CO2 pipeline ROW would be co-located along or within existing highway ROWs to the greatest extent practicable. For the remainder of the CO2 pipeline ROW, temporary easements would be required during construction, and permanent easements would be maintained for the operation of the CO2 pipeline. The CO2 pipeline ROW would not preclude farming once construction was complete. Lands currently being used for agriculture could be returned to agricultural use with few restrictions after completion of construction. Hence, agricultural lands within the temporary and permanent easements for the CO2 pipeline would not be considered irretrievably committed. However, the loss of agricultural use of these lands during the construction period would be an irreversible commitment. Natural habitat would be lost primarily where the CO2 pipeline ROWs would cross forested areas, mainly along streams and associated surface waters within the forested areas. The CO2 pipeline ROWs would result in the removal of up to 8 acres of forested areas along the southern route and 21 acres of forested areas along the northern route during construction, which would be converted to, and maintained as, grasslands over the 20-year operational life of the proposed project. The remainder of existing forested areas removed during construction would be allowed to revert back to forest through natural succession. At the end of the project's 20-year life, the operational ROW could revert back to forest through natural succession as well. However, the removal of forested area is considered an irreversible commitment because of the long time period required for a forest to re-establish. The land that would be occupied by the CO2 injection wells, associated facilities, and access roads would be irreversibly committed throughout the 20-year operational life of the project. Once CO2 injection operations are completed, some wells and equipment at the injection well site(s) may still be used for long-term monitoring purposes. Nevertheless, after removal of surface facilities, the land could return to other productive uses.  Considerable amounts of water used to operate the FutureGen 2.0 Project would also be irreversibly committed (e.g., evaporated to the atmosphere rather than discharged back to surface or groundwater). The FutureGen 2.0 Project would use up to 2.4 mgd of process water from the Illinois River that would be committed for the 20-year operational life of the oxy-combustion facility. Approximately 11.4 mgd of water would be taken from the river and cycled through the cooling towers where some of the water would evaporate. The balance (9 mgd) would be treated and returned to the Illinois River.  During operation, up to 0.2 mgd of groundwater would be used from onsite wells at the Meredosia Energy Center. Well water would be used for steam cycle demineralizer influent, coal-handling dust suppression, and potable water. Village of Meredosia water may also be used for potable water and fire protection. Because the project would not discharge any project-related water directly back to groundwater, the groundwater used would not be available for other uses. However, stormwater would be discharged to groundwater via the stormwater management basin or evaporated via the lined settling basin (refer to Section 2.4.2.2 for additional details).   Other resources that would be committed to the project include materials and energy resources used for construction and operation. Material and energy resources committed for the project would include construction materials (e.g., steel, concrete), electricity, and fuel (e.g., diesel, gasoline). All energy used during construction and operation would be irretrievable. During operation, up to 1,149 tons of bituminous coal, 766 tons of sub-bituminous coal, 119 tons of lime, and 2.2 tons of trona would be used on a daily basis, which would be irretrievably committed. These resources would not be available for use by future generations. The FutureGen 2.0 Project also would consume natural gas for heating purposes during operations. Although the amount of natural gas used would be negligible in relation to regional supplies, it would be irretrievably committed. The auxiliary electric power demand to operate the oxy-combustion facility would total 69 MWe. Although the oxy-combustion facility would irretrievably consume electricity during operation, it would generate approximately 168 MWe of electricity resulting in a net generation of approximately 99 MWe during operation, which would not otherwise be generated.  As described above, the project would result in irreversible (i.e., lost for a period of time) commitments of primarily renewable natural resources. The project would also result in an irretrievable (i.e., permanently lost) commitment of portions of geologic storage formations, energy, material resources, and fuel.  4.6 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SHORT-TERM USES OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND LONG-TERM PRODUCTIVITY This section describes the relationship and trade offs between the short-term uses of the environment for the FutureGen 2.0 Project and the project’s long-term benefits. Short-term uses of the environment would include the activities and associated impacts during the construction and 20-year operational lifespan of the proposed project. Potential impacts to various resources have been described throughout Chapter 3. Potential environmental impacts would include:  Air quality impacts resulting from criteria pollutant and fugitive dust emissions, as described in Section 3.1, Air Quality;  Erosion and sedimentation impacts on surface waters during construction, and impacts to the Illinois River and local aquifers from withdrawal of water to support operations, as described in Section 3.3, Physiography and Soils; Section 3.6, Surface Water; and Section 3.5, Groundwater;  Vegetation and wildlife habitat impacts caused by land-clearing activities, as described in Section 3.7, Wetlands and Floodplains; and Section 3.8, Biological Resources;  Aesthetic and land use changes affecting nearby residents, as described in Section 3.10, Land Use and Section 3.11, Aesthetics;  Traffic impacts during construction due to temporary detours and the movement of heavy equipment, plus increased traffic on local roadways during construction and operation, as described in Section 3.13, Traffic and Transportation; and  Noise impacts from construction activities and operations, as described in Section 3.14, Noise and Vibration. The FutureGen 2.0 Project would use environmental resources, consume products and energy, produce wastes and emissions, and occupy land. The project would consume resources including coal, surface water, groundwater, and natural and manufactured products during its planned 20-year operational life. The project would use up to 285 acres of land in Morgan County, Illinois, for the operation of the oxycombustion facility on the Meredosia Energy Center site, the permanent CO2 pipeline ROWs, the injection and monitoring well sites, and the educational facilities. See Chapter 2 for a discussion of the proposed project components. Upon future decommissioning of proposed project components, DOE assumes the structures could be removed and that the land could be made available for other purposes.  The project would enhance short-term productivity in the region through the direct, indirect, and induced creation of construction jobs during the construction of the oxy-combustion facility, the pipeline, injection wells, and educational facilities. In addition, the project would have a long-term beneficial impact on the local economy, employment, and tax base over its operational life as a result of the permanent jobs that would be created, plus the indirect and induced jobs created as a result of these permanent jobs (see Section 3.18, Socioeconomics). Another long-term benefit of the project would be the achievement of lower emissions of GHGs in comparison to conventional coal-fueled power plants by capturing and geologically storing CO2. During average annual operating conditions, the project is expected to generate 99 MWe (net) of electricity from coal combustion, with a near-zero emissions technology designed to capture at least 90 percent of the CO2 that would otherwise be emitted to the atmosphere. On a broader scale, the widespread acceptance and employment of oxy-combustion technology with geologic storage could foster an overall long-term reduction in the rate of CO2 emissions from power plants across the United States, thereby reducing national GHG emissions. If the proposed project is successful, the short-term use of land, materials, water, and energy to construct and operate the project would have long-term positive impacts on reducing GHG emissions both in the United States and globally (see Section 3.2, Climate and Greenhouse Gases). In summary, the short-term uses of the local environment do not represent substantial commitments of resources and would not cause substantial adverse impacts. In exchange for these short-term uses and associated effects, a substantial long-term benefit to the regional, national, and global environment may be achieved through the commercial-scale demonstration of technologies that can generate and distribute electricity using fossil fuels with substantially reduced GHG emissions. 5 REGULATORY AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS CEQ regulations for NEPA Part 1502 Section 1502.25 states that, to the fullest extent possible, agencies shall prepare draft EISs concurrently with and integrated with environmental impact analyses and related surveys and studies required by environmental review laws and EOs. It also requires a draft EIS list all federal permits, licenses, and other entitlements that must be obtained in implementing the proposed project. The following table contains relevant regulatory and permit requirements for the construction and operation of the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The table identifies relevant federal regulatory requirements considered within the EIS including federal regulations and EOs, state regulations and permitting requirements, and local regulations and permitting requirements. Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Table 5-1. Relevant Regulatory and Permit Requirements for the Proposed Project Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Federal Regulations and Permitting  Acid Rain Permit Program 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 72  Acid Deposition Control. The purpose of this part is to establish certain general provisions and the operating permit program requirements for affected sources and affected units under the Acid Rain Program, pursuant to Title IV of the CAA, 42 U.S. Code (USC) 7401, et seq., as amended by Public Law 101-549 (November 15, 1990).  Establishes limitations on sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions, permitting requirements, monitoring programs, reporting and record keeping requirements, and compliance plans for emissions sources. This Title requires that emissions of SO2 from utility sources be limited to the amounts of allowances held by the sources. The Acid Rain permit was incorporated into the CAA Permit Program (CAAPP) permit which was appealed in its entirety upon issuance in 2005. Resolution of CAAPP permit appeal is ongoing and will result in issuance of a renewed Acid Rain Permit. Ameren applied for renewal of the Acid Rain Permit (Title IV of CAA) on 6/4/2008; however, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) at its discretion delayed renewal of the Acid Rain Permit in conjunction with CAAPP appeals.  American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978 42 USC 1996  This Act ensures the protection of sacred locations and access of Native Americans to those sacred locations and traditional resources that are integral to the practice of their religions. Although no sacred locations and traditional resources have been identified in any areas that would be affected by the FutureGen 2.0 Project, such locations or resources could be inadvertently discovered during construction activities.  Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act 16 USC 668-668d  Prohibits "taking" bald or golden eagles, including their parts, nests, or eggs. The Act defines "take" as pursue, shoot, shoot at, poison, wound, kill, capture, trap, collect, molest or disturb. Prohibits the disturbance of a bald or golden eagle to a degree that causes, or is likely to cause: 1) injury to an eagle, 2) a decrease in its productivity, by substantially interfering with normal breeding, feeding, or sheltering behavior, or 3) nest abandonment, by substantially interfering with normal breeding, feeding, or sheltering behavior.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Chemical Accident Prevention Act 40 CFR 68 and Section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act Amendments  This Act requires stationary sources having more than a threshold quantity of the specific regulated toxic and flammable chemicals to develop a Risk Management Plan for submittal to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), which then makes the information publicly available,. The Risk Management Plan must include:  A hazard assessment that details the potential effects of an accidental release, an accident history of the last 5 years, and an evaluation of the worst-case and alternative accidental releases;  A prevention program that includes safety precautions and maintenance, monitoring, and employee training; and  An emergency response program that spells out emergency health care, employee training measures, and procedures for informing the public and response agencies (e.g., the fire department) should an accident occur. The plan must be updated and resubmitted to the agency every 5 years. Under the Illinois Accidental Release Prevention Program, the Alliance could be required to comply with the Chemical Accident Provisions because the energy center could have the potential to emit covered substances at levels above the accidental release threshold quantities.  Clean Air Act  The CAA authorizes the USEPA to delegate permitting, administrative, and enforcement duties to state governments, while USEPA retains oversight responsibilities. The IEPA has been delegated permitting authority under the CAA. The CAA programs and regulations that are or could be applicable to the FutureGen 2.0 Project are:  Acid Rain Program/Permit (Title IV)   CAA Operating Permit (Title V)   Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR)  Compliance Assurance Monitoring Rule  Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Tailoring Rule  National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAPs) and Mercury and Air Toxics (MATS) (part of Title I)  New Source Performance Standards (NSPSs) (part of Title I)  Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) Permit (part of Title I)  Regional Haze Rule Each of these CAA requirements is addressed in this table.  Clean Air Act, Title V (Air Operating Permit) 40 CFR 70  CAA Title V provides the basis for the Operating Permit Program and establishes permit conditions, including monitoring and analysis, inspections, certification, and reporting. Authority for implementation of the permitting program is delegated to the state of Illinois.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Clean Air Interstate Rule   On March 10, 2005, USEPA issued the CAIR. This rule provides states with a solution to  40 CFR 96  the problem of power plant pollution that drifts from one state to another. CAIR covers 27 eastern states and the District of Columbia. The rule uses a cap and trade system to reduce the target pollutants – SO2 and NOx. A December 2008 court decision found flaws in CAIR, but kept CAIR requirements in place temporarily while directing USEPA to issue a replacement rule. On July 6, 2011, the USEPA finalized the Cross State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR), which was intended to replace CAIR. However, on August 21, 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals struck down the USEPA’s CSAPR. As a result, CAIR remains in effect.  Clean Water Act,  Title IV 40 CFR 104 through 140  Focuses on improving the quality of water resources by providing a comprehensive framework of standards, technical tools, and financial assistance to address the many causes of pollution and poor water quality, including municipal and industrial wastewater discharges, polluted runoff from urban and rural areas, and habitat destruction. Applicable Sections:  Section 303(d) and 305(b). Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) requires states to identify and develop a list of impaired waterbodies where technology-based and other required controls have not provided attainment of water quality standards. Section 305(b) of the CWA requires states to assess and report the quality of their waterbodies. In 2008, Illinois combined their 303(d) and 305(b) list into one report referred to as the Integrated Report. The report identifies those waterbodies that are impaired and do not meet designated uses, and establishes total maximum daily loads for pollutants of concern.  Section 401—Certification. Provides states with the opportunity to review and approve, condition, or deny all federal permits or licenses that might result in a discharge to state or tribal waters, including wetlands. The major federal permit subject to Section 401 review is a Section 404 permit. Every applicant for a Section 404 permit must request state certification that the proposed activity would not violate state or federal water quality standards. In Illinois, there are 26 specific nationwide permits for which a Section 401 certification has been categorically issued per the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), including Nationwide Permit 12.  Section 402—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. Requires sources to obtain permits to discharge effluents and stormwater to surface waters. The CWA authorizes USEPA to delegate permitting, administrative, and enforcement duties to state governments, while USEPA retains oversight responsibilities. The state of Illinois has been delegated NPDES authority and therefore would issue the NPDES permit.  Section 404 o Permits for Dredged or Fill Material. Regulates the discharge of dredged or fill material in the jurisdictional wetlands and waters of the U.S. The USACE has been delegated the responsibility for authorizing these actions. o Nationwide Permit 12 Utility Line Activities. Authorizes the construction, maintenance, and repair of utility lines and the associated excavation, backfill, or bedding for the utility lines in all waters of the U.S. The USACE has been delegated the responsibility for authorizing these actions.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Compliance Assurance  The rule applies to facilities that have emissions units located at major sources subject  Monitoring Rule  to Title V air quality permitting and that use control devices to achieve compliance with  40 CFR 64  emissions limits. A Compliance Assurance Monitoring Plan is required as part of the  35 Illinois Administrative Code (IAC) Part 201  initial application for a Title V Operating Permit. The rule requires that these facilities monitor the operation and maintenance of their control equipment to evaluate the performance of their control devices and report if they meet established emissions  standards. If these facilities find that their control equipment is not working properly, the rule requires them to take action to correct any malfunctions and to report such instances to the appropriate enforcement agency (i.e., state and local environmental agencies). Six exemptions apply. The rule does not apply to emissions limitations and standards that: (1) are contained in post 1990 rules, (2) specify a continuous compliance determination method, (3) are related to stratospheric ozone requirements, (4) are included in the Acid Rain program, (5) apply solely under an emissions trading program, or (6) are included in an emissions cap that meets the requirements of 40 CFR 70.4(b)(13). Because existing standards would require continuous monitoring of NOx, SO2, and particulate matter (PM), compliance assurance monitoring would not apply to these pollutants. The project does not include add-on controls for carbon monoxide (CO) or for VOCs and therefore these pollutants would not be subject to compliance assurance monitoring.  Compliance with  Establishes policy and procedures for discharging the U.S. Department of Energy’s  Floodplain and Wetland  (DOE’s) responsibilities under EO 11988 and EO 11990, including DOE policy regarding  Environmental Review  the consideration of floodplain and wetland factors in DOE planning and decision- Requirements.  making; and DOE procedures for identifying proposed projects located in a floodplain or  Title 10 Part 1022  wetland, providing opportunity for early public review of such proposed projects, preparing floodplain or wetland assessments, and issuing statements of findings for actions in a floodplain.  Emergency Planning and  Requires that inventories of specific chemicals used or stored onsite be reported on a  Community Right-to periodic basis. The project would process or otherwise use substances subject to the  Know Act of 1986  Act’s reporting requirements, such as sulfuric acid.  42 USC 11001 et seq.  Endangered Species Act  Section 7 – Interagency Cooperation. Requires any federal agency authorizing, funding,  16 USC 1536 et seq.  or carrying out any action to ensure that the action is not likely to jeopardize the  Enacted by Public Law 93 continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the  205, Endangered Species  destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat of such species. Under Section 7 of  Act of 1973 (16 USC 1531  the Act, DOE has consulted with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the  et seq.)  Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). Section 10 – Exceptions. An Incidental Take Permit allows for the taking of a species incidental to an otherwise lawful act. This permit is required when non-federal activities would result in the take of threatened or endangered apices. Each permit application must be accompanied by a Habitat Conservation Plan, which ensures that the effects of the authorized incidental take are adequately minimized and mitigated. If such a permit is required, DOE would consult with the USFWS.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Farmland Protection  Directs federal agencies to identify and quantify adverse impacts of federal programs on  Policy Act  farmlands. The Act’s purpose is to minimize the number of federal programs that  7 USC 4201 et seq. 7 CFR 658  contribute to the unnecessary and irreversible conversion of agricultural land to nonagricultural uses. In compliance with the Act and regulations promulgated pursuant to the Act, DOE has  undertaken the following actions:  Identified and taken into account the adverse effects of the proposed project on the preservation of farmland;  Considered alternative actions, as appropriate, that could lessen adverse effects; and  Ensured that the proposed project, to the extent practicable, would be compatible with state and units of local government programs, as well as private programs and policies to protect farmland. The DOE will coordinate with the Illinois Department of Agriculture to complete the farmland impact analysis.  Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act 16 USC 2901 et seq.  Encourages federal agencies to conserve and promote conservation of non-game fish and wildlife species and their habitats.  Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act 16 USC 661 et seq.  Requires federal agencies undertaking projects affecting water resources to consult with the USFWS and the state agency responsible for fish and wildlife resources. These agencies are to be sent copies of this Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and their comments will be considered.  Greenhouse Gas  The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 (H.R. 2764; Public Law 110–161) directed  Reporting Program  the USEPA to develop a mandatory reporting rule for GHG emissions. The rule became  40 CFR 98  effective December 29, 2009, and includes requirements for 31 emissions source categories, including electric generation and general combustion sources. On April 12, 2010, USEPA issued four new proposed rules that amend the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule (GGRR). These proposals would require reporting of emissions data from additional sources, including facilities that inject and store CO2 underground for the purposes of geologic sequestration or enhanced oil and gas recovery (Subpart RR). Subpart RR reporting requirements were finalized in a rule published on December 1, 2012, and went into effect on December 31, 2010.    On May 27, 2010, the Administrator signed a proposed rule that includes technical corrections, clarifications, and other amendments to the GGRR, but does not affect the reporting requirement. On December 1, 2010, two reporting rules related to CO2 injection were finalized. Subpart RR applies to facilities that inject CO2 for geologic sequestration, and subpart UU applies to enhanced oil recovery (EOR) facilities. The geologic storage option would report the mass balance of CO2 as required by subpart RR.   Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule 40 CFR 51, 52, 70, and 71  This rule limits applicability of GHG emissions standards under the CAA to new and modified stationary sources that emit more than 75,000 tons per year (68,250 metric tons) of CO2 equivalents (beginning January 2, 2011). If GHG emissions exceed the threshold, the GHG emissions would be subject to best available control technology (BACT) and other relevant requirements that apply to PSD permits. Because this project includes contemporaneous and creditable decreases in GHG emissions, the project is not subject to PSD for GHG and would not be required to implement BACT for GHG.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Mercury and Air Toxics  On February 16, 2012, the USEPA finalized the NESHAPs from Coal- and Oil-Fired  rule (also known as  Electric Utility Steam Generating Units (EGUs) under 40 CFR 63, Subpart UUUUU,  Utility Maximum  otherwise known as the MATS rule (or Utility MACT). New and existing facilities would  Achievable Control  be subject to the rule. This rule replaces the 2005 Clean Air Mercury Rule.   Technology [MACT]  The proposed project is categorized as an EGU and would therefore be subject to this  rule)  regulation.  40 CFR 63 Subpart  UUUUU  Migratory Bird Treaty Act 16 USC 703 et seq.  Protects birds that have common migration patterns between the United States and Canada, Mexico, Japan, and Russia. The Act regulates the take and harvest of migratory birds. The USFWS will review this EIS to determine whether the activities analyzed would comply with the requirements of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.  National Emissions  Non-criteria pollutants that can cause serious health and environmental hazards are  Standards for Hazardous  termed hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) or air toxics. The NESHAPs apply primarily to  Air Pollutants  new and existing sources in source categories designated by the USEPA. Specific  40 CFR 61 and 63  NESHAPs apply to major sources of HAPs defined to be major (i.e., emitting a single  35 IAC Part 201 35 IAC Part 232  HAP in excess of 10 tons per year or an aggregate emissions rate of over 25 tons per year of any combination of regulated HAPs). However, USEPA has also promulgated several NESHAPs which apply to area sources of HAPs (less than major source levels  of HAPs). The emergency generators at the energy center would be subject to 40 CFR 63 Subpart ZZZZ, “National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Stationary Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines.” The auxiliary boiler would be subject to 40 CFR 63 Subpart DDDDD, “National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants  for Industrial, Commercial, and Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters at Major Sources.”    National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 42 USC 4321 et seq.  This EIS is being prepared to comply with NEPA, the federal law that requires agencies of the federal government to study the possible environmental impacts of major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.  National Historic  Under Section 106, the head of any federal agency having direct or indirect jurisdiction  Preservation Act  over a proposed federal or federally-assisted undertaking in any state and the head of  36 CFR 800 16 USC 470 et seq.  any federal department or independent agency having authority to license any undertaking shall, prior to the approval of the expenditure of any federal funds on the undertaking or prior to the issuance of any license, as the case may be, take into  account the effect of the undertaking on any district, site, building, structure, or object that is included in or eligible for inclusion in the National Register. The head of any such federal agency shall afford the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation established under Title II of the Act a reasonable opportunity to comment with regard to such undertaking.  National Pollutant  Authorized under the CWA, the NPDES program requires sources to obtain permits to  Discharge Elimination  discharge effluents and stormwater to surface waters. Under this program, permit  System  modifications are required if discharge effluents are altered. The CWA authorizes  42 USC 1342 et seq.  USEPA to delegate permitting, administrative, and enforcement duties to state  35 IAC Part 309  governments, while it retains oversight responsibilities. The state of Illinois has been delegated NPDES authority and therefore would issue an NPDES permit for the project. The proposed project would discharge treated industrial wastewater to surface waters under NPDES Permit No. IL0000116. This NPDES Permit (IL0000116), which was renewed September 30, 2011, and is valid for the next five years. This permit would require revision prior to the project discharging wastewater.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  New Source  The NSPS are technology-based standards applicable to new, modified and  Performance Standards  reconstructed stationary sources of regulated air emissions in certain source categories.  40 CFR 60  Where the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) emphasize air quality in general, the NSPS focus on particular sources of approximately 70 industrial source categories or sub-categories of sources (e.g., fossil fuel-fired generators, grain elevators, steam generating units) that are designated by size as well as type of process. NSPS standards have been developed and would apply to the oxy-combustion boiler, the auxiliary fuel oil fired boiler, and the emergency generator. NSPS standards have also been promulgated for coal processing plants and certain portions of the Meredosia Energy Center coal handling system may fall under the coal processing plant standards after modification for this project.  Noise Control Act 42 USC 4901 et seq.  Directs federal agencies to carry out programs in their jurisdictions “to the fullest extent within their authority” and in a manner that furthers a national policy of promoting an environment free from noise that jeopardizes health and welfare.  Notice to the Federal  The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) must be notified and informed of proposed  Aviation Administration  lighting for any structures more than 200 feet high pursuant to 14 CFR 77. The FAA  14 CFR 77  would then determine if the structures would or would not be an obstruction to air navigation. Subsequent construction notification(s) are required to be submitted to the FAA.  Occupational Safety and  Compliance with OSHA would be required according to OSHA standards.  Health Act  Applicable Rules:  29 USC 651 et seq.   OSHA General Industry Standards (29 CFR 1910)  OSHA Construction Industry Standards (29 CFR 1926)  OSHA sets permissible exposure limits for chemicals allowed for workers over an 8hour period at facilities. Energy center employees would be instructed in worker protection and safety procedures, and would be provided appropriate personal protective equipment pursuant to the contractor’s and/or energy center’s safety program.  Oil Pollution Prevention Rule 40 CFR 112  This Rule requires a Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures (SPCC) plan if the energy center stores more than 1,320 gallons of oil onsite aboveground (or more than 42,000 gallons of oil onsite belowground). The rule is applicable to the project based on the proposed storage of diesel fuel and potential use of large transformers that hold more than 1,320 gallons of mineral oil.  Pollution Prevention Act  Establishes a national policy for waste management and pollution control that focuses  42 USC 13101 et seq.  first on source reduction, and then on environmentally safe waste recycling, treatment, and disposal. EO 13101, “Greening the Government through Waste Prevention, Recycling, and Federal Acquisition”, and EO 13148, “Greening the Government through Leadership in Environmental Management”, provide guidance to agencies to implement the Pollution Prevention Act. DOE requires specific goals to reduce the generation of waste. DOE would implement a pollution prevention plan by incorporating such waste-reducing activities as ordering construction materials in correct sizes and numbers, resulting in very small amounts of waste; and implementing best management practices to reduce the volume of waste generated and reuse waste wherever possible.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Prevention of Significant  The PSD Program involves a pre-construction review and permit process for  Deterioration  construction and operation of a new or modified major stationary source of air emissions  (Clean Air Act Title I) 40 CFR 52.21  in attainment areas. A major source is a source for which the amount of any one regulated pollutant emitted is equal to or greater than thresholds of 100 tons per year for sources which are part of the 28 categories defined by the PSD rule or 250 tons per year  for all other source categories. Regulated air pollutants include PM, VOC, GHGs, SO2, NOx, and CO. Authority for implementation of the Title I PSD program has been delegated to IEPA. The construction permit application for the proposed project quantifies and analyzes the estimated operational emissions, and concludes that the proposed project would not require a PSD permit; however, the construction permit application is currently being revised, and has not yet been approved by IEPA. Due to the reduction in size of the project, it is not anticipated that a PSD permit would be required (Ameren 2012).  Regional Haze Rule  In July 1999, the USEPA published the Regional Haze Rule to address visibility  CAA Section 169  impairment in our nation’s largest national parks and wilderness (“Class I”) areas. The Regional Haze Rule required states to develop Best Available Retrofit Technology (BART) standards for combustion sources constructed between 1962 and 1977 which have the potential to emit greater than 250 tons per year of regional haze pollutants. These standards were to be developed on a case-by-case basis. Facilities constructed after 1977 were subject to NSPS standards for boilers and BART was not required. Therefore, the FutureGen 2.0 Project would not be required to conduct a Class I area impact analysis under the Regional Haze Rule.  Resource Conservation  Regulates the treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous wastes. Project  and Recovery Act  participants would be required to identify any residues that require management as  (RCRA)  hazardous waste under RCRA (40 CFR 261). For some waste streams, this includes  40 CFR 239 through 299  testing waste samples using the toxic characteristic leaching procedure or other procedures that measure hazardous waste characteristics.   Applicable Title: Title II, Subtitle C—Hazardous Waste Management, provides for a regulatory system to ensure the environmentally sound management of hazardous wastes from the point of origin to the point of final disposal. Title II, Subtitle D—State or Regional Solid Waste Plans, requires state and local government to establish a regulatory framework for the proper management and disposal of non-hazardous solid wastes.   Rivers and Harbors Act  Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act requires authorization from the USACE for the  of 1989  construction of any structure in or over any navigable water of the U.S., the  33 USC 401, 403, 407  excavation/dredging or deposition of material in these waters or any obstruction or alteration in a "navigable water". Structure or work outside the limits defined as navigable waters of the U.S. require a Section10 permit if the structure or work affects the course, location, condition, or capacity of the waterbody. The Alliance is currently discussing the applicability of this requirement with the USACE.  Safe Drinking Water Act  Gives USEPA the responsibility and authority to regulate public drinking water supplies  42 USC 300 et seq.  by establishing drinking water standards, delegating authority for enforcement of drinking water standards to the states, and protecting aquifers from hazards such as injection of wastes and other materials into wells. The USEPA has primacy over Class VI injection wells, which are used for geologic sequestration of CO2. USEPA regulations for the Underground Injection Control (UIC) program of the Safe Drinking Water Act are codified at 40 CFR 146.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Transportation of  Specifies safety standards and reporting requirements for pipeline facilities used in the  Hazardous Liquids by  transportation of hazardous liquids or CO2. This includes pipeline location standards to  Pipeline  avoid private dwellings, industrial buildings, and places of public assembly, stipulations  49 CFR 195  for pipeline depth and right-of-way (ROW) requirements. This Act established the Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), which is part of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. OPS maintains a pipeline incident database and also requires pipeline annual operator reports. OPS develops safety guidelines for pipelines. The 1992 amendments, particularly Section 601 Safety, expanded the authority of OPS to evaluate safety and environmental protection related to siting and operation of natural gas, oil, and hazardous liquid pipelines.  Underground Injection  Construction and operation of CO2 injection wells for geologic storage would require the  Control Permit  issuance of an UIC permit in accordance with 40 CFR 146 under the Safe Drinking  40 CFR 146  Water Act. The USEPA currently has the authority to issue and administer the Class VI permits required for large-scale injection of CO2. The Alliance plans to file applications for Class VI UIC Permits with the USEPA.  Executive Orders   Executive Order 13175  Directs federal agencies to establish regular and meaningful consultation and  Consultation and  collaboration with tribal governments in the development of federal policies that have  Coordination with Indian  tribal implications, to strengthen United States government-to-government relationships  Tribal Governments  with Indian tribes, and to reduce the imposition of unfunded mandates on tribal governments.  Executive Order 13432, Cooperation Among Agencies in Protecting the Environment With Respect to Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Motor Vehicles, Nonroad Vehicles, and Nonroad Engines  EO issued (May 2007) to reduce GHG emissions from motor vehicles, nonroad vehicles, and nonroad engines.  Executive Order 12898  Requires federal agencies to identify and address, as appropriate, disproportionately  Federal Actions   high and adverse human health or environmental effects of its programs, policies, and  to Address Environmental  activities on minority populations and low-income populations.  Justice in Minority  Populations and Low- Income Populations  Executive Order 13514,  EO (issued October 2009) to make reduction of GHG emissions a priority for federal  Federal Leadership in  agencies.  Environmental, Energy and  In October 2010, the CEQ finalized guidance establishing government-wide  Economic Performance  requirements for federal agencies in calculating and reporting greenhouse emissions associated with agency operations.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Executive Order 11988  EO 11988, “Floodplain Management”, directs federal agencies to establish procedures  Floodplain Management;  to ensure that they consider potential effects of flood hazards and floodplain  Executive Order 11990  management for any action undertaken. Agencies are to avoid impacts to floodplains to  Protection of Wetlands  the extent practical. EO 11990, “Protection of Wetlands”, requires federal agencies to avoid short- and longterm impacts to wetlands if a practical alternative exists. DOE regulation 10 CFR 1022 establishes procedures for compliance with these EOs. Where no practical alternatives exist to development in floodplain and wetlands, DOE is required to prepare a floodplain and wetlands assessment discussing the effects on the floodplain and wetlands, and consideration of alternatives. In addition, these regulations require DOE to design or modify its actions to minimize potential damage in floodplains or harm to wetlands. DOE is also required to provide opportunity for public review of any plans or proposals for actions in floodplains and new construction in wetlands. A statement of findings from the assessment will be incorporated into the Final EIS.  Executive Order 13148 Greening the Government through Leadership in Environmental Management  Makes the head of each federal agency responsible for ensuring that all necessary actions are taken to integrate environmental accountability into agency day-to-day decision-making and long-term planning across all agency missions, activities, and functions.  Executive Order 13101 Greening the Government through Waste Prevention, Recycling, and Federal Acquisition  Directs federal agencies to incorporate waste prevention and recycling in each agency’s daily operations and work to increase and expand markets for recovered materials through preference and demand for environmentally preferable products and services.  Executive Order 13007  Directs federal agencies, to the extent permitted by law and not inconsistent with agency  Indian Sacred Sites  missions, to avoid adverse effects to sacred sites and to provide access to those sites to Native Americans for religious practices. This Order directs agencies to plan projects to provide protection of and access to sacred sites to the extent compatible with the project.  Executive Order 13112 Invasive Species  Directs federal agencies to prevent the introduction of or to monitor and control invasive (non-native) species, to provide for restoration of native species, to conduct research, to promote educational activities, and to exercise care in taking actions that could promote the introduction or spread of invasive species.  Executive Order 11514 Protection and Enhancement of Environmental Quality  This EO directs federal agencies to continuously monitor and control activities to protect and enhance the quality of the environment. The EO also requires agencies to develop procedures to ensure the fullest practical provision of timely public information and the understanding of federal plans and programs with potential environmental impacts, and to obtain the views of interested parties. DOE promulgated regulations (10 CFR 1027) and issued DOE Order 451.1b, “National Environmental Policy Act Compliance Program”, to ensure compliance with this EO. Because the proposed project is a federal action that requires NEPA analysis, DOE must comply with Order 451.1b.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Executive Order 13186  Requires federal agencies to avoid or minimize the negative impacts of their actions on  Responsibilities of Federal  migratory birds, and to take active steps to protect birds and their habitats.  Agencies  to Protect  Migratory Birds   Directs each federal agency taking actions having or likely to have a negative impact on migratory bird populations to work with the USFWS to develop an agreement to  conserve those birds.  Directs agencies to avoid or minimize impacts to migratory bird populations, take reasonable steps that include restoring and enhancing habitat, prevent or abate pollution affecting birds, and incorporate migratory bird conservation into agency planning processes whenever possible.  Requires environmental analyses of federal actions to evaluate effects of those actions on migratory birds, to control the spread and establishment in the wild of exotic animals and plants that could harm migratory birds and their habitats, and either to provide advance notice of actions that could result in the take of migratory birds or to report annually to the USFWS on the numbers of each species taken during the conduct of agency actions.  Executive Order 12856  Directs federal agencies to reduce and report toxic chemicals entering any waste  Right-to-Know Laws and  stream, improve emergency planning, response, and accident notification, and  Pollution Prevention  encourage the use of clean technologies and testing of innovative prevention  Requirements  technologies. In addition, this Order states that federal agencies are persons for purposes of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act, which requires agencies to meet the requirements of the Act.  Executive Order 13423  EO 13423 directs federal agencies to conduct their environmental, transportation, and  Strengthening Federal  energy related activities in an environmentally, economically, and fiscally sound,  Environmental, Energy,  integrated, continuously improving, efficient, and sustainable manor.  and Transportation  Management  Illinois State Regulations and Permitting  Accommodation of Utilities on Right-of-Way 92 IAC Part 530  A public entity acting in the capacity of a utility must obtain a permit issued by an officer of the elected governing body.  Air Pollution Control  An IEPA construction permit is required prior to construction. Because this project would  Construction and  occur in an attainment area, the project would be subject to either a PSD permit or a  Operating Permits  minor source permit, depending on the air emissions.  35 IAC Part 201  The construction permit typically allows operation for a period of up to 12 months  35 IAC Part 203  following initial startup, during which all permit-required emissions source testing, emissions monitoring verification, and preparation of the CAAPP operating permit application would be conducted. The operating permit would then provide ongoing regulatory compliance conditions for the facility following construction.  Archaeological and  Under the Archaeological and Paleontological Resources Protection Act, individuals are  Paleontological  prohibited from disturbing (collecting, destroying, defacing, etc.) archaeological and  Resources Protection  paleontological resources on public lands in Illinois. This law is also known as the Public  Act  Lands Act. Violations of this Act are subject to civil penalties relating to either the  20 ILCS 3435  misdemeanor or felony charges.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Boiler and Pressure Vessel Safety Act 41 IAC 120  Under the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Safety Act, no boiler, except those exempted by the Act, can be installed unless it has been constructed and inspected in conformity with the applicable section of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Code and is inspected and registered in accordance with the requirements of the Act.  Carbon Dioxide  Specifies the process for obtaining a certificate of authority from the Illinois Commerce  Transportation and  Commission by owner or operator of a CO2 pipeline that is operated to transport CO2 for  Sequestration Act  underground storage or EOR.  Illinois Public Act 097-0534  Cemetery Protection Act 765 ILCS 835  The Cemetery Protection Act makes it illegal to vandalize, obliterate, or desecrate a burial ground (cemetery), park, memorial, grave marker, vegetation, or surroundings (fences, curbs, etc.) dedicated to the deceased. Under this law, specific criminal penalties are provided for and increase in severity relative to degree of the offense.  Certificate of Public  A certificate would be required if the FutureGen Alliance, as the operator of the energy  Convenience and  center, was determined to be a public utility. At this time, it is not expected that a  Necessity  certificate would be required.  Section 3-105 and 8-406  of the Illinois Public  Utilities Act  Construction in  17 IAC Part 3700: IDNR issues permits for construction projects that may impact the  Floodways of Rivers,  flood carrying capacity of the rivers, lakes, and streams. These rules affect all streams  Lakes, and Streams  and lakes except those in northeastern Illinois regulated under Part 3708. All  17 IAC Part 3700  construction activities in the floodways of streams in urban areas where the stream drainage area is 1 square mile or more or in rural areas where the stream drainage area is 10 square miles or more must be permitted by the Division prior to construction.  Regulation of Public  17 IAC Part 3704: The Division issues permits for activities in the public waters of the  Waters  state. The public waters may generally be described as the commercially navigable  17 IAC Part 3704  lakes and streams of the state and the backwater areas of those streams. The Division reviews proposed activities in public waters to ensure that the public's rights are not diminished by the activity. Activities that require review are not limited to construction. A  Rivers, Lakes, and  permit is issued to demonstrate that the activity does not diminish the public's rights.  Streams Act and  The purpose of this Statewide Permit is to authorize the construction of underground  Floodway Construction  pipeline and utility crossings, which have insignificant impact on those factors under the  Rules  jurisdiction of the Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. This  615 ILCS 5, 1994  permit applies to all directionally bored pipeline and utility crossings placed beneath the beds of all Illinois rivers, lakes, and streams under the Department's jurisdiction. This permit also applies to other pipeline and utility crossings placed beneath the beds of all Illinois rivers, lakes, and streams under the Department's jurisdiction except those in Part 3708.  General Permit for  Construction sites that disturb one acre or more are required to have coverage under the  Construction Storm  NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction site activities. When  Water Discharge  the construction activity is completed and all disturbed areas are stabilized, the  IEPA NPDES Permit No. ILR10  responsible party must submit a Notice of Termination in order to end coverage under the General Permit.  35 IAC, Subtitle C,  Chapter 1  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Human Skeletal Remains  Under the Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act, any person who discovers human  Protection Act  skeletal remains shall promptly notify the coroner. It is unlawful for any person, either by  20 Illinois Compiled  himself or through an agent, to knowingly disturb human skeletal remains, grave  Statutes (ILCS) 3440  markers, or grave artifacts in unregistered graves protected by this Act unless such  17 IAC 4170  person obtains a permit issued by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.  Hydrostatic Test Water  This permit would be obtained from the IEPA, Division of Water Pollution Control under  Discharge Permit  the NPDES Program. This permit would regulate hydrostatic test water discharge and  NPDES General Permit  construction dewatering to waters of the state. No trench dewater permit would be  35 IAC Subtitle C,  required for the proposed project unless contaminated soil/water and discharge would  Chapter 1  flow to an uncontaminated source.  Illinois Clean Coal  The law creates a framework for developing clean-coal power projects with CO2 capture  Portfolio Standard Law  and storage, requiring emissions from these electric generation facilities to be as clean  20 ILCS Part 3855  as natural gas generators. To qualify as a clean coal facility under this legislation, new coal-fueled power plants that begin operations between 2016 and 2017, must capture and store 70 percent of carbon emissions, and after 2017, must capture and store 90 percent of the carbon emissions the facility would otherwise emit. Facilities must also incorporate power generating equipment that limit regulated pollutants (SO2, NOx, CO, particulates, and mercury) from combustion of the synthetically-produced feedstock to levels that are no higher than combined cycle, natural gas-fired plants. The law requires electric utilities and other electric retail suppliers in Illinois to purchase up to 5 percent of their electricity from clean coal facilities. It also entitles one initial clean coal facility with a final air permit to 30-year purchase agreements for the sale of its output.  Illinois Department of Agriculture  Developed recommended pipeline construction standards to help preserve integrity of agricultural land and reduce impacts from pipelines such as deeper burial to 5 feet under agricultural areas with tile drains.  Illinois Elevator Safety Rules 41 IAC 1000  The Illinois Elevator Safety Rules, assures that conveyances are correctly and safely installed and operated within the state by regulating the installation, construction, operation, inspection, testing, maintenance, alteration, and repair of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, moving sidewalks, platform lifts, stairway chairlifts, and automated people movers, and by licensing personnel and businesses that work on these conveyances. The project would install an elevator.  Illinois Emergency  This Act set up the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and procedures for planning  Management Agency Act  and handling natural disasters and manmade emergencies. Title 29: Emergency  20 ILCS 3305  Services, Disasters, and Civil Defense specifies the agency’s work related to emergency planning, incident reporting for releases of extremely hazardous or hazardous chemicals above specified reportable quantities. This agency maintains information on radon in the state.  Illinois Emergency  Provides for state implementation of federal statues related to reporting of hazardous  Planning and Right to  chemicals stored onsite and notification requirements if a release occurs to offsite areas.  Know Act  430 ILCS 100  Illinois Endangered Species Act 17 IAC Part 1075  This Act requires a consultation process be undertaken with the IDNR to determine the potential impact of a facility on state threatened, endangered, or special concern species. Such consultation is underway for the project. This documentation will be included in the Final EIS.  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Illinois Environmental  Supplements and strengthens existing criminal sanctions regarding environmental  Protection Act  damage by enacting specific penalties for injury to public health and the environment.  415 ILCS 5  Establishes a unified, state-wide program supplemented by private remedies to restore, protect, and enhance the quality of the environment. Assures that adverse effects upon the environment are fully considered and borne by those who cause them.  Illinois Executive Order  Illinois State EO issued (October 2006) to initiate a long-term strategy by the state to  2006-11  combat global climate change, and build on the steps the state has already taken to reduce greenhouse emissions. The Order created the Illinois Climate Change Advisory Group (ICCAG) to consider a full range of policies and strategies to reduce GHGs in Illinois and make recommendations to the Governor (IEPA 2011).  Illinois Farmland Preservation Act 8 IAC Part 700  Illinois Department of Agriculture policy to promote the protection of Illinois farmland from unnecessary conversion and degradation.  Illinois Gas Pipeline Safety Act 220 ILCS 20  Establishes minimum safety standards for the transportation of gas and for the pipeline facilities. Applies to the design, installation, inspection, testing, construction, extension, operation, replacement, and maintenance of pipeline facilities.  Illinois Historic Resources Preservation Act 20 ILCS Part 3420  Consultation with the Illinois SHPO is required if historic properties could be located within the project area. Such consultation is underway; DOE, the Alliance, and the Illinois SHPO are parties to a Programmatic Agreement that would cover such activities.  Illinois Interagency  Establishes a state goal that there be “no overall net loss of the state's existing wetland  Wetland Policy Act  acres or their functional values due to state supported activities." To accomplish this  20 ILCS 830  goal, the Act established a review process for all projects being pursued by a state agency or being accomplished with state funds that have the potential to adversely affect a wetland. If it is determined an impact is going to occur, the entity requesting approval must prepare a compensation plan that details how it will compensate for the impact. All compensation plans must be approved by IDNR.   Interconnection Agreement  If an interconnection agreement is required with an owner of a transmission system, approval by the Illinois Commerce Commission may be required.  Permit for Groundwater Monitoring Wells 77 IAC 920  The Illinois Department of Public Health, Environmental Health Division and local health departments review water well installation plans, issue permits for new well construction, and inspect wells.  Potable Water Supply  A construction permit would be required to connect to a public potable water supply. Any  Connection Permits  entity obtaining a construction permit must also obtain an operating permit prior to being  35 IAC, Subtitle A, Chapter II, Part 174  placed in service. There is an existing connection from the Meredosia Energy Center to the village of Meredosia water supply. This would continue to be used for the FutureGen 2.0 Project.  However, this would not require a new permit since the connection already exists. A  IEPA Division of Public  permit could be required for the proposed educational facilities.  Water Supplies,  Construction Permit  IEPA Division of Public  Water Supplies, Permit  Section, Operating Permit,  IL532-0140 PWS 037  Statute,  Regulation, Order  Description  Sound Emissions Standards and Limitations for Property-Line Noise-Sources IAC Title 35 Part 901  Includes classifications of land according to use, which are applied to noise emissions regulations. The Code categorizes land use into Land Class A, B, and C depending on type (i.e., developed, agricultural, vegetated, etc.). Illinois regulations list the maximum noise limits that different classifications of land use can experience. The regulations identify un-weighted (decibel) permissible sound levels during day and nighttimes for sound emanating from a Class C land (e.g., industrial) to a receiving Class A land (e.g., residential) and are presented in Table 3.14-4.  Wastewater Facility Construction Approval ILCS, Chapter 415  Design and construction of wastewater treatment systems at the Meredosia Energy Center would require review and approval by the IEPA.  Local Regulations and Permitting  Sanitary Holding System  Permit Morgan County Private Sewage Disposal Ordinance Section 2.1 – 2.8  A permit is required for the installation of any holding tank system. Installation and operation of a holding tank system would be in accordance with 77 IAC 905. The duration of use for holding tank systems is restricted to one year; however, a permit variance can be applied for to extend this time limit if it is anticipated that use of the tank would last beyond one year.  ASME = American Society of Mechanical Engineers; BACT = best available control technology; BART = Best Available Retrofit Technology; CAA = Clean Air Act; CAAPP = Clean Air Act Permit Program; CAIR = Clean Air Interstate Rule; CEQ = Council on Environmental Equality; CO = carbon monoxide; CO2 = carbon dioxide; CFR = Code of Federal Regulations; CSAPR = Cross State Air Pollution Rule; CWA = Clean Water Act; DOE = U.S. Department of Energy; EGU = Electric Utility Steam Generating Units; EIS = Environmental Impact Statement; EO = Executive Order; EOR = enhanced oil recovery; FAA = Federal Aviation Administration; GGRR = Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule; GHG = greenhouse gas; HAP = hazardous air pollutant; IAC = Illinois Administrative Code; ICCAG = Illinois Climate Change Advisory Group; IDNR = Illinois Department of Natural Resources; IEPA = Illinois Environmental Protection Agency; ILCS = Illinois Compiled Statutes; MACT = Maximum Achievable Control Technology; MATS = Mercury and Air Toxics; NAAQS = National Ambient Air Quality Standard; NEPA = National Environmental Policy Act; NESHAP = National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants; NOx = nitrogen oxides; NPDES = National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; NSPS = new source performance standard; OPS = Office of Pipeline Safety; OSHA = Occupational Safety and Health Administration; PM = particulate matter; PSD = Prevention of Significant Deterioration; RCRA = Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; ROW = right-of-way; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; SPCC = Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures; UIC = Underground Injection Control; USACE = U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; USC = U.S. Code; USEPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; VOC = volatile organic compound INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK DOE/EIS-0460D  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  6. REFERENCES  6  REFERENCES  7 USC (United States Code) 4201-4209. “Farmland Protection Policy.”  U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Code. 8 IAC (Illinois Administrative Code) 700. “Farmland Preservation Act.”  State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 10 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations) 1021. “National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Procedures.”  U.S. Department of Energy, Code of Federal Regulations. 16 USC 470. “National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.” U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Code. 17 IAC 3700. “Construction in Floodways of Rivers, Lakes and Streams.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 20 ILCS (Illinois Compiled Statutes) 3410. “Illinois Historic Preservation Act.”  Accessed October 26, 2012 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=370&ChapterID=5. 20 ILCS 3420. “Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act.”  Accessed October 26, 2012 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=372&ChapterID=5. 20 ILCS 3435. “Archaeological and Paleontological Resources Protection Act.” Accessed October 26, 2012 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=375&ChapterID=5. 20 ILCS 3440. “Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act.”  Accessed October 26, 2012 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=376&ChapterID=5. 23 CFR 772. “Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise and Construction Noise.” Federal Highway Administration, Code of Federal Regulations. 35 IAC 174. “Delegation of Construction and Operating Permit Authority for Sanitary and Combined Sewers and Water Main Extensions.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 35 IAC 243. “Air Quality Standards.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 35 IAC 302. “Water Quality Standards.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 36 CFR 800. “Protection of Historic Properties.” Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 50. “National Primary and Secondary Ambient Air Quality Standards.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 51.166. “Prevention of Significant Deterioration of Air Quality.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 52. “Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 60. “Standards of Performance for New Stationary Sources.”  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 63 Subpart UUUUU. “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 81. “Designation of Areas for Air Quality Planning Purposes.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 93. “Determining Conformity of Federal Actions to State or Federal Implementation Plans.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 98. “Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting.”  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 146. “Subpart H-Criteria and Standards Applicable to Class VI Wells.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations. 40 CFR 1500-1508. “National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Regulations.”  The Council on Environmental Quality, Code of Federal Regulations. 42 USC 4321-4370. “National Environmental Policy Act.” U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Code. 42 USC 4332. “Cooperation of Agencies; Reports; Availability of Information; Recommendations; International and National Coordination of Efforts.” U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Code. 42 USC 7409. “National Primary and Secondary Ambient Air Quality Standards. Promulgation.” U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Code. 49 CFR 195. “Transportation of Hazardous Liquids by Pipeline.” Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, U. S. Department of Transportation, Code of Federal Regulations. 53 FR 45858. “50 CFR Part 17. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Determination of Threatened Status for Boltonia decurrens (Decurrent False Aster).” U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Federal Register [Volume 53, Number 219]. November 14, 1988. 54 FR 39857. “50 CFR Part 17. Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Determination of Threatened Status for Eastern and Western Prairie Fringed Orchids.” U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Federal Register [Volume 54, Number 187]. September 28, 1989. 67 FR 31129. “40 CFR Part 232. Final Revisions to the Clean Water Act Regulatory Definitions of “Fill Material” and “Discharge of Fill Material”.” Department of the Army, Corps of Engineers, Federal Register [Volume 67, Number 90]. May 9, 2002. 71 FR 42840. “Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement for Implementation of the FutureGen Project.” U.S. Department of Energy, Federal Register [Volume 71, Number 145]. July 28, 2006. 72 FR 19015. “Draft Indiana Bat Recovery Plan, First Revision; Draft Survey Protocol.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Federal Register [Volume 72, Number 92]. April 16, 2007. 74 FR 35174. “Record of Decision, FutureGen Project.” U.S. Department of Energy, Federal Register [Volume 74, Number 137]. July 20, 2009. 75 FR 35128. “Hazardous and Solid Waste Management System; Identification and Listing of Special Wastes; Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals From Electric Utilities; Proposed Rule.”  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Register [Volume 75, Issue 118].  June 21, 2010. 75 FR 75060. “Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gases: Injection and Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide; Final Rule.”  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Register [Volume 75, Issue 230]. December 1, 2010. 75 FR 77230. “Federal Requirements Under the Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program for Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Geologic Sequestration (GS) Wells.” Final Rule. 40 CFR Parts 124, 144, 145, 146 and 147. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Register [Volume 75, Issue 237]. December 10, 2010. 76 FR 29728. “Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement and Notice of Potential Floodplain and Wetlands Involvement for the FutureGen 2.0 Program.” U.S. Department of Energy, Federal Register [Volume 76, Number 99]. May 23, 2011. 77 FR 22392. “Standards of Performance for Greenhouse Gas Emissions for New Stationary Sources: Electric Utility Generating Units.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Register [Volume 77, Issue 72]. April 13, 2012. 92 IAC 530. “Accommodation of Utilities on Right-Of-Way.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. 220 ILCS 5. “Public Utilities Act.” Accessed September 14, 2012 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ ilcs5.asp?DocName=&ActID=1277&ChapterID=23&SeqStart=&SeqEnd=&Print=True. 765 ILCS 835. “Cemetery Protection Act.” State of Illinois, Administrative Code. AIGA (Asia Industrial Gases Association). 2010. Safe Location of Oxygen and Inert Gas Vents. Singapore. AIGA 067/10. AIHA (American Industrial Hygiene Association). 2011. “2011 ERPG/WEEL Handbook Current ERPGTM Values (2011).” Accessed July 24, 2012 at http://www.aiha.org/INSIDEAIHA/ GUIDELINEDEVELOPMENT/ERPG/Pages/default.aspx. Air Liquide. 2007. Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for Liquid Oxygen. MSDS No. 10075. Issued December 31, 2007. Air Liquide. 2013. ASU Emissions and Effluents Summary. Process Datasheet. 7979-020-ASU PDS-111LR. Airnow. 2011. “Air Quality Index (AQI)-A Guide to Air Quality and Your Health.” Accessed March 10, 2011 at http://www.airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqibasics.aqi. AISWCD (Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts). 2012. “Illinois Urban Manual.” Online manual. Accessed November, 29, 2012 at http://www.aiswcd.org/IUM/contents.html. Alliance (FutureGen Alliance).  2007. Press Release. FutureGen Alliance Selects Mattoon, Illinois as the Final Site for the First-of-a-kind, Near-Zero Emissions Coal-fueled Power Plant. December 18, 2007. Alliance. 2010. FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Request for Site Proposals for FutureGen 2.0 CO2 Storage Hub Site. October 25, 2010. Alliance. 2012a. FutureGen 2.0 Oxy-combustion Coal-fueled Power Plant with Carbon Capture Pre-FEED Design and Cost Report. Phase I Final Technical Report Prepared for U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. May 23, 2012. Alliance. 2012b. FutureGen 2.0 Pipeline and Regional CO2 Storage Reservoir Project Conceptual Design Report. August 2011, Revision 1 (September 2011), Addendum (August 27, 2012). Ambrose, W.A., S. Lakshminarasimhan, M.H. Holtz, V. Nez-Lez, S.D. Hovorka, and I. Duncan. 2008. “Geologic factors controlling CO2 storage capacity and performance: case studies based on experience with heterogeneity in oil and gas reservoirs applied to CO2 storage.”  Environmental Geology. 54(8):1619-1633. Ameren and Alliance. 2012. FutureGen 2.0 Project National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Modification. May 3, 2012. Ameren. 2012. Construction Permit Application for a Proposed Project at a CAAPP Source, FutureGen 2.0 Repowering Project at the Meredosia Energy Center. Prepared for Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. February 6, 2012. American Hospital Directory. 2011. “American Hospital Directory-Hospital Statistics by State.” Updated April 6, 2011. Accessed August 8 2012 at http://www.ahd.com/state_statistics.html. Anliker, M.A. and D.M. Woller. 1998. Potential Ground-Water Resources for Springfield, Illinois. Contract Report 627. Illinois State Water Survey, Hydrology Division.  Champaign, Illinois. May 1998. ATSDR. 2012. “ATSDR Minimum Risk Levels List.” Updated February 2012. Accessed MRL List July 14, 2012 at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/mrls/index.asp. Audubon Society. 2012. “Mississippi Flyway.” Accessed August 22, 2012 at http://conservation.audubon. org/mississippi-flyway. Babcock & Wilcox. 2010. Overview of Oxycombustion Technology. ASME PTC 4.5 Kick-off Meeting Presentation. December 16, 2010. Battelle. 2011a. Environmental Information Volume Biological Resources Section. Prepared for FutureGen Alliance. October 2011. Battelle. 2011b. Environmental Information Volume. Cultural Resources Section. Prepared for FutureGen Alliance. June 2011. BEA (Bureau of Economic Analysis). 2012. RIMS II, An essential tool for regional developers and planners. User guide and total multipliers data. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, DC. Beacon. 2011. “Beacon-Morgan County, IL.” Online Morgan County Geographic Information System mapping application. Updated April 14, 2011. Accessed December 28, 2011 at http://beacon. schneidercorp.com/. Behrens, C. and M. Holt. 2005. Nuclear Power Plants: Vulnerability to Terrorist Attacks. Report for Congress, U.S. Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service. Order Code RS21131. Updated February 4, 2005. Bell, A.H. 1961. Underground Storage of Natural Gas in Illinois. Circular 318. Illinois State Geological Survey. Urbana, Illinois. 1961. Benson, S.M. 2009. Steps to Accelerate Deployment of CCS Storage. Presentation at Eighth Annual Conference on Carbon Capture & Sequestration. Pittsburgh, PA. May 4-7, 2009. Berg, R.C., J.P. Kempton, and K. Cartwright. 1984. Potential for Contamination of Shallow Aquifers in Illinois. Circular 532. Illinois Department of Energy and Natural Resources, State Geological Survey Division. Champaign, Illinois. 1984, Reprinted 1994. Berger, P.M., W.R. Roy, and E. Mehnert. 2009. “Geochemical Modeling of Carbon Sequestration, MMW, and EOR in the Illinois Basin.”  Energy Procedia. 1(1):3437-3444. Bird, R.B., W.E. Stewart, and E.N. Lightfoot. 2006. Transport Phenomena, 2nd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, New York, New York. 2007. Birkholzer, J.T., Q. Zhou, and C.F. Tsang. 2009. “Large-scale impact of CO2 storage in deep saline aquifers: A sensitivity study on pressure response in stratified systems.” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control. 3(2):181-194. Blueplanet. 2011. “World Climates.” Accessed March 31, 2011 at http://www.blueplanetbiomes.org/ climate.htm. Boden, T.A., G. Marland, and R.J. Andres. 2012. “Global, Regional, and National Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions.” Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy. Accessed October 1, 2012 at http://cdiac.ornl.gov/trends/emis/tre_ glob_2009.html. Bolt, Beranek, and Newman. 1971. Noise from Construction Equipment and Operations, Building Equipment, and Home Appliances. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Noise Abatement and Control. Washington, D.C. December 31, 1971. Borgonie, G., A. Garcia-Moyano, D. Litthauer, W. Bert, A. Bester, E. van Heerden, C. Moller, M. Erasmus, and T.C. Onstott. 2011. “Nematoda From the Terrestrial Deep Subsurface of South Africa.” Nature. 474(7349):79-82. June 2, 2011. Bowen, B.R., R.L. Ochoa, N.D. Wilkens, J. Brophy, T.R. Lovell, N. Fischietto, C.R. Medina, and J. A. Rupp. 2011. “Depositional and diagenetic variability within the Cambrian Mount Simon Sandstone: Implications for carbon dioxide sequestration.”  Environmental Geosciences. 18(2):69-89. Brower, R.D., A.P. Visocky, I.G. Krapac, B.R. Hensel, G.R. Peyton, J.S. Nealson, and M. Guthrie. 1989. Evaluation of Underground Injection Industrial Waste in Illinois. Illinois Scientific Surveys Joint Report 2. Illinois State Geological Survey, Department of Energy and Natural Resources. Champaign, Illinois. CCSP (Climate Change Science Program). 2008. Scientific Assessment of the Effects of Global Change on the United States – Summary and Findings. May 2008. CEQ (Council on Environmental Quality). 1997. “Environmental Justice Guidance under the National Environmental Policy Act” Executive Office of the President. Washington, D.C. December 10, 1997. CEQ. 2010a. “Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Executive Office of the President. February 18, 2010. CEQ. 2010b. “Guidance for Federal Greenhouse Gas Accounting and Reporting | The White House.” Executive Office of the President. Washington, D.C. October 6, 2010. City of Jacksonville. 2002. “City of Jacksonville, Illinois-Comprehensive Plan.”  Adopted May 2002. Accessed August 8, 2012 at http://www.jacksonvilleil.com/vertical/Sites/%7BDB68511E-E929445F-86EA-BF8BABF6AE06%7D/uploads/%7B9E29EDFC-ADAC-4655-9DC5C59F10330B2C%7D.PDF. City of Jacksonville. 2012a. “Water Supply Information – Jacksonville.”  Accessed November 12, 2012 at  http://www.jacksonvilleil.govoffice2.com/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC={F662B303-6E24437F-AD33-7C66A0480361}. City of Jacksonville. 2012b. “Zoning Ordinance & Zoning Map-Jacksonville.”  Accessed August 7, 2012 at http://www.jacksonvilleil.com/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC={B9F8DDD8-9C91-4E87AC5E-399C977531F8}. City of Jacksonville. 2012c. “Wastewater Treatment Plant - Jacksonville.” Accessed September 18, 2012 at http://www.jacksonvilleil.com/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC=%7B97288BE8-54C8-4220B1EB-514629859C41%7D. City of Jacksonville. 2012d “History of Jacksonville-Jacksonville.” Accessed December 5, 2012 at http://www.jacksonvilleil.govoffice2.com/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC={A69B0752-CE5B46E8-8CA9-E297734325BB}. Cluff, R. M., D.R. Dickerson. 1982. “Natural Gas Potential of the New Albany Shale Group (Devonian-Mississippian) in Southeastern Illinois.” Society of Petroleum Engineers Journal. April 1982. 219-300. Cole, A. 2011. Personal Communication with Alex Cole, Water Attendant, North Morgan Water Cooperative. September 2, 2011. Colman, J.A., and R.F. Sanzolone. 1991. Surface Water-Quality Assessment of the Upper Illinois River Basin in Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin: Geochemical Data for Fine-Fraction Streambed Sediment from High- and Low-Order Streams, 1987. U.S. Geological Survey. Urbana, Illinois. Open-File Report 90-571. Commission for Environmental Cooperation. 2011. North American Terrestrial Ecoregions – Level III. April 2011. Accessed June 26, 2012 at ftp://ftp.epa.gov/wed/ecoregions/pubs/NA_Terrestrial EcoregionsLevel3_Final-2june11_CEC.pdf. Cowan, J.P. 1994. “Chapter 5, Noise Regulations, Guidelines, and Ordinances.” In Handbook of Environmental Acoustics. John  Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York, New York. Crone, A.J. and R.L. Wheeler. 2000. Data for Quaternary Faults, Liquefaction Features, and Possible Tectonic Features in the Central and Eastern United States and the Rocky Mountain Front. Open-File Report 00-0260.U.S. Department of Interior, U.S. Geological Survey. Dahl, T.E. 2011. Status and Trends of Wetlands in the Conterminous United States 2004 to 2009. U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. Washington, D.C. 108 pp. Daycare Centers List. 2011. “Daycare centers near Meredosia and Jacksonville, Illinois.” Accessed August 2011 at http://www.yellowpages.com. DNV (Det Norske Veritas). 2010. CO2 Storage –Is it safe? Towards large-scale implementation of CCS. Research and Innovation. Hik, Norway. Position Paper 06-2010. DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2002. Recommendations for Analyzing Accidents under the National Environmental Policy Act. U.S. Department of Energy, Environment, Safety and Health. July 2002. DOE. 2004. Recommendations for the Preparation of Environmental Assessment and Environmental Impact Statements, Second Edition. U.S. Department of Energy, Environment, Safety and Health. December 2004. DOE. 2006. Coal Combustion Waste Management at Landfills and Surface Impoundments, 1994-2004. U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Scientific and Technical Information. Oak Ridge, Tennessee. DOE/PI-0004. August 2006. DOE. 2007a. FutureGen Project Final Environmental Impact Statement. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. DOE/EIS-0394. November 2007. DOE. 2007b. Final Risk Assessment Report for the FutureGen Project Environmental Impact Statement. Revision 2. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. October 2007. Prepared by Tetra Tech, Inc. Lafayette CA. DOE. 2008a. DOE Handbook Temporary Emergency Exposure Limits for Chemicals: Methods and Practice. U.S. Department of Energy. DOE-HDBK-1046-2008. August 2008. DOE. 2008b. Finding of No Significant Impact, Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium (MGSC) Phase III Large-Scale Test Environmental Assessment. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. November 28, 2008. DOE. 2008c.  Final Environmental Assessment Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium (MGSC) Phase III Large-Scale Field Test Phase, Decatur Illinois. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. DOE/EA-1626. October 2008. DOE. 2011a. Final Environmental Assessment Industrial Carbon Capture and Sequestration (ICCS) Area 1 Project. CO2 Capture From Biofuels Production and Sequestration into the Mt. Simon Sandstone. Archer Daniels Midland Company, Decatur, Illinois. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory.  DOE/EA-1828. April 2011. DOE. 2011b. Mountaineer Commercial Scale Carbon Capture and Storage Project, Draft Environmental Impact Statement. U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory. DOE/EIS-0445D. February 2011. DOE. 2012. “DOE - Office of Legacy Management - EJ Definition and Policy.” Accessed at October 10, 2012 at http://www.lm.doe.gov/Office_of_the_Director/Environmental_Justice/EJ_Definition_ and_Policy.aspx.  Douglas, D. 2011. Personal Communication with Dusty Douglas, Morgan County Regional Planning Commission. April 8, 2011. EO (U.S. Executive Order) 12898. February 11, 1994. Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations. Federal Register [Volume 59, Number 32]. February 16, 1994. EO 13432. May 14, 2007. Cooperation Among Agencies in Protecting the Environment with Respect to Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Motor Vehicles, Nonroad Vehicles, and Nonroad Engines. Federal Register [Volume 72, Number 94]. May 16, 2007. EO 13514. October 5, 2009. Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy and Economic Performance. Federal Register [Volume, 74. Number 194]. October 8, 2009. E-Notes. 2011. “Hill-Burton Act (1946): Major Acts of Congress.” Accessed September 30, 2011 at http://www.enotes.com/major-acts-congress/hill-burton-act/. EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration). 2009. Annual Energy Outlook 2009 with Projections to 2030. U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting. Washington, D.C. DOE/EIA-0383. March 2009. EIA. 2011. Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2009. March. U.S. Department of Energy, Independent Statistics and Analysis. Washington, D.C. March 2011. EIA. 2012. Annual Energy Outlook 2012, with Projections to 2035. U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting. Washington, D.C. DOE/EIA-0383. June 2012. EIGA (European Industrial Gases Association). 2004. Prevention of Major Accidents, Guidance on Compliance with Seveso II Directive. Brussels, Belgium. IGC Doc 60/04/E. Ellsworth, W. L., S.H. Hickman, A.L. Lleons, A. McGarr, A.J. Michael, and J. L. Rubinstein. 2012. Are Seismicity Rate Changes in the Midcontinent Natural or Manmade?  Seismological Society of America Annual Meeting Abstract. April 18, 2012. ENVCAP (Environmental Compliance Assistance Platform). 2011. “TSD & Recycling Facilities Locator.” Accessed July 28, 2011 at www.envcap.org/statetools/tsdf/tsdf2.cfm Ermak, D. L. 1990. “User’s Manual for SLAB: An Atmospheric Dispersion Model for Denser-Than-Air. Releases.” Atmospheric and Geophysical Sciences Division, University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. UCRL-MA-105607. June 1990. Accessed October 27, 2010 at http://www.epa.gov/scram001/models/nonepa/SLAB.PDF. Etheridge, D.M., L.P. Steele, R.L. Langenfelds, R.J. Francey, J.-M. Barnola, and V.I. Morgan. 1996. “Natural and anthropogenic changes in atmospheric CO2 over the last 1000 years from air in Antarctic ice and firn.” Journal of Geophysical Research. 101:4115-4128. Data updated July 20, 2010. Accessed September 25, 2012 at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/icecore/antarctica/law/ law_data.html.  FAA (U.S. Federal Aviation Administration). 2012. “AirNav: Airport Search Results.”  Accessed November 30, 2012 at http://www.airnav.com/cgi-bin/airport-search. Farzan, H. 2011. Development of Cost Effective Oxy-Combustion Retrofitting for Coal-Fired Boilers. Final Report for April 1, 2006 through December 31, 2010. FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation). 2009. “Crime in the United States, Police Employee Data, 2009.” Accessed October 4, 2011 at http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2009/police/index.html. FBI. 2011. “Table 1, Crime in the United State by Volume and Rate per 100,000 Inhabitants, 1990-2009.” Accessed October 7, 2011 at http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2009/data/table_01.html. FEMA (U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2009. Flood Insurance Rate Map, Morgan County Illinois and Incorporated Areas, Panel 4 of 350. Map Number 17137C0004D. Effective August 18, 2009. FEMA. 2011. “National Flood Hazard Panel Layer.” State of Illinois GIS Shapefile. U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC. Map Service Center request submitted March 29, 2011, at http://www.msc.fema.gov. FHWA (Federal Highway Administration). 1995. Highway Traffic Noise Analysis and Abatement Policy and Guidance. U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.  Washington, D.C. June 1995. FHWA. 2004. FHWA “TNM V25 - Traffic Noise Model – Noise- Environment – FHWA.” Accessed December 3, 2012 at http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/noise/traffic_noise_model/tnm_v25/. FHWA. 2006. “Highway Traffic and Construction Noise – Problem and Response - Regulations And Legislation, Regulations, & Guidance.” Accessed December 3, 2012, at http://www.fhwa.dot. gov/environment/noise/regulations_and_guidance/probresp.cfm#t9. Finley, R. 2005. An Assessment of Geological Carbon Sequestration Options in the Illinois Basin. Final Report for Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium under US DOE Contract DE-FC2603NT41994. Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. December 31, 2005. Flora of North America. undated. “Melanthium virginicum in Flora of North America @efloras.org.” Accessed March 25, 2011 at http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_ id=220008304. Frohlich, C. C. Hayward, B. Stump, and E. Potter. 2011. “The Dallas-Fort Worth Earthquake Sequence: October 2008 through May 2009.” Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 101(1):327340. FTA (Federal Transit Administration). 2006. Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment. Federal Transit Administration, Office of Planning and Environment. Washington, D.C. FTA-VA-901003-06. May 2006. Gibb, J.P., D.C. Noel, W.C. Bogner, and R.J. Schict. 1979. Groundwater Conditions and River-Aquifer Relationships along the Illinois Waterway. Illinois State Water Survey. Urbana, IL. 1979. Griffith, C.A., D.A. Dzombak, and G.V. Lowry. 2011. “Physical and chemical characteristics of potential seal strata in regions considered for demonstrating geological saline CO2 sequestration.”  Environmental Earth Sciences 64(4): 925-948. Hajic, E.R. and D.S. Leigh. 1985. Geomorphology and Limited Cultural Resource Investigation of the Meredosia Village and Meredosia Lake Levee and Drainage Districts, Scott, Morgan, and Cass Counties, Illinois. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. St. Louis, Missouri. St. Louis District Cultural Resource Management Report 17. April 1985. Hanna, S. R. and P. J. Drivas. 1987. Guidelines for use of Vapor Cloud Dispersion Models. Center for American Institute of Chemical Engineers. New York, New York. Health Resources and Services Administration. 2011. “HRSA Data Warehouse – Report Tool, Basic Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) Report for Primary Medical Care.” Accessed December 6, 2011 at http://datawarehouse.hrsa.gov/HGDWReports/RT_App.aspx?rpt=HH. Herkert, J.E., and J.E. Ebinger, editors. 2002.  Endangered and Threatened Species of Illinois: Status and Distribution, Volume 1 – Plants.  Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board. Springfield, Illinois.  HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). 2000. “2000 HHS Poverty Guidelines.” Accessed August 28, 2012 at http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/figures-fed-reg.shtml. HHS. 2010. “August 2010 HHS Poverty Guidelines.” Accessed August 28, 2012 at http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/10poverty.shtml. Hill, S.R. 2006. Conservation Assessment for the Fibrous-Rooted Sedge. Illinois Natural History Survey. Center for Wildlife and Plant Ecology Technical Report 2006 (7). June 30, 2006. Holzman. 2010. Analysis of Cooling Tower Impacts at IL 104 Alternative #9 due to Meredosia Energy Center. Prepared for Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Region 4, District 6 by M.I. Holzman and Associates, LLC. Springfield, Illinois. July 2010. Hooper, B., L. Murray, and C. Gibson-Polle, eds. 2005. Latrobe Valley CO2 Storage Assessment, Final Report. Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies. Melbourne, Australia. RPT05-108. November 2005. HUD (U.S. Housing and Urban Development). 1985. The Noise Guidebook. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Environment and Energy. HUD-953-CPD. March 1985. HUD. 2010. “HUD  Census Tract Map.” Online GIS map application. Accessed August 4, 2010 at http://209.48.228.153/qctmap.html#. Hull, D. 2011. Personal Communication with Dusty Hull, Water Superintendent, Meredosia Water Plant. July 13, 2011. Hull, D. 2012a. Personal Communication with Dusty Hull, Water Superintendent, Meredosia Water Plant. August 31, 2012. Hull, D. 2012b. Personal Communication with Dusty Hull, Water Superintendent, Meredosia Water Plant. August 15, 2012. IDNR (Illinois Department of Natural Resources). 1997. Embarras River Area Assessment – Volume 3: Living Resources.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Critical Trends Assessment Program. IDNR. 1998. Big Rivers Area Assessment – Volume 3: Living Resources.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Critical Trends Assessment Program. IDNR. 2000. Kaskaskia River Area Assessment – Volume 3: Living Resources.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Critical Trends Assessment Program. IDNR. 2001. Lower Sangamon River Area Assessment – Volume 3: Living Resources. January. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Critical Trends Assessment Program. IDNR. 2003. La Moine River Area Assessment – Volume 3: Living Resources. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Critical Trends Assessment Program. IDNR. 2006. Floodplain Management – Local Floodplain Administrator’s Manual. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. March 2006. IDNR. 2009a. 100-Year Floodplain in Illinois. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. August 6, 2009. IDNR. 2009b. “Illinois Natural Areas Inventory (INAI) Sites by County. Illinois Department of Natural Resources.” August 2009. Accessed September 11, 2012 at https://dnr.state.il.us/conservation/ naturalheritage/pdfs/inai_list_by_co_aug2009.pdf. IDNR. 2011. Illinois Threatened and Endangered Species by County. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Division of Natural Heritage. Updated September 12, 2011. IDNR. 2012. “Fishing in Illinois. The Illinois River Fact Sheet.” Accessed September 24, 2012 at http://www.ifishillinois.org/profiles/rivers&creeks/Illinois/IllinoisRiv.html. IDOA (Illinois Department of Agriculture). 2012.  Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement between the FutureGen Industrial Alliance and the Illinois Department of Agriculture in Illinois, Pertaining to the Construction of up to a 12-inch Carbon Dioxide Pipeline and Related Appurtenances. January 20, 2012. IDOT (Illinois Department of Transportation). 2002. Final Environmental Impact Statement U.S. 67 (FAP 310) Between Jacksonville and Macomb. Illinois Department of Transportation. FHWA-ILEIS-00-02-F. May 2002. Accessed June 26, 2012 at http://www.dot.state.il.us/desenv/rt67impact/ cover.pdf. IDOT. 2006. “Illinois Railroad Map.” Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of Planning and Programming. January 2006. Accessed July 27, 2012 at http://www.dot.il.gov/officialrailmap.pdf. IDOT. 2011. Environmental Assessment, Illinois Route 104 (FAP Route 745) over Illinois River, Village of Meredosia, Morgan & Pike Counties, Illinois. Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Region 4, District 6. Job #: D96-016-08. April 2011. IDOT. 2012a. FY 2007-2012 Proposed Highway Improvement Program, Highway District 6.  Illinois Department of Transportation, Region 4, District 6.  IDOT. 2012b. “Getting Around Illinois - Average Daily Traffic Counts.” Online GIS map application. Accessed July 26, 2012 at http://www.gettingaroundillinois.com/gai.htm?mt=aadt. IDOT. 2012c. “Illinois High Speed Rail –Chicago to St. Louis: 2010 Construction Map.” Accessed December 4, 2012 at http://www.idothsr.org/pdf/trt_construction_location.pdf. IDPH (Illinois Department of Public Health). 2011. “Licensed Illinois Hospitals by City.” July 5, 2011. Accessed November 9, 2011 at www.idph.state.il.us/healthcarefacilities/Hospitals_by_City.pdf. IDPH. 2012. “Illinois Hospital Report Card and Consumer Guide to Health Care.” Accessed February 15, 2012 at www.healthcarereportcard.illinois.gov. IEA (International Energy Agency). 2005. IEA GHG Weyburn CO2 Monitoring & Storage Project. IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme. Cheltenham, United Kingdom. IEA. 2006a. Natural Releases of CO2.  IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme. Cheltenham, United Kingdom. IEA. 2006b. Safe Storage of CO2: Experience from the Natural Gas Storage Industry. IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme. Technical Study Report Number: 2006/2. January 2006. IEMA (Illinois Emergency Management Agency). 2009. The ABC’s of Radon in Illinois. Illinois Emergency Management Agency. IEMA 012-20,000. May 2009. IEMA. 2010. Illinois Emergency Operations Plan, Basic Plan and Emergency Support Function Annexes. Illinois Emergency Management Agency. September 2010. IEMA. 2011. “Welcome to IEMA | About IEMA.” Accessed November 30, 2011 at http://www.iema. illinois.gov/iema/about/. IEMA. 2012a. “Illinois County by Zip Code % Greater than 4pCi/L.” Accessed August 15, 2012 at http://www.radon.illinois.gov/iema/radon/MeasurementMaps/Morgan.pdf. IEMA. 2012b. “Number of Mitigation Systems in Country by Zip Code.”  Accessed August 15, 2012 at http://www.radon.illinois.gov/iema/radon/MitigationMaps/Morgan.pdf. IEPA (Illinois Environmental Protection Agency). 2009. Illinois Annual Air Quality Report 2008. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Air. Springfield, Illinois. November 2009. IEPA. 2010a. Illinois Annual Air Quality Report 2009. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Air. Springfield, Illinois. November 2010. IEPA. 2010b. “Category 5- 303(d) List.” In Draft Illinois Integrated Water Quality Report and Section 303(d) List-2010. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Water. Accessed February 23, 2011 at http://www.epa.state.il.us/water/tmdl/303d-list.html. IEPA. 2011a. 4th Annual Air Quality Report, Illinois 2010. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Air. Springfield, Illinois. December 2011. IEPA. 2011b. “Illinois Climate Change Advisory Group.” Accessed April 6, 2011 at http://www.epa. state.il.us/air/climatechange/. IEPA. 2011c. Illinois EPA’s Ash Impoundment Strategy Progress Report. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Water Pollution Control. October 2011. IEPA. 2011d. Reissued NPDES Permit Number IL0000116 to Ameren Energy Generating Company. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control. Issued September 30, 2011. IEPA. 2011e. Hazardous Waste Generation and Management, 1987-2009.  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Land. Springfield, Illinois.  IEPA. 2011f. Meteorological Data and Wind Rose for Station #93822 Springfield Capital Airport. November 16, 2011. IEPA. 2012a. “Appendix A-2: Illinois’ 2012 303(d) List, Alphabetically by Water Body Name.” In Illinois Integrated Water Quality Report and Section 303(d) List – Volume I: Surface Water – 2012. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Water. March 7, 2012. IEPA. 2012b. “Non-Special Waste Certification Fact Sheet-Illinois EPA-Bureau of Land.” Accessed September 17, 2012 at http://www.epa.state.il.us/land/waste-mgmt/non-special-waste.html. IEPA. 2012c. Nonhazardous Solid Waste Management and Landfill Capacity in Illinois: 2011. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Land. July 2012. IHPA (Illinois Historic Preservation Agency). 2011a. SHPO Concurrence Letter for Phase I Cultural Resources Survey for the Site Characterization Locale. June 1, 2011. IHPA. 2011b. SHPO Concurrence Letter for Phase I Cultural Resources Survey for the Soil Gas Monitoring Locations. November 29, 2011. ILGA (Illinois General Assembly). 2009. “Public Act 95-1027, effective date June 1, 2009. SB 1987 Clean Coal Portfolio Standard Law. Amendment to the Illinois Power Agency Act 20 ILCS 3855, effective date August 28, 2007.” Accessed April 6, 2011 at http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ publicacts/95/095-1027.htm. Illinois EO (Executive Order) 2006-11. 2006. Illinois Executive Order on Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction. October 5, 2006. Illinois State Museum. 2012 “Illinois Agriculture-People.”  Accessed December 3, 2012 at http://www. museum.state.il.us/exhibits/agriculture/htmls/people/index.html. IPCB (Illinois Pollution Control Board). 2007. Environmental Regulations for the State of Illinois; State of Illinois, Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Subtitle H, Part 901: Sound Emission Standards and Limitations for Property Line Noise Sources. Last amended January 2007. Accessed July 8, 2011 at http://www.ipcb.state.il.us/SLR/IPCBandIEPAEnvironmental Regulations-Title35.asp. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2005. IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. Prepared by Working  Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz, O. Davidson, H.C. de Coninck, M. Loos and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York. 2005. IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland. IPCC. 2011. IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. Prepared by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schler, C. von Stechow (eds)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York. ISGS (Illinois State Geological Survey). 1995a. “Structural Features in Illinois - 1995 - Line Features (Axial or Flexure) of Anticlines, Synclines and Monoclines.” ISGS GIS Database GISDB_ BEDGEO.IL_Struct_Feat_Clines_1995_Ln. Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. GIF accessed September 11, 2012 at http://www.isgs.illinois.edu/nsdihome/browse/ statewide/structclinesb.gif. ISGS. 1995b. “Structural Features in Illinois – 1995 – Faults.” ISGS GIS Database GISDB_BEDGEO. IL_Struct_Feat_Faults_1995_Ln. Illinois State Geological Survey, Champaign, Illinois.. GIF accessed September 11, 2012 at http://www.isgs.illinois.edu/nsdihome/browse/statewide/ structfaultsb.gif. ISGS. 2004. Generalized Statewide Location of Major Bedrock, Sand and Gravel, and Potential Shallow Aquifers in Illinois. Vector digital data from ISGS GIS database. Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. Available online at http://www.isgs.illinois.edu/. ISGS. 2005. Bedrock Geology of Illinois. Compiled by D.R. Kolata. Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. Illinois Map 14. 2005. ISGS. 2009. “Historical Earthquakes of Illinois (magnitude 4.5 or greater).” Accessed May 2, 2012 at http://www.isgs.uiuic.edu/research/earthquake-hazards/eq-of-il-big.shtml. ISGS. 2011a. “Quaternary Deposits 8.5x11 map series.” Accessed February 25, 2011 at http://www.isgs. illinois.edu/sections/quat/deposit-map.shtml. ISGS. 2011b. “Loess Thickness Map.” Accessed July 12, 2011 at http://www.isgs.illinois.edu/maps-datapub/pdf-files/loess_thickness.pdf. ISGS. 2011c. Preliminary Environmental Site Assessment Final Report. Illinois State Geological Survey Report for the Environmental Assessment, Illinois Route 104 (FAP Route 745). IDOT Job #: D96-016-08. ISGS 1739V. February 8, 2011. ISGS. 2012a. “Physiographic Divisions of Illinois.” Accessed December 6, 2012 at  http://www.isgs. illinois.edu/maps-data-pub/publications/pdf-files/physio-w-color-8x11.pdf. ISGS. 2012b. “Illinois Oil and Gas Resources Internet Map Service.” Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. Query performed and data downloaded September 6, 2012 at http://www. isgs.illinois.edu/sections/oil-gas/launchims.shtml. ISGS. 2012c. “Illinois Water Well Internet Map Service.” Illinois State Geological Survey. Champaign, Illinois. Query performed and data downloaded September 6, 2012 at http://www.isgs.illinois. edu/maps-data-pub/wwdb/launchims.shtml. ISGS. 2012d. “Map of oil and gas fields and natural gas storage areas.” Accessed May 2, 2012 at http://moulin.isgs.uiuc.edu/ILOIL/webapp/ILOIL.html. ISGS. 2012e. “ISGS –Earthquake Maps.” Accessed May 2, 2012 at http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/research/ earthquake-hazards/earthquake-maps.shtml. ISP (Illinois State Police). 2009. Section II- Crime Index Offense/Crime Rate Data. In Crime in Illinois 2009.  Illinois State Police, Illinois Uniform Crime Reporting Program. ISP. 2012. “District Quick Finder.” Accessed February 13, 2012 at www.isp.state.il.us/districts/district finder.cfm. ISWS (Illinois State Water Survey). 1996. “One-Hundred and Five-Hundred Year Floodzones for Unincorporated Areas in Illinois.” ISGS GIS Database GISDB_HYDRO.IL_Flood_Zones_ 1986_Py. Illinois State Water Survey, Champaign, Illinois.  Downloaded May 2011 at http://www.isgs.illinois.edu/. ISWS. 2012.  “ISWS-Illinois Water Supply Planning: Water Supply-Ground Water.”  Accessed September 12, 2012 at http://www.isws.illinois.edu/wsp/wsground.asp. ISWS. 2013. “Illinois State Water Survey-Climate Data-Results, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.” Illinois State Climatologist Data. Data Results for station 114442 (Jacksonville). Accessed March 25, 2011 and February 4, 2013 at http://www.isws.illinois.edu/data/climatedb/ data.asp. Jacksonville Municipal Department. 2012. Personal Communication with Jacksonville Municipal Department. August 15, 2012. Jones and Stokes. 2004. Transportation- and Construction-Induced Vibration Guidance Manual. (J&S 02039.) Sacramento, CA. Prepared for California Department of Transportation, Noise, Vibration, and Hazardous Waste Management Office, Sacramento, California. June 2004. Journal Courier. 2010. “Virginia primed for new water plant.”  Journal Courier. May 24, 2010. Journal Courier. 2011. “Timetable on boil order unchanged.” Journal Courier. June 25, 2011. Kluge, R. 2012. Personal Communication with Rick Kluge, Fire Chief, Jacksonville Fire Department. August 8, 2012. Klusman, R.W. 2003. “A geochemical perspective and assessment of leakage potential for a mature carbon dioxide-enhanced oil recovery project and as a prototype for carbon dioxide sequestration; Rangely field, Colorado.”  American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin. 87(9):14851507. Kottek, M. J. Grieser, C. Beck, B. Rudolf, and F. Rubel. 2006. “World Map of Kpen-Geiger Climate Classification updated.” Meteorologische Zeitschrift. 15(3):259-263. LaGesse, Jr., L. V. 2012a. An Investigation of Potential Habitat for Regal Fritillary, Speyeria idalia, FutureGen/Meredosia Energy Center, Morgan County, Illinois. July 1, 2012. LaGesse, Jr., L. V. 2012b. An Investigation for Illinois Chorus Frogs, Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis and Possible Impacts for the FutureGen 2.0 Project/Meredosia Energy Center, Morgan County, Illinois. June 1, 2012. Lamancusa, J. 2009. “Noise Control – Outdoor Sound Propagation.” Pennsylvania State University, Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering. July 20, 2009. Accessed May 3, 2011 at http://www.mne.psu.edu/lamancusa/me458/10_osp.pdf. Leetaru, H.E. and J.H. McBride. 2009. “Reservoir uncertainty, Precambrian topography, and carbon sequestration in the Mt. Simon Sandstone, Illinois Basin.” Environmental Geosciences. 16(4):235-243. Lemieux, J.-M. 2011. “Review: The potential impact of underground geological storage of carbon dioxide in deep saline aquifers on shallow groundwater resources.” Hydrology Journal. 19:757-778. Liu, D. and Lipták, B. 1997. Environmental Engineers’ Handbook. 2nd Edition. Lewis Publishers. Liu, Q. and M.M. Maroto-Valer. 2011. “Parameters affecting mineral trapping of CO2 sequestration in brines.” Greenhouse Gases Science and Technology. 1:211-222. MABAS (Mutual Aid Box Alarm System). 2011. “About MABAS-IL Home.” Accessed December 2, 2011 at http://portal.mabas-il.org/AboutMABAS/Pages/MABASOverview.aspx. Massachusetts v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2007. 549 U.S. 497 (2007). McColpin, G.R. 2009. “Surface Deformation Monitoring As a Cost Effective MMV Method.” Energy Procedia. 1:2079-2086. MDNR (Missouri Department of Natural Resources). 2012. “Bonne Terre-DNR.” Air Monitoring Data from the Bonne Terre Site. Division of Environmental Quality, Environmental Services Program. Accessed March 15, 2012 at http://www.dnr.mo.gov/env/esp/aqm/bonne-terre.htm. MGA (Midwestern Governors Association). 2012. “Midwestern Governors Association – Initiatives - CCS Task Force.” Accessed November 28, 2012 at http://www.midwesterngovernors.org/ CCS.htm. MGSC (Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium). 2012. “Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium.” Accessed November 28, 2012 at http://sequestration.org/. Midwest Technology Assistance Center. 2009. Groundwater Availability at Versailles, Illinois (Brown County).  Midwest Technology Assistance Center. Minnis A.M., S.D. Sipes, and D.J. Gibson. 2006. Analysis of Illinois Plants in Need of Conservation – a Supplement to the Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation Plan. Department of Plant Biology and Center for Ecology, Southern Illinois University Carbondale. May 31 2006. Missouri Department of Conservation. 2011. “Illinois Chorus Frog.” Accessed March 25, 2011 at http:// mdc.mo.gov/discover-nature/field-guide/illinois-chorus-frog. Morgan County. 2009. Morgan County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. August 3, 2009. Morgan County. 2012. “Regional Planning Commission.” Access August 31, 2012 at http://www.morgan county-il.com/Regional-Planning-Commission.html. Morozova, D., M. Zettlitzer, A. Vieth, and H. Wdemann. 2010. “Microbial Community Response to the CO2 Injection and Storage in the Saline Aquifer, Ketzin, Germany.” Geophysical Research Abstracts. 12:EGU2010-11146-1. MPCA (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency). 1999. A Guide to Noise Control in Minnesota. Acoustical Properties, Measurement, Analysis, Regulation. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Noise Program. Saint Paul, Minnesota. March 1999. National Cooperative Soil Survey. 2006. “Official Series Description – PLAINFIELD Series.” October 2006. Accessed March 21, 2011 at http://www2.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/osd/dat/P/PLAINFIELD.html NatureServe. 2010. “NatureServe Explorer.” Online database. Accessed October 3, 2012 at http://www.natureserve.org/explorer/. Naymik, T.G., and M.J. Barcelona. 1981. “Characterization of a Contaminant Plume in Ground Water, Meredosia, Illinois.” Ground Water. 19 (5):517-526. NCDC (National Climate Data Center). 2011a. “Average Relative Humidity.” Accessed November 13, 2012 at http://www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ccd-data/relhum11.txt. NCDC. 2011b. Storm Events Database. Accessed  March 25, 2011 and July 5, 2011 at http://www. ncdc.noaa.gov/stormevents/ftp.jsp. NCDC. 2013. “Summary of Monthly Normals 1981-2010.” Accessed  February 5, 2013 at http://www. ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/#t=secondTabLink. NCES (National Center for Education Statistics). 2011a. Numbers and Types of Public Elementary and Secondary Schools From the Common Core of Data: School Year 2009–10. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. NCES 2011-345. April 2011. NCES. 2011b. Characteristics of Private Schools in the United States: Results From the 2009–10 Private School Universe Survey. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. NCES 2011-339. May 2011. NCES. 2012. “School Search, Public School Districts and Private Schools, 2009-2010 School Year.” National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed February 15, 2012 at http://nces.ed.gov/. Nelson, W. J., 1995. “ISGS-Fault Systems of Illinois and Neighboring States.” Figure 2. Fault map for Illinois and neighboring states. In Illinois State Geological Survey Bulletin 100. Updated September 9, 2009. Accessed May 2, 2012 at http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/research/earthquakehazards/earthquake-maps.shtml. NETL (National Energy Technology Laboratory). 2008. Pulverized Coal Oxycombustion Power Plants. DOE/NETL-2007/1291. Volume 1: Bituminous Coal to Electricity. Final Report. Revision, August 2008. NETL. 2010a. 2010 Carbon Sequestration Atlas of the United States and Canada, Third Edition. November 2010. NETL. 2010b. Understanding the Impact of CO2 Injection on the Subsurface Microbial Community in an Illinois Basin CCS Reservoir: Integrated Student Training in Geoscience and Geomicrobiology. Project Fact Sheet FE0002421. July 2010. NETL. 2010c. Best Practices for: Site Screening, Site Selection, and Initial Characterization for Storage of CO2 in Deep Geologic Formations. DOE/NETL-401/090808 March 2010. NETL. 2011a. DOE/NETL Advanced Carbon Dioxide Capture R&D Program: Technology Update. May 2011. Accessed April 8, 2013 at http://www.netl.doe.gov/technologies/coalpower/ewr/pubs/CO2 CaptureTechUpdate051711.pdf. NETL. 2011b. Best Practices for: Risk Analysis and Simulation for Geologic Storage of CO2. DOE/NETL-2011/1459. March 2011. NETL. 2012a. Best Practices for: Carbon Storage Systems and Well Management Activities. DOE/NETL-2011/1458. April 2012. NETL. 2012b. Best Practices for: Monitoring, Verification, and Accounting of CO2 Stored in Deep Geologic Formations -  2012 Update. Second Edition. DOE/NETL-2012/1568. October 2012. NETL. 2012c.  Archer Daniels Midland Company: CO2 Capture from Biofuels Production and Storage into the Mt. Simon Sandstone.  Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage Project Facts.  Project Fact Sheet ARRA1547. March 2012. NFPA (National Fire Protection Association). 2010. Guide to Hazardous Materials, 14th Edition. Edited by Guy R. Colonna, PE. National Fire Protection Association. Quincy, Massachusetts. 2010. NIOSH (National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health). 2005. “CDC-Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health Concentrations (IDLHs): Chemical Listings and Documentation.” Accessed April 23, 2012 at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/idlh/intridl4.html. NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 2011. “Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide.” Recent Mauna Loa CO2. Accessed April 6, 2011 at http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/. NOAA. 2012. “Earth System Research Laboratory/Global Monitoring Division FTP Data Finder.” Accessed September 30, 2012 at http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/dv/data/. NOAA Fisheries Service. 2012. “About National Marine Fisheries Service.” Accessed September 5, 2012 at http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/aboutus/aboutus.html. NPS (National Park Service). 2011. “NPS: Explore Nature-Air Resources Division-Class I Locations.” Air Resources Division. Accessed March 10, 2011 at http://www.nature.nps.gov/air/Maps/classILoc.cfm. NRC (National Research Council). 2012. Induced Seismicity Potential in Energy Technologies. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. 2012. O’Connor, W.K. and G.E. Rush. 2005. CO2 Flood Tests on Whole Core Samples of the Mt. Simon Sandstone, Illinois Basin. Office of Fossil Energy, Albany Research Center. Albany, Oregon. DOE/ARC-2005-013. Obermeier, S.F. and Crone. A.J., compilers. 1994. “Fault number 1024, Wabash Valley liquefaction features in Quaternary fault and fold database of the United States.” U.S. Geological Survey. Accessed May 2, 2012 at http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/qfaults. Oldenburg, C.M. 2012. “The risk of induced seismicity: is cap-rock integrity on shaky ground?” Editorial.  Greenhouse Gases Science and Technology. 2:217-218. Oldenburg, C.M., and A.P Rinaldi. 2011. “Buoyancy Effects on Upward Brine Displacement Caused by CO2 Injection.” Transportation Porous Medium. 87:525-540. Ong, C. 2012. Personal communication with Cliff White, DOE, Gregg Hagerty, URS, Lucy Swartz, Alliance, Thomas Anderson, PNNL, Amanda Stegen, PNNL, Fred Carey, PHE and Anthony Becker, PHE. “FG2 – FWS and DNR meetings.” February 21, 2012. Onuma, T. and S. Ohkawa. 2009. “Detection of surface deformation relates with CO2 injection by DInSAR at In Salah, Algeria.” Energy Procedia. 1:2177-2184. OPS (Office of Pipeline Safety). 2012a. “PHMSA: Stakeholder Communications. All Reported Pipeline Incidents 1992-2011.” Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Office of Pipeline Safety. Accessed  July 17, 2012 at http://primis.phmsa.dot.gov/comm/reports/safety/ AllPSI.html?nocache = 4194. OPS. 2012b. “PHMSA: Stakeholder Communications.” Significant Pipeline Incidents by Cause. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Office of Pipeline Safety. Accessed February 23, 2012 at January 2012 http://primis.phmsa.dot.gov/comm/reports/safety/SerPSIDet_1992_2011_ US.html?nocache=7008. OPS. 2012c. “PHMSA-Data & Statistics – Distribution, Transmission, and Liquid Accident and Incident Data.” Pipeline Safety Detailed Incident Online Database for Natural Gas and Hazardous Liquid pipelines, including CO2 pipelines. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Office of Pipeline Safety. Accessed August 9, 2012 at http://phmsa.dot.gov/portal/site/PHMSA/ menuitem.ebdc7a8a7e39f2e55cf2031050248a0c/?vgnextoid=fdd2dfa122a1d110VgnVCM100000 9ed07898RCRD&vgnextchannel=3430fb649a2dc110VgnVCM1000009ed07898RCRD&vgnextf mt = print. OPS. 2012d. “PHMSA-Accident Incident and Mileage Summary Statistics-Natural Gas Transmission, Gas Distribution, and Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Annual Mileage.” Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Office of Pipeline Safety. Accessed July 17, 2012 at http:// phmsa.dot.gov/portal/site/PHMSA/menuitem.ebdc7a8a7e39f2e55cf2031050248a0c/?vgnextoid= 036b52edc3c3e110VgnVCM1000001ecb7898RCRD&vgnextchannel=3b6c03347e4d8210VgnV CM1000001ecb7898RCRD&vgnextfmt=print. OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). 2012. “Table Z-1 Limits for Air Contaminants. – 1910.1000 Table Z-1.” and “Table Z-2 – 1910.1000 Table Z-2.” Accessed March 8, 2012  at http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9992 and http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id= 9993. Patrick. 2011. Sound Measurements at the Morgan County Characterization Well. Patrick Engineering for the FutureGen Alliance. November 28, 2011. Pew Center. 2011. “Illinois Governor signs legislation to reduce emissions from coal power plants.” Accessed April 6, 2011 at http://www.pewclimate.org/node/6363. PHE (Potomac-Hudson Engineering). 2011. Meredosia Power Station, Ambient Noise Monitoring Report 2011. Potomac-Hudson Engineering, Inc. for FutureGen Alliance. May 2011. Piskin, K. and R.E. Bergstrom. 1975. Glacial Drift in Illinois: Thickness and Character. Illinois State Geological Survey Circular 490. Revision of Circular 416. State of Illinois, Department of Registration and Education. Urbana, Illinois. Prairie Archaeology & Research. 2011a. Phase I Cultural Resource Survey. FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Site Characterization Locale, Morgan County, Illinois. April 2011. Prairie Archaeology & Research. 2011b. Phase I Cultural Resources Survey FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Soil Gas Monitoring Location, Morgan County, Illinois. November 2011. Prairie Archaeology & Research. 2012a. Draft Phase I Cultural Resource Survey. 147-Acre FutureGen 2 Power Plant Site Near the Village of Meredosia, Morgan County, Illinois. April 2012. Prairie Archaeology & Research. 2012b. FutureGen 2.0 Project. Environmental Information Volume, Cultural Resources Section. May 2012. Prairie Archaeology & Research. 2012c. Phase I Cultural Resources Survey. FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. Bluff Area Pipeline Right-Of-Way Segment, Morgan County, Illinois. January 2012. Praxair. 2007. Material Safety Data Sheet for Oxygen, Refrigerated Liquid. P-4637-H. December 2007. Preston C., M. Monea, W. Jazrawi, K. Brown, S. Whittaker, D. White, D. Law, R. Chalaturnyk, and B. Rostron. 2005. “IEA GHG Weyburn CO2 Monitoring and storage project.” Fuel Processing Technology. 86(14-15):1547-1568. Pruess, K. 2006. “On Leakage from Geologic Storage Reservoirs of CO2.” Proceedings of CO2SC Symposium 2006. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, March 20-22, 2006. Public Law 97-98. Farmland Protection Policy Act. U.S. Department of Agriculture Environmental Compliance Library. December 21, 1981. Public Law 111-5.  “American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.” 123 Stat. 115. February 17, 2009.  Accessed April 5, 2011 at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname =111_cong_bills& docid=f:h1enr.pdf. Rmkens, M.J.M., R.A. Young, J.W.A. Posen, D.K. McCool, S.A. El-Swaify, and J.M. Bradford. 1996. “Chapter 3. Soil Erodibility Factor (K)” In Renard, K.G., G.A. Foster, D.K. Weissles, D.K. McCool, and D.C. Yoder, coordinators. Predicting Soil Erosion by Water: A Guide to Conservation Planning With the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook No. 703. July 1996. Salinger, B. 2013. Personal Communication with Bonnie Salinger, City of Meredosia. February 1, 2013. SCAPA (Subcommittee on Consequence Actions and Protective Assessments). 2012. Table 2: Protective Action Criteria (PAC) Rev 27, Based on Applicable 60-minute AEGLs, ERPGs, or TEELs. February 2012. Schools List. 2011. Schools in Meredosia. Accessed at http://illinois.hometownlocator.com/features/ cultural,class,school,scfips,17137.cfm. SES (Specialized Ecological Services). 2011a. Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation – Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower, Morgan County, Illinois. Prepared for the FutureGen Alliance. November 28, 2011. SES. 2011b. Protected Species Survey. Proposed FutureGen Development, Morgan County, Illinois. Prepared for the FutureGen Alliance. May 25, 2011. SES. 2011c. Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation – Proposed FutureGen Development, Morgan County, Illinois. Prepared for the FutureGen Alliance. May 25, 2011;  Addendum 1. June 2011. Shelby Electric Cooperative, Inc. 2011. “Electric Cooperatives of Illinois.” Accessed September 2, 2011 at http://shelbyelectric.coop/About/StateCooperativeSystem.asp. Singh, K.P., G.S. Ramamurtby, and I.W, Seo. 1988. 7-Day 10-Year Low Flows of Streams in the Rock, Spoon, La Moine, and Kaskaskia Regions, Illinois State Water Survey Division, Surface Water Section. Contract Report 440. February 1988. Smithsonian. 2012. “Astragalus distorus.” Accessed November 29, 2012 at http://botany.si.edu/DCflora/ flowergallery/gallery.cfm?mychoice=Astragalus%20distortus&genspe=Astragalusdistortus. Soil Survey Division Staff. 1993. Soil Survey Manual. National Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 18. Soil Survey Staff. 2011a. “Farmland Classification-Morgan County, Illinois.” Web Soil Survey. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Accessed March 3, 2011 at  http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx. Soil Survey Staff. 2011b. “Web Soil Survey.” U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Survey. Accessed March 21, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ WebSoilSurvey.aspx. Stover, C.W., G. Reagor, and S.T. Algermissen, 1984. United States earthquake data file. U.S. Geological Survey. Open-File Report 84-225. Suckale, J. 2010. “Moderate-to-large seismicity induced by hydrocarbon production.”  The Leading Edge. 29(3):310-319. Suloway, L. and M. Hubbell. 1994. Wetland Resources of Illinois: An Analysis and Atlas. Illinois Natural History Survey Special Publication 15. Champaign, Illinois. July 1991. Swezey, C.S. 2009. Stratigraphy and Petroleum Systems of the Illinois Basin, U.S.A. U.S. Geological Survey  Scientific Investigations Map 3068. Thomas, D.L. 1999. “Illinois River.” In Illinois Natural History Survey Annual Report 1998-1999. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Illinois Natural History Survey.  Accessed March 22, 2011 at http://www.inhs.illinois.edu/resources/annualreports/98_99/illriv.html. Turner, B.D. 1994. Workbook Of Atmospheric Dispersion Estimates: An Introduction to Dispersion Modeling, 2nd edition. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, Florida. U.S. Cities. 2012. “Jacksonville Illinois Profile and Resource Guide, City or Community of Jacksonville, Illinois.” Accessed January 23, 2012 at http://www.usacitiesonline.com/ilcountyjacksonville. htm#statistics. U.S. Department of State. 2011. “Appendix L – Pipeline Temperature Effects Study.” In Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Keystone XL Project. August 26, 2011. USACE (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers). 1998. “Illinois Waterway Navigational Chart No. 28.” Accessed March 9, 2011 at http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/NIC2/Documents/chart28.pdf. USACE. 2007. Illinois River Basin Restoration Comprehensive Plan with Integrated Environmental Assessment. Rock Island District. March 2007. USAF (United States Air Force). 2003. Air Emissions Inventory Guidance Document for Stationary Sources at Air Force Installations. United States Air Force Institute for Environment, Safety and Occupational Health Risk Analysis. Brooks Air Force Base, Texas. May 1999, Revised December 2003. USBLS (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2011. Illinois County Unemployment Rate Rankings, Not Seasonally Adjusted. Bureau of Labor Statistics. August 2011. USBLS. 2012a. “Table 1. Incidence rates of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses by industry and case types, 2010.” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Updated October 2010. Accessed July 16, 2012 at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb2813.pdf. USBLS. 2012b. “Fatal occupational injuries, total hours worked, and rates of total occupational injuries for civilian workers by selected worker characteristics, occupations, and industries, 2010.” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Accessed February 23, 2012 at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfoi_rates_2010hb.pdf. USBLS. 2012c. “Table A-1. Fatal occupational injuries by industry and event or exposure, All United States, 2010.” U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Accessed July 16, 2012 at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0250.pdf. USCB (U.S. Census Bureau). 1994. “Population of Counties by Decennial Census: 1900 to 1990.” U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division. October 14, 1994. Accessed December 5, 2012 at http://www.census.gov/population/cencounts/1900-90.txt. USCB. 2000. “DP-1: Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2000, Geographic area: Morgan County, Illinois.” U.S. Census Bureau, American FactFinder. Accessed August 4, 2011 at http://factfinder.census.gov/home/saff/main.html?_lang = en. USCB. 2010a. “2010 Census Interactive Population Search.” Accessed August 1, 2012 at http://2010. census.gov/2010census/popmap/. USCB. 2010b. “2006-2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, Meredosia, Illinois.” U.S. Census Bureau, American Fact Finder. Accessed February 7, 2012 at http://factfinder2.census. gov/. USCB. 2010c. “Jacksonville (city) QuickFacts from the U.S. Census Bureau.” U.S. Census Bureau, QuickFacts Database. Accessed April 11, 2012 at http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/ 17/1738115.html. USCB. 2010d. 2010 Census Redistricting Data (Public Law 94-171) Summary File, Tables P1 and H1. Accessed February 13, 2011 at http://www2.illinois.gov/census/Pages/Census2010Data.aspx. USCB. 2010e. “2010 State and County QuickFacts.” U.S. Census Bureau, Accessed October 13, 2011 at http://quickfacts.census.gov. USCB. 2010f. “Profile of General Population and Housing Characteristics: 2010. 2010 Demographic Profile Data, Census Tract 9514, Morgan County, Illinois.” U.S. Census Bureau, American Fact Finder. Accessed August 28 2012 at http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/search results.xhtml?refresh=t. USCB. 2010g. “Selected Economic Characteristics, 2006-2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. Demographic Profile 03 – Morgan County, IL Census Tract 9514.” U.S. Census Bureau, American Fact Finder. Accessed August 28, 2012 at http://factfinder2.census.gov/ faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t. USCB. 2011a. “Population density and population characteristics from Census 2010 National Summary File of Redistricting Data (PL 94-171), Detailed Tables, Table P1 Population Data, Illinois and Table P12 population age characteristics.” Data Accessed August 8, 2011 at http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. USCB. 2011b. “Table 3. Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for Incorporated Place in Illinois: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2011.” U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division. Accessed July 24, 2012 at http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/17000lk.html. USDA (U.S. Department of Agriculture). 1999. “Table 1. County Summary Highlights: 1997.” In 1997 Census of Agriculture. United States Summary and State Data, Volume 1. Geographic Area Series, Part 51. AC97-A-51. March 1999. USDA. 2009. “Table 1. County Summary Highlights: 2007.” In 2007 Census of Agriculture. United States Summary and State Data, Volume 1. Geographic Area Series, Part 51. AC-07-A-51. Updated December 2009. USDA. 2011. “NSSH Part 622 | NRCS Soils.”  National Soil Survey Handbook, Part 430-VI. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Updated January 24, 2011. Accessed March 25, 2011 at http://soils.usda.gov/technical/handbook/. USDA. 2012. “Part 618- Soil Properties and Qualities | NRCS Soils.” National Soil Survey Handbook, Part 618.51. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Updated January 24, 2011. Accessed August 20, 2012 at http://soils.usda.gov/technical/handbook/. USDA/NRCS (U.S. Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources Conservation Service). 2001. National Landcover Dataset – Illinois. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Cartography and Geospatial Center. Texas. 2001. USDA/NRCS. 2006. Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database for Morgan County, Illinois. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Texas. 2006. USDOI/USGS (U.S. Department of the Interior and U.S. Geological Survey). 1994. National Water Quality Assessment Program – The Lower Illinois River Basin. NAWQA Fact Sheet.  FS 94-018. September 1994. USEPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1974. Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare within Adequate Margin of Safety. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Noise Abatement and Control. Washington, D.C. March 1974. USEPA. 1993. EPA’s Map of Radon Zones, Illinois. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Office of Radiation and Indoor Air. September 1993. USEPA. 1995a. “Section 13.2.3, Heavy Construction Operations.” In Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors (AP-42) 5th Edition, Volume I. Accessed September 1, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/ttnchie1/ap42/ch13/final/c13s02-3.pdf. USEPA. 1995b. Memorandum: Calculating Potential to Emit (PTE) for Emergency Generators. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. September 6, 1995. USEPA. 1995c. SCREEN3 Model User’s Guide. Report U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. Research Triangle Park, NC. EPA-454/B-95-004. September 1995. USEPA. 1998. Characterization of Building-Related Construction and Demolition Debris in the United States. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Municipal and Industrial Solid Waste Division. EPA530-R-98-010. June 1998. USEPA. 2000. Carbon Dioxide as a Fire Suppressant: Examining the Risks. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation. EPA430-R-00-002. February 2000. USEPA. 2005a. Methodology to Estimate the Transportable Fraction (TF) of Fugitive Dust Emissions for Regional and Urban Scale Air Quality Analyses. Updated August 3, 2005. USEPA. 2005b. Examination of the Multiplier Used to Estimate PM2.5 Fugitive Dust Emissions from PM10.  USEPA. 2008a. “NONROAD Model (nonroad engines, equipment, and vehicles) Modeling and Inventories.” 2008 NONROAD Model. Updated November 26, 2012. Accessed on November 28, 2012 at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/nonrdmdl.htm. USEPA. 2008b. Vulnerability Evaluation Framework for Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. EPA430-R-08-009. July 10, 2008. USEPA. 2009a. “Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under Section 202(a) of the Clean Air Act.” Accessed April 5, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ endangerment.html. USEPA. 2009b. Frequently Asked Questions about Global Warming and Climate Change: Back to Basics. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation. EPA-430-R08-016. April 2009. USEPA. 2009c. Risk Management Program Guidance for Offsite Consequence Analysis. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response. EPA 550-B99-009. Updated March 2009. USEPA. 2010a. Median Life, Annual Activity, and Load Factor Values for Nonroad Engine Emissions Modeling. NR-005d. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Transportation and Air Quality. EPA420-R-10-016. July 2010. USEPA. 2010b. Exhaust and Crankhouse Emission Factors for Nonroad Engine Modeling Compression-Ignition. NR-009d. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Transportation and Air Quality. EPA-420-R-10-018. July 2010. USEPA. 2010c. Memorandum: Guidance Concerning the Implementation of the 1-hour NO2 NAAQS for Prevention of Significant Deterioration Program. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. June 29, 2010. USEPA. 2010d. Memorandum: Guidance Concerning the Implementation of the 1-hour SO2 NAAQS for Prevention of Significant Deterioration Program. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. August 23, 2010. USEPA. 2010e. Final Rule: Prevention of Significant Deterioration and Title V Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule. Fact Sheet. May 2010. USEPA. 2010f. General Technical Support Document for Injection and Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide: Subparts RR and UU. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation. November 2010. USEPA. 2010g. “Primary Distinguishing Characteristics of Level III Ecoregions of the Continental United States.” July 2010. Accessed September 6, 2012 at ftp://ftp.epa.gov/wed/ecoregions/ us/Eco_Level_III_descriptions.doc. USEPA. 2011a. “Illinois State Implementation Plan.” Accessed on March 10, 2011 at http://yosemite.epa. gov/r5/r5ard.nsf/SIPs%20View%20By%20State%20Main%20View!OpenView&Start=1&Count =30&Expand=1.19.1.1#1.19.1.1. USEPA. 2011b. “Currently Designated Nonattainment Areas for All Criteria Pollutants | Green Book | US EPA.” Updated April 21, 2011. Accessed June 1, 2011, at http://www.epa.gov/air/oaqps/greenbk/ ancl.html#ILLINOIS. USEPA. 2011c. “IDEA Query Results.” Enforcement and Compliance History Online (ECHO). Accessed July 5, 2011 at http://www.epa-echo.gov/echo/compliance_report_air.html. USEPA. 2011d. “Select Geographic Area | AirData | US EPA.” Accessed May 31, 2011 at http://www.epa. gov/ air/data/geosel.html. USEPA. 2011e. “Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program | Regulatory Initiatives | Climate Change U.S. EPA.” Accessed April 4, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/ghgrulemaking. html. USEPA. 2011f. “Regulations & Standards | Transportation and Climate | US EPA.” Accessed April 5, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/regulations.htm#1-1. USEPA. 2011g. “EPA New Source Review Regulatory Actions.” Accessed April 5, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/nsr/actions.html. USEPA. 2011h. “Clean Air Act Permitting for Greenhouse Gas Emissions – Final Rules. Fact Sheet.” Accessed April 5, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/nsr/actions.html#2011. USEPA. 2011i. Draft Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program Class VI Well Site Characterization Guidance for Owners and Operators. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. EPA 816-D-10-006. March 2011. USEPA. 2011j. “SDWIS Search | Envirofacts | US EPA.”  Updated April 26, 2011. Accessed April 26, 2011 at http://oaspub.epa.gov/enviro/sdw_report_v2.first_table?pws_id=IL1370300&state=IL& source=Groundwater&population=1041&sys_num=0. USEPA. 2011k. “Lower Illinois Watershed – 07130011 | Surf Your Watershed | US EPA.” Accessed February 25, 2011 at http://cfpub.epa.gov/surf/huc.cfm?huc_code=07130011. USEPA. 2011l. Proposed Regulations to Establish Requirements for Cooling Water Intake Structures at Existing Facilities. Fact Sheet. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. EPA820-F-11-002. March 2011. USEPA. 2011m. “NEPAssist.” Online environmental resource mapping application. Accessed August 1, 2011 at https://ssoprod.epa.gov/sso/jsp/NEPAlogin.jsp. USEPA. 2011n. Clean Water Act NPDES Permitting Determinations for the Thermal Discharge and Cooling Water Intake Structures at Merrimack Station in Bow, New Hampshire. NPDES Permit No. NH0001465. USEPA. 2011o. “Coal Combustion Residuals | Industrial Waste | US EPA.” Accessed August 11, 2011 at http://www.epa.gov/osw/nonhaz/industrial/special/fossil/coalashletter.htm. USEPA. 2012a. “National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) | Air and Radiation | US EPA.” Updated July 16, 2012. Accessed July 25, 2012 at http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html. USEPA. 2012b. “MOVES (Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator) | Modeling and Inventories | US EPA.” MOVES 2012b simulator information page. Updated June 25,2012. Accessed July 25, 2012, at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/models/moves/index.htm#generalinfo. USEPA. 2012c. AP-42, Volume 1, Fifth Edition. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors. Volume 1: Stationary Point and Area Sources. Original publication January 1995, sections updated periodically. Accessed May 28, 2012 at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/index.html. USEPA. 2012d. “Trends in Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” In Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2010. EPA 430-R-12-001. April 15, 2012. USEPA. 2012e. Geologic Sequestration of Carbon Dioxide, Draft Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program Class VI Well Testing and Monitoring Guidance. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. EPA 816-D-10-009. January 2012. USEPA. 2012f. “EPA Office of Water (OW): 303(d) Listed Impaired Waters NHD Indexed Dataset.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water. Accessed online December 2012 at http://epamap32.epa.gov/radims/. USEPA. 2012g. “EPA | Envirofacts Warehouse | FII.” Facility Detail Report for Ameren Energy Generating Meredosia Power Station. Accessed November 28, 2012 at http://oaspub.epa.gov/ enviro/fii_query_dtl.disp_program_facility?pgm_sys_id_in=ILD065236226. USEPA. 2012h. “Acute Exposure Guideline Level (AEGLs) | US EPA.” Updated April 23, 2012 Accessed April 23, 2012 for SO3 at http://www.epa.gov/oppt/aegl/pubs/rest153.htm, H2S at http://www.epa.gov/oppt/aegl/pubs/results57.htm, and SO2 at http://www.epa.gov/oppt/ aegl/pubs/results86.htm. USEPA. 2012i. “Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) Database Inhalation Reference Concentration (RfC).” Accessed July 24, 2012 for H2S at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0061.htm#inhalrfc. USEPA. 2012j. “EPA Map of Radon Zones | Radon | US EPA.” Updated September 11, 2012. Accessed November 27, 2012 at http://epa.gov/radon/zonemap.html. USFA (United States Fire Administration). 2012. “National Fire Department Census Database.” Accessed February 13, 2012 at www.usfa.dhs.gov/applications/census. USFWS (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service). 2010a. “Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States.” Vector Digital Data CONUS-wet_poly. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Division of Habitat Resource Conservation. Washington, DC. Accessed February 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/. USFWS. 2010b. “Bald Eagle Permit: Non-Purposeful Take Step-by-Step Guidance.” Updated September 13, 2010. Accessed September 5, 2012 at http://www.fws.gov/midwest/MidwestBird/ eaglepermits/baeatake/step1.html. USFWS. 2011a. “Wetlands Mapper.” Online National Wetland Inventory mapping application. Accessed March 28, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Data/Mapper.html. USFWS. 2011b. “Species Fact Sheet – Bald Eagle.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Oregon Fish and Wildlife Office. Accessed June 6, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/oregonfwo/Species/Data/ BaldEagle/. USFWS. 2012a. “Birds Protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.” Updated April 11, 2012. Accessed September 6, 2012 at http://www.fws.gov/migratorybirds/RegulationsPolicies/mbta/taxolst.html. USFWS 2012b. “About the Refuge - Meredosia – U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.” Updated October 2, 2012. Accessed November 5, 2012 at http://www.fws.gov/refuge/Meredosia/about.html. USFWS. 2012c. Illinois Federally Endangered, Threatened, and Candidate Species. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Midwest Region. Updated March 2012. USFWS 2012d. “Sheepnose (a freshwater mussel) Plethobasus cyphyus.” March 2012. Accessed October 29, 2012 at  http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/clams/sheepnose/pdf/Sheepnose FactSheetMarch2012.pdf. USGCRP (U.S. Global Change Research Program). 2009. “”Regional Climate Impacts: Midwest.” In Global Change Impacts in the United States. June 2009. USGS (U.S. Geological Survey). 2000a. “Lower Illinois River Basin NAWQA: Basin Information.” Updated May 11, 2000. Accessed March 24, 2011 at http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/lirb/info/. USGS. 2000b. “Lower Illinois River Basin: Network Design.” Updated May 11, 2000. Accessed March 25, 2011 at http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/lirb/gw/net_design/index.html. USGS. 2000c. “Lower Illinois River Basin: Surface Water.” Updated May 11, 2000. Accessed November 29, 2012 at http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/lirb/sw/. USGS. 2009a. “Water Data Report 2009. 05568500 Illinois River at Kingston Mines, Illinois.” Accessed March 10, 2011 at http://waterdata.usgs.gov/il/nwis/annual/?referred_module=sw. USGS, 2009b. “Water Data Report 2009. 05586100 Illinois River at Valley City, Illinois.” Accessed March 10, 2011 at http://waterdata.usgs.gov/il/nwis/annual/?referred_module=sw. USGS. 2010. “Water Data Report 2010. 05585500 Illinois River at Meredosia Illinois.” Accessed March 10, 2011 at http://waterdata.usgs.gov/il/nwis/annual/?referred_module=sw. USGS. 2011a. “Water Quality Assessment of the Lower Illinois River Basin: Environmental Setting.”  Kelly A. Warner. Accessed March 11, 2011 at http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/lirb/pubs/esr/ Environ.html. USGS. 2011b. “USGS Surface-Water Data for Illinois.” Accessed February 25, 2011 at http://waterdata. usgs.gov/il/nwis/sw. USGS. 2012a. “Probability of earthquake with M > 5.0 within 50 years & 50 km.” Accessed August 28, 2010 at http://geohazards.usgs.gov/eqprob/2009/index.php. USGS. 2012b. “US Seismic Hazard 2008.” Peak Ground Acceleration (%g) with 2% probability of exceedance in 50 years, national database. Accessed November 28, 2012 at http://earthquake. usgs.gov/hazards/apps/map/. USGS. 2013. “Illinois.” Earthquake History. Accessed January 30, 2013 at http://earthquake.usgs.gov/ earthquakes/states/illinois/history.php. USGS/USEPA (U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2011. “National Hydrography Dataset.” U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Reston, Virginia. Accessed July 2011 at http://nhd.usgs.gov/data.html. Werries, S. 2012. Personal Communication with Scott Werries, Fire Chief, Meredosia Volunteer Fire Department. August 8, 2012. West Central Mass Transit. 2012. “West Central Mass Transit District Passenger Guidelines & Fare Schedule.” Updated May 21, 2008. Accessed December 3, 2012 at http://www.wcmtd.org/ morgan-scott-county.aspx. Whitney, S.D., K.D. Blodgett, and R.E. Sparks. 1997. A Comprehensive Mussel Survey of the Illinois River, 1993-1995. Illinois Natural History Survey. Illinois Department of Natural Resources. Springfield, Illinois. December 1997. Updated February 27, 2010. Willman, H.B., E. Atherton, T.C. Buschbach, C. Collinson, J.C. Frey, M.E. Hopkins, J.A. Lineback, and J.A. Simon. 1975. Handbook of Illinois Stratigraphy. Illinois State Geological Survey Bulletin 95. Urbana, Illinois. Woller, D.M., and E.W. Sanderson. 1979. Public Groundwater Supplies in Morgan and Scott Counties. Illinois Institute of Natural Resources Bulletin 60-27. Urbana, Illinois. Woods, A.J., J.M. Omernik, C.L. Pederson, and B.C. Moran. 2006a. “Illinois Level III and IV Ecoregions.” Accessed September 6, 2012 at ftp://ftp.epa.gov/wed/ecoregions/il/il_map.pdf. Woods, A.J., J.M. Omernik, C.L. Pederson, and B.C. Moran. 2006b. “Level III and IV Ecoregions of Illinois.” September 2006. Accessed July 13, 2011 at ftp://ftp.epa.gov/wed/ecoregions/il/il_eco_ desc.pdf. WRI (World Resources Institute). 2007. “Illinois Greenhouse Gas Inventory and Projections.” February 22, 2007. Accessed October 1, 2012 at http://www.epa.state.il.us/air/climatechange/documents/07-02-22/il-emissions-overview-v5.pdf. WRI. 2012. “Climate Analysis Indicators Tool.” Accessed September 30, 2012 at http://www.google.com/publicdata/directory#!dp=World+Resources+Institute. Zhou, Q., and J.T. Birkholzer. 2011. On scale and magnitude of pressure build-up induced by large-scale geologic storage of CO2. Greenhouse Gases Science and Technology. 1:11-20. Zhou, Q., J.T. Birkholzer, E. Mehnert, Y.-F. Lin, and K. Zhang. 2009. Modeling Basin-and Plume-Scale Processes of CO2 storage for Full-Scale Deployment. Ground Water 48(4):494-514. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 7 FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL, AND TRIBAL CONTACTS Federal Agencies Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Office of Federal Agency Programs Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Office of Energy Projects U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Headquarters U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St. Louis District U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service U.S. Department of Agriculture, Rural Utilities Service U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region V U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Midwest Region U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Marion Ecological Services U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of Transportation Policy, Environmental Team Leader U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Carbon Sequestration / Climate Change Lead, Region V U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Headquarters, Office of Federal Activities U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Region V Illinois Agencies Illinois Commerce Commission Illinois Department of Agriculture, Director Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, Director Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, Office of Coal Development Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Director Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Division of Ecosystems and Environment Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Division of Natural Heritage Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Impact Assessment Section Manager Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources Illinois Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Illinois Department of Transportation, Office of Planning and Programming Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Air Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Land Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Director Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, State Historic Preservation Officer National Governors Association, Natural Resources Committee Local and Regional Agencies City of Jacksonville, City Clerk City of Jacksonville, Fire Department City of Jacksonville, Mayor City of Jacksonville, Police Department Morgan County Highway Department Morgan County Regional Planning Commission Village of Meredosia, Mayor Native American Tribes Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Citizen Potawatomi Nation Delaware Nation, Oklahoma Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma Forest County Potawatomi Community Hannahville Indian Community Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin Iowa Tribe of Kansas & Nebraska Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma Kaw Nation Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians of Michigan Miami Tribe of Oklahoma Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi, Michigan Osage Nation Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians Prairie Band of the Potawatomi Nation Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa The Shawnee Tribe Other Organizations Jacksonville Fire Department, Fire Chief Jacksonville Municipal Department Meredosia Volunteer Fire Department, Fire Chief Meredosia Water Plant, Water Superintendent Morgan County GIS North Morgan Water Cooperative, Water Attendant DOE/EIS-0460D  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  8. DISTRIBUTION LIST  8  DISTRIBUTION LIST  Federal Elected Officials The Honorable Cheri Bustos United States House of Representatives  (IL District 17) The Honorable Rodney Davis United States House of Representatives  (IL District 13) The Honorable Richard Durbin United States Senate The Honorable Mark Kirk United States Senate The Honorable Adam Kinzinger Unites States House of Representatives  (IL District 16) The Honorable Aaron Schock United States House of Representatives  (IL District 18) The Honorable John Shimkus United States House of Representatives  (IL District 15) United States Senate and House of Representatives Committees Appropriations Committees The Honorable Barbara Mikulski, Chairman Committee on Appropriations United States Senate The Honorable Richard Shelby, Ranking Member Committee on Appropriations United States Senate The Honorable Dianne Feinstein, Chairman Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Committee on Appropriations United States Senate The Honorable Lamar Alexander, Ranking Member Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Committee on Appropriations United States Senate Authorizing Committees The Honorable Ron Wyden, Chairman Committee on Energy and Natural Resources United States Senate  The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, Ranking Member Committee on Energy and Natural Resources United States Senate The Honorable Barbara Boxer, Chairman Committee on Environment and Public Works United States Senate The Honorable Harold Rogers, Chairman Committee on Appropriations United States House of Representatives The Honorable Nita Lowey, Ranking Member Committee on Appropriations United States House of Representatives The Honorable Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, Chairman Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Committee on Appropriations United States House of Representatives The Honorable Marcy Kaptur, Ranking Member Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Committee on Appropriations United States House of Representatives The Honorable David Vitter, Ranking Member Committee on Environment and Public Works United States Senate The Honorable Fred Upton, Chairman Committee on Energy and Commerce United State House of Representatives The Honorable Henry A. Waxman, Ranking Member Committee on Energy and Commerce United States House of Representatives Native American Tribal Organizations Mr. George Blanchard, Governor Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Mr. John A. Barrett, Chairman Citizen Potawatomi Nation Ms. Tamara Francis, Cultural Preservation Director Delaware Nation, Oklahoma Mr. Kenneth Meshigaud, Chairperson Hannahville Indian Community Mr. Jon Greendeer, President Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin Mr. David K. Sprague, Chairperson Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Potawatomi Indians of Michigan Mr. Timothy Rhodd, Chairman Iowa Tribe of Kansas & Nebraska Ms. Janice Rowe-Kurak, Chairperson Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma Mr. Guy Munroe, Chairman Kaw Nation Mr. Gilbert Salazar, Chairman Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma Mr. Steve Cadue, Chairman Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas Mr. Juan Garza, Jr., Chairman Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas State Elected Officials The Honorable Pat Quinn Governor of Illinois The Honorable Norine Hammond Illinois State House of Representatives (District 93) The Honorable Andrew Manar Illinois State Senate (District 48) The Honorable Sam McCann Illinois State Senate (District 50) The Honorable Raymond Poe Illinois State House of Representatives (District 99) Mr. Thomas E. Gamble, Chief Miami Tribe of Oklahoma Mr. Homer A. Mandoka, Chairperson Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi, Michigan Mr. John D. Red Eagle, Principal Chief Osage Nation Mr. John P. Froman, Chief Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Mr. Matthew Wesaw, Chairman Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians Mr. Steve Ortiz, Chairman Prairie Band of the Potawatomi Nation Mr. Frank Blackcloud, Chairman Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa Mr. Michael Dougherty, Chairperson Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska Mr. George Thurman, Principal Chief Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma Mr. Ron Sparkman, Chief The Shawnee Tribe Mr. Harold Frank, Chairman Forest County Potawatomi Community Ms. Glenna J. Wallace, Chief Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma The Honorable Chapin Rose Illinois State Senate (District 51) The Honorable Wayne Rosenthal Illinois State House of Representatives (District 95) The Honorable John Sullivan Illinois State Senate (District 47) The Honorable C.D. Davidsmeyer Illinois State House of Representatives (District 100) Federal Agencies Mr. Mark Matusiak Civil Works Policy and Policy Compliance Division Office of Water Project Review U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Mr. Charles L. Walthall, National Program Leader Office of National Programs, Natural Resources and Sustainable Agricultural Systems Agricultural Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Mr. Joe Carbone, Assistant Director for NEPA Ecosystem Management Coordination Forest Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Mr. Andrée DuVarney, National Environmental Coordinator Natural Resources Conservation Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Federal Agencies – Regional Offices Mr. Tyson J. Zobrist, Project Manager Regulatory Branch St. Louis District U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Mr. Matt Mangan, Biologist Marion Ecological Services Sub-Office Fish and Wildlife Service U.S. Department of the Interior State Agencies Mr. Jonathan Feipel, Executive Director Illinois Commerce Commission Ms. Anne Haaker  Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Preservation Services Division Illinois Historic Preservation Agency Mr. Robert F. Flider, Director Illinois Department of Agriculture Mr. Bill Hoback, Deputy Director Office of Coal Development Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Mr. Adam Pollet, Acting Director Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Mr. Nicholas Mueller, Regional Environmental Officer Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region V Department of Homeland Security Mr. Mark Plank, Federal Preservation Officer Rural Utilities Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Mr. Matthew Ponish, National Environmental Farm Service Agency U.S. Department of Agriculture Ms. Marthea Rountree Office of Federal Activities U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Ms. Jarrad Kosa, NEPA Coordinator Fish and Wildlife Service U.S. Department of the Interior Mr. Jeff Wright, Director Office of Energy Projects Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Mr. Ken Westlake, Chief NEPA Implementation Section Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, Region V U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Jeffrey McDonald, Carbon Sequestration / Climate Change Lead, Region V U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Marc Miller, Director Illinois Department of Natural Resources Mr. Arlan Juhl, P.E., Director Office of Water Resources Illinois Department of Natural Resources Ms. Karen Miller Impact Assessment Section Manager Illinois Department of Natural Resources Mr. Todd Rettig, Division Manager Division of Ecosystems and Environment Illinois Department of Natural Resources Dr. LaMar Hasbrouck, Director Division of Environmental Health Illinois Department of Public Health Mr. Chuck Ingersoll, Director Office of Planning and Programming Illinois Department of Transportation Ms. Lisa Bonnett, Deputy Director Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. David Bloomberg Air Quality Planning Section, Division of Air Pollution Control Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Steve Nightingale Permit Section, Bureau of Land Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Ed Bakowski Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Steve Chard Illinois Department of Agriculture Mr. Dick Berg Illinois State Geological Survey Mr. Tom Cox Illinois Department of Transportation Regional and Local Officials and Agencies The Honorable Larry Ferguson, Mayor City of Arcola The Honorable Andy Ezard, Mayor City of Jacksonville The Honorable Kenneth Scott, Mayor Village of Meredosia The Honorable Gordon Jumper, Mayor Village of South Jacksonville The Honorable Greg Brotherton, Mayor City of Taylorville The Honorable Daniel J. Kleiss, Mayor City of Tuscola Mr. Paul Scmitz, Chairman Christian County Board Ms. Laura Wilkinson, Vice Chairman Christian County Board Mr. Charles Knox, Chairman Douglas County Board Mr. Bill Meier, Chairman Morgan County Commissioners Mr. Bradley Zeller, Vice Chairman Morgan County Commissioners Mr. Dick Rawlings, Member Morgan County Commissioners Mr. Dusty Douglas Morgan County Regional Planning Commission Ms. Sallie Green, Assistant Director Advanced Energy Technology Initiative Illinois State Geological Survey Midwest Geological Carbon Sequestration Consortium Mr. Kevin Lesko Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Mike Murphy Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Terry Savko Illinois Department of Agriculture Mr. John Negangard Illinois Department of Transportation Mr. Bob Smet Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Mr. Duane Pulliam Illinois Department of Natural Resources Mr. Terry L. Denison, President Jacksonville Regional Economic Development Corporation Mr. Matt Bernius, Village President Village of Arthur Mr. Bob Doan, Community Development Coordinator Arthur Area Economic Development Corporation Ms. Ginny Fanning Jacksonville Area Chamber of Commerce Mr. John Clark, Supervisor Arcola Township Mr. Paul Faraci, Regional Manager DCEO – Illinois Office of Regional Outreach, East Central Office Ms. Rachael Crane, Director Arcola Chamber of Commerce Mr. Chuck Knox, Chairman Douglas County Board Mr. Don Munson Douglas County Board Mr. Dave McCabe, President Moultrie County Board Ms. Carly McCrory Tuscola Economic Development Inc. Ms. Stepheny McMahon, Director Sullivan Chamber & Economic Development Mr. Brian Moody, Executive Director Tuscola Economic Development, Inc. Ms. Mary L. Renner, Director Christian County Economic Development Corporation Ms. Ann Short, Mayor City of Sullivan Mr. Steven D. Sipes, Mayor City of Pana Mr. Paul White, Chairman Jacksonville Area Chamber of Commerce Mr. Jim Crane, County Engineer Douglas County Mr. Bob Crossman, Attorney Village of Arthur Mr. Andrew Bequette, Attorney City of Tuscola Mr. Jim Deece City of Pana Mr. Steve Helton, Road Commissioner Village of Arthur Mr. Charlie McGrew, County Sheriff Douglas County Sheriff’s Department  Mr. Gene Good, Fire Chief Arthur Fire District Mr. Steve Hettinger, Fire Chief City of Tuscola Nongovernmental Organizations Mr. Randy Rawson, President American Boiler Manufacturers Association Ms. Pamela A. Lacey, Senior Managing Counsel American Gas Association Mr. Harry Ng, General Counsel American Petroleum Institute Ms. Joy Ditto Vice President of Government Relations American Public Power Association Mr. Richard M. Loughery, Director Environmental Activities Edison Electric Institute Ms. Vickie Patton, General Counsel Environmental Defense Fund Mr. Drew Hoel City of Tuscola Mr. Les Huddle, Superintendent Jacksonville School District #117 Mr. Jon Freeman Cass-Morgan County Farm Bureau Mr. John J. Lawrence, Alderman City of Taylorville Mr. Mike Lindenmeyer Arcola Chamber of Commerce Mr. Dan Little Morgan County Board Ms. Alta Long, Treasurer City of Tuscola Mr. Paul Sisk, Fire Chief Arcola Fire District Mr. Michael Smith, Superintendent Tuscola School District Ms. Judy Tighe, Executive Director Jacksonville Main Street Mr. Joe Victor Douglas County Mr. George Wineland, Assistant Chief Tuscola Fire Department Mr. Travis Wilson, Superintendent Arthur School District Mr. William Wagonner, City Administrator City of Arcola Ms. Michelle Nellenbach, Director Natural Resources Committee National Governors Association Ms. Amanda Aspatore, Assistant General Counsel Environmental Affairs National Mining Association Mr. Rae Cronmiller, Environmental Counsel National Rural Electric Cooperative Association Mr. Jim Lyon, Senior Vice President for Conservation National Wildlife Federation Ms. Traci Barkley Water Resources Scientist Prairie Rivers Network  (National Wildlife Federation Regional Affiliate) Mr. Ed Hopkins  Sierra Club Mr. Jack Darin, Director Sierra Club, Illinois Chapter Mr. David Alberswerth Senior Energy Policy Advisor The Wilderness Society Ms. Nada Culver, Senior Director The Wilderness Society Mr. Taylor McKinnon, Public Lands Campaign Director Center for Biological Diversity Mr. Richard Liebert, Chairman Citizens for Clean Energy, Inc. Libraries Arcola Public Library Jacksonville Public Library M-C River Valley Public Library District Interested Parties Mr. Dean Alger Duke Energy Generating Services Mr. Dean W. Applebee Mr. Jeff Armstrong WILS News Ms. Kathy Atchling Preedy Ballard Mr. Kyle Barry Ms. Bonita Becker Mr. Carl Becker Ms. Jane Becker Mr. Todd Becker Mr. Weldon Becker Ms. Vikkie Becker Diversified Crop Insurance Service Ms. Karen Bender, Associate Director Office of Corporate Relations Ms. Diane Bingaman Ms. Joyce Blumenshine Sierra Club Ms. Patricia Boldt Ms. Barbara Bauman Tyran, Director Washington and State Relations Electric Power Research Institute  Mr. Timothy Ballo, Senior Associate Attorney Earthjustice Mr. Eddie Johnston Managing Director – Infrastructure  Gas Technology Institute Mr. Erich Pica, President Friends of the Earth Mr. David Hawkins, Director Climate Programs, Washington Office Natural Resources Defense Council Mr. Robert A. Beck, Executive Vice President National Coal Council  Taylorville Public Library Tuscola Public Library Mr. Keith Bradbury Franklin Bank Mr. David Brown FutureGen Mr. Jack Brown Christian County Generation Mr. Chris Burger Patrick Mr. Chris Cain, Facility Manager Lyondellbasell – Equistar Chemicals Mr. Ron Carney Mr. Willis E. Chupp Alex Cole Mr. W. Brian Cole Mr. Martin Culik C12 Energy Mr. Ron Cummings IBEW Mr. Robert Dahlmann Mr. Mike Damler, President TEDI Mr. Andy Davenport Mr. David Davenport Mr. Phil Deal Mr. Bob Denton, Facility Manager Duke Energy Generating Services Iris and Noel Dicks Mr. Kevin Doellman WICD-TV Ms. Karyl Dressen Mr. Aaron Dufelmeier University of Illinois Extension Mr. Jim Duncan Ms. Ashley Durbin TEDI Ms. Catherine Edmiston Mr. Jadon Evans Mr. Rickey Ferguson Mr. Duane Friend University of Illinois Extension Mr. Paul Friesema Environmental Policy and Culture Program Northwestern University Mr. James Goldsborough Goldsborough Electric, LLC Ms. Lanette Goldsborough Goldsborough Electric, LLC Mr. Phil Gonet Illinois Coal Association Mr. Jeff Gonka Tenaska Mr. Tom Grojean Grojean Realty and Insurance Agency Mr. Robert Guennewig Mr. Nestor F. Gutierrez Buena Vista Farms Kelly Hall Mr. Roger Hardy Mr. Fred W. Heilich Mr. Fred Helmuth, President West Prairie Water Company Ms. Colleen Hester MacMurray College Mr. Mike Hilgerberg Trent and Dawn Huddleston Elegant Occasion Bridal Mr. Phil Jagucki Schlumberger Reg and Eleanor Jobisch Mr. Richard A. Johnson Mr. Reginald Jordan, Administrator Pleasant Hill Healthcare Mr. Ed Kindred Mr. Kevin Klein Mr. Thomas Klincar, President John Wood Community College Mr. Nick Kovatch WLDS/WEAI News Mr. Tim Landis The State Journal-Register Mr. Alan Lauher, President Central Illinois Building and Construction Trades Ms. Joan Lawrence Ms. Colleen Lehmann The Tuscola Journal Mr. Scott Lensink, President Lake Land College Mr. Greg Lepper Mr. Derek Markley, Special Assistant to the President Eastern Illinois University Mr. Ernie Marsh GSI Mr. Gary Martin Mr. Marvin L. Martin Ms. Pam Martin Illinois College Mrs. Susan Mattes Mr. Jim McCabe WLDS/WEAI News Mr. Doug McCumber, President First National Bank of Arcola Ms. Bree Meier Mr. David Mercer, Correspondent The Associated Press Mr. Homer Miller Ms. Kellie Miller Mr. Emerson Moore Ms. Norma Jean Moore Mr. Albert Musch Ms. Betty Niemann Mr. Jeffrey Niemann Ms. Virginia Niemann Mr. Larry Nolan Mr. Jack Norman Mr. Jim Oliver The Farmers State Bank and Trust Company Mr. Richard Ommen Ms. Melissa Pantier Illinois College Ms. Kathryn F. Payser Mr. Steve Perkins Ms. Vicki Perkins Dr. William Perry, President Eastern Illinois University Mr. Jeff Phillips Mr. Jim Prescott Tenaska Ms. Beverly Pryor Mr. David Pryor Mr. Brad Pullen, Assistant Vice President First Mid-Illinois Bank & Trust Mr. Tom Ramage, President Parkland College Ms. Carolyn Randall Uffelman Farms, Inc. Mr. Johnny F. Rentz Mr. Alan Rider Mr. Bob Roads Mr. Jake Russell Journal-Courier Ms. Patty Rykhus Ms. Becky Sandu Ms. Marilyn Schutt Mr. Garret Selinger ICCS Mr. Alan Shoemaker Tuscola Stone Company Mr. Gary Spurling Christian County Generation Ms. Kelly Staak Mr. Mike Step, HSEQT Manager Lyondellbasell – Equistar Chemicals Mr. Axel Steuer Illinois College Ms. Marsha R. Strader Mr. Joe Strea Parkland College Mr. Joe Streit, Program Manager Parkland – Business Training and Community Education Mr. Geoff Summerville Summerville Enterprises Ms. Karen E. Surratt Mr. Ron Swager PEI Ms. Nadine Szczepanski MacMurray College Ms. Jan Terry Lincoln Land Community College Ms. Kathy Turner Ms. Rachel Wells Illinois Times Mr. Roger West Carpenters Local 904 Mr. Dan Whalen Mr. Allan Worrell Worrell-Leka Land Services Mr. David Wortman DOE/EIS-0460D  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT  9. LIST OF PREPARERS  9  LIST OF PREPARERS  U.S. Department of Energy – National Energy Technology Laboratory Cliff Whyte, P.E. – NEPA Compliance Officer, Document Manager Jeffrey Hoffmann – Federal Project Manager Thomas A. Sarkus – FutureGen Project Director Nelson F. Rekos – Project Manager Potomac-Hudson Engineering, Inc. Frederick J. Carey, P.E. – Project Manager M.S., Environmental Engineering B.S., Civil Engineering 20 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Andrea Wilkes – Document Manager/Deputy Project Manager M.A., Science Writing B.S., Civil and Environmental Engineering B.S., English Literature 27 years experience in environmental engineering, science writing, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Cynthia Ong – Deputy Project Manager M.S., Environmental Sciences B.S., Civil Engineering 8 years of experience in general civil site design work, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Melissa Sanford – Data Manager/Environmental Scientist B.S., Meteorology B.S., Business Management 5 years of experience in project coordination, environmental data quality analysis, technical reports, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Anthony Becker – Environmental Scientist M.S., Biology B.S., Biology 5 years of experience in ecological investigations, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Teresa Beltran – Executive Assistant 15 years of administrative experience. Brian Boose – Senior Environmental Scientist B.S., Biological Sciences/Ecology 23 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis, conducting NEPA training courses, wetlands delineations, threatened/endangered species surveys, habitat characterization, and permitting. A. Brook Crossan, Ph.D., P.E. – Senior Environmental Engineer Ph.D., Geophysical Fluid Dynamics M.S., Mechanical Engineering B.S., Mechanical Engineering 37 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Paul DiPaolo –Environmental Scientist B.S., Environmental Science and Policy 2 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Robin Griffin – Senior Environmental Scientist B.A., English Composition M.S., Environmental Management 17 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Joseph A. Grieshaber – Senior Environmental Scientist M.B.A., Finance M.S., Biology B.S., Biology 36 years of experience, including 21 years of environmental management, and NEPA documentation and analysis.  Timothy Lavallee, P.E. – Senior Environmental Engineer M.S., Civil and Environmental Engineering B.S., Mechanical Engineering 20 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Jamie Martin-McNaughton – Environmental Scientist B.S., Geology-Biology 6 years of experience in geological field work, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Erin J. McNutt – Environmental Scientist M.S., Ecology B.S., Conservation 2 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Robert A. Naumann – Environmental Scientist M.S., Environmental Science B.S., Natural Resources 13 years of experience in environmental compliance, wetlands, and forestry, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Samir A. Qadir – Environmental Scientist M.S., Environmental Policy B.S., Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering 8 years of experience in environmental analysis and program support, compliance audits, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Christopher Rua – Environmental Scientist B.S., Environmental Planning & Design 11 years of experience in site investigations, wetland and habitat surveys, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Stacey Schueler – Environmental Scientist B.S., Environmental Studies 9 years of experience in site remediation, natural resource studies, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Deborah Shinkle – GIS Analyst B.A., Environmental Studies 8 years of experience in data analysis and GIS experience on federal projects. Rachel M. Spangenberg – Senior Environmental Scientist B.S., Biology 23 years of experience in environmental compliance audits, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Amanda Tyrell – Environmental Scientist M.S., Environmental Sciences and Policy B.S., Integrated Science and Technology 12 years of experience in environmental management, environmental due diligence, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Debra Walker – Principal Scientist B.S., Biology 35 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis. Brian Whipple – Principal Engineer M.S., Information Systems B.S., Environmental Engineering 17 years of experience in environmental management, compliance audits, site assessments and remediation engineering projects, and NEPA documentation and analysis. Tetra Tech, Inc. (Health Risk Assessment) Karen Summers – Technical Lead M.S., Geology B. A., Geology 35 years of experience with NEPA documentation and analysis. Carrie Munill – GIS Specialist  Graduate studies in Geography, GIS, and Spatial Statistics B.S., Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 12 years of experience in GIS mapping and geography. Kateryna Sayenko – Programmer and Modeler M.S., Computer Science 10 years of programming and modeling experience including atmospheric and dense gas modeling. Michael Ungs – Principal Scientist and Modeler Ph.D., Forest Science M.S., Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering B.S., Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering 28 years of modeling experience including evaluation of CO2 pipelines, tanks, and wells. DOE/EIS-0460D DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  10. GLOSSARY  10 GLOSSARY  Term  Definition  100-Year Floodplain  Land that becomes or will become submerged by a flood that has a chance to  occur every 100 years (1 percent annual chance of flooding).  500-Year Floodplain  Land that becomes or will become submerged by a flood that has a chance to  occur every 500 years (0.2 percent annual chance of flooding).  7Q10  A method of measuring stream flow, calculated as the lowest stream flow for  seven consecutive days that would be expected to occur once in 10 years.  A-Weighted Scale  Assigns weight to sound frequencies that are related to how sensitive the human  ear is to each sound frequency.  Air Liquide Process  An international company that has been involved in the development of oxy & Construction, Inc.  combustion technologies for power generation with carbon capture for the past  (Air Liquide)  10 years. For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, Air Liquide is responsible for  developing complex components of the oxy-combustion facility, such as the air  separation unit and the compression and purification unit.  Air Separation Unit  An integrated component of the oxy-combustion facility that will supply oxygen  for the oxy-combustion boiler by separating oxygen and nitrogen from the air  through a cold distillation process.  Alluvial  Relating to, composed of, or found in alluvium, which is defined as loose,  unconsolidated soil or sediments, which have been eroded, reshaped by water in  some form, and deposited in a non-marine setting.  Ambient  Of or relating to the conditions of the surrounding environment or atmosphere as  it normally exists.  Ameren Energy  An integrated energy commodity holding company, created in 2000 for  Resources (Ameren)  providing energy solutions to the midwestern United States market. The original  owner and operator of the Meredosia Energy Center, which was selected by the  Department of Energy’s clean coal power program to be the site for the  FutureGen 2.0 Project.  Annual Average  The total volume of vehicle traffic for a highway or road for a year divided by  Daily Traffic  365 days.  Aquifer  Underground geologic formation composed of permeable layers of rock or  sediment that holds and transmits water.  Archaeological  Any material remains of the past, which offer the potential for investigation,  Resource  analysis, and contribution to the understanding of past human communities.  Area of Potential  The geographic area or areas within which an undertaking may directly or  Effect  indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties.  Term  Definition  Area of Review  Defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as the region surrounding  the geologic sequestration project where underground sources of drinking water  may be endangered by the injection activity.  Attainment Area  A geographic area that meets the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for a  criteria pollutant.  Auxiliary Boiler  The boiler that would be used to provide steam to the plant that is needed during  the startup process.  Babcock & Wilcox  An international company that designs, manufactures, and constructs steam  Power Generation  generating systems and emissions control equipment for utilities and industry.  Group, Inc.  Developing the boiler island and gas quality control system for the FutureGen  (Babcock & Wilcox)  2.0 oxy-combustion facility.  Bedrock  Unweathered rock overlaid in most places by soil or rock fragments.  Best Management  Methods, measures, or practices that are generally used in industry to prevent or  Practices  reduce the contributions of pollutants to the environment.  Blowdown  The portion of steam or water removed from a boiler or recirculating cooling  tower at regular intervals to prevent the excessive accumulation of dissolved and  suspended materials.  Booster Pump  The building that would house the well injection pumps and associated flow  Building  meters, flow control valves, and variable speed drive cabinets.  Bottom Ash  Coarse particles generated during the combustion of coal that fall by gravity to  the bottom of the boiler.  Brine  Highly salty and heavily mineralized water that may contain heavy metal and  organic contaminants.  Capillary Pressure  Additional pressure needed for a liquid or gas to enter a pore and overcome  surface tension, or to cross the interface with an immiscible fluid (e.g., CO2 into  brine).   Caprock  The geologic formation or formations that overlie the injection zone and act as a  confining layer to prevent the upward vertical migration of CO2 out of the  injection zone. Caprock is typically comprised of low permeability and porosity  rock layers (typically shale, limestone, or dolomite) making it relatively  impermeable.  Carbon Capture and  The process of capturing CO2 and ultimately injecting it into underground  Storage  geologic formations for secure storage. Sometimes referred to as carbon capture  and sequestration.  Definition Term Carbon Dioxide A greenhouse gas created by natural processes such as animal and plant respiration as well as from human activity such as the burning of fossil fuels. Circulating Dry Scrubber used in the oxy-combustion gas quality control system to remove Scrubber sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide from flue gas. Also called a circulating fluidized bed – flue gas desulfurization unit. Compression and Component of the oxy-combustion facility that purifies and compresses treated Purification Unit flue gas for delivery to the CO2 pipeline. Cooling Tower A structure that is used to provide cool water for the condensation of steam in the steam condenser, and to remove excess heat from other system processes (e.g., air separation and compression and purification units) by circulating the water along a series of panels through which cool air passes. Cooling Water Water that is heated as a result of being used to cool steam and condense it to water. Criteria Pollutant The Clean Air Act of 1970 required the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to set air quality standards for common and widespread pollutants to protect human health and welfare. There are six criteria pollutants: ozone, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, and particulate matter. Critical Habitat A geographic area that contains features essential for the conservation of a threatened or endangered species that may require management and protection. Cultural Resource Archaeological resources, including prehistoric and historic archaeological sites; historic resources; cultural or historic landscapes or viewsheds; Native American resources; and paleontological resources. Cumulative Impact The impact on the environment that results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency (federal or non-federal) or person undertakes such other actions. Day-Night Sound A-weighted equivalent decibel level for a 24-hour period with an additional Level 10-decibel weighting imposed on the equivalent sound levels occurring during nighttime hours (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.). De minimis So small or minimal that it does not matter or the law does not take it into consideration. Decibel A unit for expressing the relative intensity of sounds on a logarithmic scale. Demographics The statistical data of a population, especially those showing average age, income, education, etc. Term  Definition  Direct Contact  Component of the oxy-combustion gas quality control system facility that  Cooler Polishing  removes moisture and sulfur dioxide from treated flue gas.  Scrubber  Direct Impact  Impact or effect that occurs at the same time and place.  Easement  The right of use over the property of another owner.  Effluent  Waste stream flowing into the atmosphere, surface water, groundwater, or soil.  Eminent Domain  The right of a government to appropriate private property for public use upon  payment of its fair market value to the owner; private entities can be granted the  right of eminent domain by a government for special purposes.  Emissions  Release of gases and particles into the atmosphere from various sources.  Endangered Species  A species, subspecies, or varieties in danger of extinction throughout all or a  significant portion of their range. The federal list of endangered species can be  found in 50 CFR 17.11 (wildlife), 50 CFR 17.12 (plants), and 50 CFR 222.23  (marine organisms). The Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board also  maintains a list of endangered species regulated by the Illinois Department of  Natural Resources.  Environmental  The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people – regardless of  Justice  race, ethnicity, and income or education level – in environmental decision  making. Environmental Justice programs promote the protection of human  health and the environment, empowerment via public participation, and the  dissemination of relevant information to inform and educate affected  communities.  Ephemeral Stream  An ephemeral stream has flowing water only during, and for a short duration  after, precipitation events in a typical year. Ephemeral streambeds are located  above the water table year-round. Groundwater is not a source of water for the  stream. Runoff from rainfall is the primary source of water for stream flow.  Fault  A subsurface fracture or discontinuity in geologic strata, across which there is  observable displacement as a result of earth movement.  Floodplain  Flat or nearly flat land adjacent to a stream or river that experiences occasional  or periodic flooding.  Flue Gas  Residual gases resulting from combustion that are vented to the atmosphere  through a flue or chimney.  Fluvial  Refers to the processes associated with rivers and streams and the deposits and  landforms created by them.  Term  Definition  Fly Ash  Fine particles generated during combustion that are collected by electrostatic precipitators or baghouses prior to discharge of the flue gas to the atmosphere.  Formation  The primary unit associated with formal geological mapping of an area. Geologic formations possess distinctive geologic features and can be combined into groups or subdivided into member or units.  Fugitive Dust  Airborne particulate matter typically associated with disturbance of unpaved haul roads, wind erosion of exposed surfaces, and other activities in which material is removed and redistributed.  FutureGen Alliance (Alliance)  A non-profit organization created to benefit the public interest and the interests of science through research, development, and demonstration of near-zero emissions coal technology. Formed to partner with the Department of Energy on the FutureGen Initiative. Current members include Alpha Natural Resources, Inc.; Anglo American, SA; Joy Global, Inc.; Peabody Energy Corporation; and Xstrata PLC.  FutureGen Initiative  A $1 billion, 10-year demonstration project initiated by President Bush in 2003 to create the world’s first coal-based, zero emissions electricity and hydrogen power plant to support other federal initiatives, including the National Climate Change Technology Initiative (2001) and the Hydrogen Fuel Initiative (2003).  Gas Quality Control System  Collection of oxy-combustion facility components that treat flue gas generated during the combustion process to remove pollutants, recover heat, and prepare the gas for the compression and purification unit.  Greenhouse Gas  Gas that contributes to the greenhouse effect by absorbing and remitting infrared radiation and ultimately warming the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases include water vapor, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane, nitrous oxide, and several classes of halogenated substances that contain fluorine, chlorine, or bromine (including chlorofluorocarbons).  Hazardous Air Pollutant  Air pollutants that are not covered by ambient air quality standards, but may present a threat of adverse human health effects or adverse environmental effects, and are specifically listed in 40 CFR 61.01.  Hazardous Waste  Solid waste that exhibits at least one of four characteristics (ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity), or that is specifically listed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as a hazardous waste; but is not specifically exempted in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations. Hazardous waste is regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Subtitle C.  Historic Resource  Prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places.  Term  Definition  Hydric Soil  A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing  season to develop anaerobic (oxygen-lacking) conditions that favor the growth  and regeneration of water-adapted vegetation.  Hydrology  A science dealing with the properties, distribution, and circulation of water on  the surface of the land, in the soil and the underlying rocks, and in the  atmosphere.  Hydrostatic Testing  Testing that is conducted by filling a vessel (pipeline) with water and  pressurizing it and then checking for pressure losses or deformation.   Indirect Impact  An impact that occurs later in time or farther removed in distance, but is still  reasonably foreseeable.  Injection Well  A deep well used to inject supercritical CO2 into the injection zone for  permanent geologic storage.  Injection Zone  A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is of  sufficient areal extent, thickness, porosity, and permeability to receive CO2  through an injection well or wells associated with a geologic sequestration  project.  Integrated  A process that uses synthesis gas derived from coal to drive a gas combustion  Gasification  turbine and exhaust gas from the gas turbine to generate steam from water to  Combined Cycle  drive a steam turbine. This technology was considered under the original  FutureGen Initiative; however, it is not a component of the proposed project.  Intermittent Stream  An intermittent stream has flowing water during certain times of the year, when  groundwater provides water for stream flow. During dry periods, intermittent  streams may not have flowing water. Runoff from rainfall is a supplemental  source of water for stream flow.  Lime  General term for calcium-containing inorganic materials, in which carbonates,  oxides, and hydroxides predominate. Used as an absorbent for removal of acid  gases.  Loam  A rich, friable soil containing a relatively equal mixture of sand and silt and a  somewhat smaller proportion of clay.  Loess  Dust-like soil formed by the accumulation of wind-blown silt, comprised of  clay, sand, and silt that is loosely cemented by calcium carbonate. It is usually  homogenous and highly porous.  Low-Income  Identified where households have an annual income below the poverty  Population  threshold, which was $22,050 for a family of four at the time of the 2010  Census.  Term  Definition  Mainline Block  Design feature of a pipeline that blocks flow at a certain point as to isolate and  Valve  contain any line leak.  Minority  As defined by the Council on Environmental Quality, an individual who is  American Indian or Alaskan Native; Black or African American; Asian; Native  Hawaiian or Pacific Islander; or Hispanic or Latino.  Minority Population  Identified where either more than 50 percent of the population of the affected  area is minority, or the affected area’s minority population percentage is  meaningfully greater than the minority population percentage in the general  population or other appropriate unit of geographic analysis.  Mitigation Measure  Measures taken to reduce adverse impacts on the environment.  Mooring Dolphin  Freestanding structure above the water line used to secure vessels with ropes.  Moraine  Glacial deposits of unsorted and unstratified material.  Mt. Simon  The Mt. Simon Formation is the major deep saline formation where CO2 from  Formation  the Meredosia Energy Center would be injected through deep injection wells.  The Mt. Simon Formation is the primary formation that makes up the injection  zone.  National Ambient  Nationwide standards set up by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for  Air Quality  widespread air pollutants, as required by Section 109 of the Clean Air Act.  Standards  Currently, six pollutants are regulated: carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide,  ozone, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide (i.e., the six criteria pollutants).  National  Signed into law on January 1, 1970. U.S. statute that requires all federal  Environmental  agencies to consider the potential effects of proposed actions on the human and  Policy Act  natural environment.  National Pollutant  Provision of the Clean Water Act that prohibits discharge of pollutants into U.S.  Discharge  waters unless a permit allowing such a discharge is issued by the U.S.  Elimination System  Environmental Protection Agency, a state, or where delegated, a tribal  government on a Native American reservation.  National Register of  The official list of the nation’s historic places worthy of preservation.  Historic Places  Authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and managed by  the National Park Service. To be considered eligible, a property must meet the  National Register Criteria for Evaluation, including the property’s age, integrity,  and significance.  No Action  The project baseline condition or future condition if no action is taken. Used to  Alternative  measure the effects of action alternatives.  Noise Abatement  Provides a benchmark to assess the level at which noise becomes a clear source  Criteria  of annoyance for different land uses.  Definition Term Oxy-Combustion The combustion of coal with a mixture of manufactured oxygen and recycled flue gas, versus atmospheric air, resulting in a gas by-product primarily comprised of CO2.  Paleontological Any fossilized remains, traces, or imprints of organisms, preserved in or on the Resource earth’s crust, that are of paleontological interest and that provide information about the history of life on earth. Particulate Matter Fine liquid or solid particles such as dust, smoke, mist, fumes, or smog, found in air or emissions. Perennial Stream Waterbody present at all seasons of the year. Permissible The legal limit established by the Occupational Safety and Health Exposure Limit Administration for exposure of an employee to hazardous substances. A permissible exposure limit is usually given as an 8-hour time weighted average exposure. This means that for limited periods a worker may be exposed to concentrations higher than the permissible exposure limit, so long as the average concentration over 8 hours remains lower. pH A measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed on a scale from 0 to 14 with the neutral point at 7. Acid solutions have pH values lower than 7, and basic (i.e., alkaline) solutions have pH values higher than 7. Physiographic A portion of the Earth’s surface with a basically common topography and Region common morphology. Potable Water Water that is safe and satisfactory for drinking and cooking. Prime Farmland A special category of highly productive cropland that is recognized and described by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resource Conservation Service and receives special protection under the Federal Farmland Protection Act. Process Water The water intake structures and wells that would be used to supply water to the Systems plant, and new water treatment systems to remove water impurities. Programmatic A document that spells out the terms of a formal, legally binding agreement Agreement between an agency and other state and/or federal agencies. Two basic kinds: (1) describes the actions that will be taken by the parties in order to meet their environmental compliance responsibilities for a specific project; (2) establishes a process through which the parties will meet their compliance responsibilities for an agency program, a category of projects, or a particular type of resource. Proposed Action The activity, including the project and its related support activities, proposed to accomplish a federal agency’s purpose and need. Definition Term Protective Action Criteria for determining the potential health effects from exposure to accidents Criteria developed by the Department of Energy’s Subcommittee on Consequence Actions and Protective Assessments. Pulse Jet Fabric Component of the oxy-combustion gas quality control system facility that Filter removes particulate matter (e.g., fly ash) from the flue gas discharged from the circulating dry scrubber. Record of Decision The formal concluding document of the National Environmental Policy Act process, which states the agency’s decision, along with the rationale for its selection. Announced by a Notice of Availability in the Federal Register. Region of Influence Defines the geographic extent of the area to be analyzed in the environmental impact statement for potential impacts to each respective resource area. Rip-Rap Rock or other material used to armor shorelines, streambeds, bridge abutments, pilings, and other shoreline structures against scour, water, or ice erosion. It can be used on any waterway or water containment where there is potential for water erosion. Saline Water with high concentrations of salts (typically more than 10,000 parts per million dissolved solids), making it unsuitable for use. Scoping An early and open process for determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for identifying the significant issues related to a proposed action. Scrubber A device that removes noxious gases (such as sulfur dioxide) from flue gas by using absorbents suspended in a liquid solution. Seismic Pertaining to, characteristic of, or produced by earthquakes or earth vibrations. Sensitive Receptor Any specific resource (i.e., population or facility) that would be more susceptible to the effects of implementing the proposed action than would otherwise be. Includes, but is not limited to, asthmatics, children, and the elderly, as well as specific facilities, such as long-term health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, retirement homes, residences, schools, playgrounds, and childcare centers. Short-Term A concentration which workers can be exposed to routinely for a short period of Exposure Limit time without suffering significant effects, but which should not occur more than four times per day and not longer than 15 minutes each time. Established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. Site Control The building that would house the major operational components of the pipeline Building and the injection well site(s), including the instruments for monitoring and controlling the injection wells, pipeline operations, and site access. Term  Definition  Socioeconomics  An umbrella term that may refer broadly to the use of economics in the study of  society. More narrowly, a discipline studying the reciprocal relationship  between economic science on the one hand and social philosophy, ethics, and  human dignity on the other.  Sound Pressure  The quantitative expression of the physical intensity or loudness level of noise  Level  sources.  Spur  The hypothetical end-of-pipeline route that would run from the end of the  southern or northern pipeline routes (originating at the western edge of the CO2  storage study area) to hypothetical injection well sites within the CO2 storage  study area used to support the impact analysis in this document.  Stormwater  A plan for stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and  Pollution Prevention  sediment controls that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel  Plan  of land decreases offsite nonpoint pollution.  Stratigraphic Well  An exploratory well drilled for the purpose of gathering geologic information on  the composition and relative position of rock strata of an area. The Alliance  completed a stratigraphic well in the CO2 storage study area in December 2011  to collect data with which to characterize the geology and hydrogeology of the  area to support the design and permitting of the project as well as the analysis of  impacts in this environmental impact statement.  Supercritical CO2  CO2 usually behaves as a gas in air or as a solid in dry ice. If the temperature  and pressure are both increased (above its supercritical temperature of 88ºF  [31.1ºC] and 73 atmospheres [1073 pounds per square inch]), it can adopt  properties midway between a gas and a liquid, such that it expands to fill its  container like a gas, but has a density like that of a liquid.  Supervisory Control  The communication system that would transmit information and data about  and Data Acquisition   pipeline performance.  Temporary Barge  The existing boat ramp area located north of the Meredosia Energy Center and  Unloading Facility  southwest of the village of Meredosia that would be used to unload a number of  large modules for the construction of the oxy-combustion facility.  Threshold Limit  A concentration, established by the American Conference of Governmental  Value  Industrial Hygienists, at which it is believed a worker can be exposed day after  day for a working lifetime without adverse health effects.  Till  The unsorted sediment deposited directly below a glacier, which exhibits a wide  range of particle sizes, from fine clay to rock fragments and boulders.  Topography  The relief features or surface configuration of an area.  Traditional Cultural  District, site, building, structure, or object that is valued by a community for the  Property   role it plays in sustaining the community’s cultural integrity.  Definition Term Tributary A stream that flows to a larger stream or other body of water. Trona A naturally-occurring hydrated sodium carbonate mineral that is used in the gas quality control system to reduce sulfur trioxide concentrations in the flue gas and in the direct contact cooler polishing scrubber to reduce sulfur dioxide at the compression and purification unit inlet. Turbidity The cloudiness or haziness of a fluid caused by individual particles (suspended solids) that are generally invisible to the naked eye, similar to smoke in air. Viewshed The land, water, cultural, and other aesthetic elements that are visible from a fixed vantage point. Volatile Organic Chemical compounds that contain carbon and evaporate readily at ordinary, Compound room-temperature conditions. As defined in 40 CFR 51.100(s), any compound of carbon that participates in atmospheric photochemical reactions, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or carbonates, ammonium carbonate, and other organic compounds designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as having negligible reactivity. Wastewater A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from residences, commercial establishments, farms, and industrial facilities. Water of the U.S. A waterway regulated under the Clean Water Act because it is important for the preservation of navigable waterways and interstate commerce. Subject to federal jurisdiction and permitting under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and includes all navigable waterways, their tributaries, as well as wetlands contiguous to and adjacent to those navigable waterways and tributaries. Watershed A land area bounded by topography that drains water to a particular stream, river, or entire river system. Well Maintenance The buildings that would contain equipment to supply the injection well with and Monitoring fluid to maintain annulus pressurization in order to prevent leakage from the System Buildings injection well. Wetland Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK LIST OF APPENDICES APPENDIX A PUBLIC SCOPING ...................................................................................................... A-1 APPENDIX B CONSULTATION LETTERS B1 – Native American Tribal Consultation ....................................................................................... B-3 B2 – Protected Species Consultation ............................................................................................... B-57 B3 – Cultural Resources Consultation ............................................................................................ B-67 APPENDIX C MAP VIEWS OF PIPELINE C1 – Pipeline Corridor Overview ...................................................................................................... C-1 C2 – Pipeline Routes with Mile Markers .......................................................................................... C-7 APPENDIX D WETLANDS SURVEYS D1 – Ameren Wetlands Report for Meredosia Energy Center .......................................................... D-1 D2 – Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation for the Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower  ................................................ D-59 D3 – Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation for the Proposed FutureGen Development (Stratigraphic Well) ..................................................................... D-135 APPENDIX E BIOLOGICAL SURVEYS E1 – An Investigation for Illinois Chorus Frogs (Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis) and Possible Impacts ..................................................................................................................................... E-1 E2 – An Investigation of Potential Habitat for Regal Fritillary Butterfly (Speyeria idalia) ........... E-15 E3 – Protected Species Survey for Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower ...................................................................................................................................... E-57 E4 – Protected Species Survey for Proposed FutureGen Development (Stratigraphic Well) ......... E-77 APPENDIX F CULTURAL SURVEYS F1 – Draft Programmatic Agreement ................................................................................................ F-1 F2 – Phase I – Site Characterization Locale Survey .......................................................................... F-9 F3 – Phase I – Meredosia Energy Center Survey ............................................................................ F-25 F4 – Phase I – Bluff Area Pipeline Right-of-Way Survey............................................................... F-61 F5 – Phase I – Soil Gas Monitoring Locations Survey.................................................................... F-77 APPENDIX G GEOLOGICAL REPORT ........................................................................................... G-1 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX A Public Scoping for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 1 INTRODUCTION This Public Scoping Report summarizes the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE) public scoping activities and the scoping comments for the FutureGen 2.0 Project Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). The public scoping period began on May 23, 2011, when DOE issued a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an EIS in the Federal Register, under Docket ID No. FR Doc. 2010–12632 (76 FR 29728). As part of the NOI, comments and suggestions were requested to be received within the 30-day scoping period and no later than June 22, 2011. Public scoping meetings were held June 7, 8, and 9, 2011 in Taylorville, Tuscola, and Jacksonville, Illinois, respectively. Under the FutureGen 2.0 Project (the “project”), DOE proposes to provide financial assistance (approximately $1 billion) through separate Cooperative Agreements with Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and the FutureGen Alliance (the Alliance) to support the implementation of project components, which if successful would advance the goals of the project. The potential issues identified from comments received during the public scoping period are summarized in Section 4. DOE took these issues into consideration when defining the scope and areas of emphasis (or focus) of this EIS for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. 2 PUBLIC SCOPING ACTIVITIES The NOI (Attachment A) initiated the public scoping period where members of the public (including federal, state, and local agencies; affected federally-recognized Indian tribes; and other interested stakeholders) were invited to comment on the proposed scope and content of the EIS. DOE mailed invitation letters to potentially interested parties the week of May 23, 2011, to announce the dates and locations of the public scoping meetings. The NOI stated that the public scoping meetings would be held at the following locations:  June 7, 2011 at Taylorville High School, Taylorville, Illinois  June 8, 2011 at Ironhorse Golf Club, Tuscola, Illinois  June 9, 2011 at the Elks Lodge, Jacksonville, Illinois The meeting locations were selected to provide appropriate geographic coverage and reasonable accessibility for stakeholders potentially affected by actions associated with the proposed oxy-combustion facility at the Meredosia Power Station site and the proposed CO2 pipelines, injection sites, geologic storage areas, and associated facilities.  DOE also published announcements in the following local newspapers on the dates indicated:   Journal-Courier, Jacksonville; May 22, 29; June 1, 5  State Journal-Register; Springfield; May 22; June 5  Breeze-Courier; Taylorville; May 23; June 3, 5  Herald & Review; Decatur; June 1, 5  Daily Union; Shelbyville; May 31; June 4  News-Progress; Sullivan; May 25; June 1  Tri-County Journal; Tuscola; May 26; June 2  Tuscola Journal; Tuscola; May 25; June 1  Record-Herald; Arcola; May 26; June 2  Journal-Gazette / Times-Courier; Mattoon / Charleston; June 1, 4 Additionally, announcement letters and project information were provided to local libraries. Letters accompanying the project information requested that the libraries post the announcement letters in a public viewing area until June 30, 2011. The announcement letters publicized the scoping meeting dates and locations and the availability of project information at the library. Project information included the NOI and two 8 ½” x 11” printouts of the DOE posters that were available during the scoping meetings (NEPA timeline and Project Overview Map). The project information packages were sent to the following libraries:  M-C River Valley Public Library District (Meredosia, IL)  Jacksonville Public Library  Taylorville Public Library  Tuscola Public Library  Arcola Public Library Each scoping meeting began with an informal session from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. During this time, attendees were able to view project-related posters, handouts, and a video on NETL’s Carbon Sequestration Program (March 2007); and to ask questions of DOE, Ameren, and Alliance representatives. Sign-in sheets, comment forms and a box to submit comments were also provided at the sign-in table. A total of 160 attendees signed the meeting attendance lists cumulatively among all three meetings (93 in Jacksonville, 36 in Taylorville, and 31 in Tuscola). Lists of signed-in attendees for each of the meetings are provided in Appendix E. The formal scoping meeting at each location began at 7:00 p.m. and included presentations by DOE, Ameren, and the Alliance, followed by an opportunity for verbal comments by the public. The presentations and comments were transcribed by a court reporter for each meeting. Transcripts of the meetings and slides for the DOE, Ameren, and the Alliance presentations are available at: http://www.netl.doe.gov/publications/others/nepa/index.html. 3 PUBLIC SCOPING COMMENTERS A total of 21 individuals provided verbal comments cumulatively among all three meetings (15 in Jacksonville, 5 in Taylorville, and 1 in Tuscola) (Table 1). During the comment period, DOE accepted comments by telephone, facsimile, U.S. mail, and electronic mail. A total of 26 respondents submitted comment letters to DOE during the scoping period (Table 2).  Table 1. Commenters During the Scoping Meetings Table 1. Commenters During the Scoping Meetings Name  Affiliation  June 7, 2011 – Taylorville, IL  Greg Brotherton  Mayor, City of Taylorville  John Curtain  Christian County Board, Chair  Steve Sipes  Mayor, City of Pana  Alan Rider  Resident  Jack Norman  Tenaska (Taylorville Energy Center) representative  June 8, 2011 – Tuscola, IL  Barbara Brehm  Landowner  Name  Affiliation  June 9, 2011 – Jacksonville, IL  Brad Zeller  Morgan County Board, Chair  Kelly Hall  Jacksonville Community Development Director (representing Mayor of Jacksonville, Andy Ezard)  Andy Davenport  Landowner  David Davenport  Landowner  Jeffrey Niemann  Landowner  Elizabeth Niemann  Landowner  Richard Johnson  Resident  William Hawks  Resident  Catherine Edmiston  Citizens Against Longwall Mining  Patty Rykhus  Resident  Alan Rider  Resident  Reginald Jordan  Resident  Joyce Blumenshine  Sierra Club, Heart of Illinois Group  Terry Denison  President, Jacksonville Regional Economic Development Corporation  Ginny Fanning  Jacksonville Area Chamber of Commerce  Table 2. Submitted Comments During the Scoping Period Table 2. Submitted Comments During the Scoping Period Name  Affiliation  Location  Marilyn Schutt  Resident  Morgan County  Jim Duncan  Vet-2-Vet  Morgan County  Dave Davenport*  Landowner  Morgan County  Andy Davenport*  Landowner  Morgan County  Nadine Szczepanski  MacMurray College  Morgan County  Betty Niemann*  Landowner  Morgan County  Virginia Niemann  Resident  Morgan County  Susan Mattes  Resident  Morgan County  Johnney F. Rentz  Resident  Morgan County  Marvin Martin  Landowner  Morgan County  Dick Rawlings  Resident  Morgan County  Kerry Mackey  Resident  Morgan County  James Goldsborough  Resident, Goldsborough Electric, LLC  Morgan County  Richard Ommen  Resident  Morgan County  Ernie Marsh  Resident  Christian County  Jadon Evans  Resident  Christian County  Carolyn Randall  Landowner  Christian County  Alan Rider*  Resident  Christian County  Patty Rykhus*  Resident  Christian County  Name  Affiliation  Location  Allen Worrell  Resident  Christian County  Beverly Pryor  Landowner  Douglas County  Robert Guennewig  Landowner  Douglas County  Willis E. Chupp  Resident  Douglas County  Emerson and Norma Jean Moore  Landowner  Douglas County  Marsha Strader  Landowner  Douglas County  Diane Bingaman  Landowner  Not Available  *Also commented during scoping meetings. 4 PUBLIC SCOPING COMMENT SUMMARY In general, the majority of respondents commented unfavorably, with a primary emphasis on potential impacts to farmers and farmland. Other negative views not directly related to a specific environmental resource included: issues with the experimental nature of the project; a lack of belief that economic benefits would occur; the use of public funds for a private endeavor; belief that project funding should go toward renewable and alternative energy technologies aside from coal; and potential increased electricity costs for consumers. In terms of environmental resource-specific concerns, the majority of comments were related to Socioeconomics and carbon capture and storage (CCS), with a general belief that CCS ultimately contaminates the land instead of the air. The majority of natural resource topics were addressed in terms of impacts to farmlands; issues strictly related to natural resources tended to be general in nature (e.g., potential impacts to surface waters should be addressed). Additionally, two petitions in opposition of the project, signed by a total of about 340 residents and landowners in Morgan County, and one petition signed by 55 residents and landowners in Douglas County, were submitted to DOE.  Of the commenters that responded favorably, many commented positively on the project primarily due to economic and job creation benefits for the community, as well as benefits in terms of self-sufficient National energy production.  Table 3 provides a summary of the scoping comments that were received, organized by comment category or applicable resource area. DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Opposition to the Project  General opposition to the project due to generally unfavorable views, the experimental nature of the project; general concerns that the Alliance cannot be trusted when they say CCS would stop global warming because it is an alliance of energy companies; potential adverse consequences to farmers and high quality farmland; general adverse environmental impacts including environmental contamination and seismic issues; a lack of belief that economic benefits would occur; the use of public funds; a lack of CCS regulations and questions of liability if a CO2 leak occurred; belief that project funding should go toward renewable and alternative energy technologies aside from coal; belief that CCS contaminates the land instead of the air; project costs; and a belief that local individuals that support the project do not live near an injection site and would not be personally affected.  Support for the Project  General support for the project due to economic benefits including job creation; a belief that the area could become a pioneer in energy technology; an increased need for National energy self-sufficiency; local educational opportunities; and that it represents a cleaner use of Illinois coal.  Purpose and Need  States that the project is federally funded, but if the industry thought it was profitable they would invest in it by themselves. General opposition to the project as it would be wasteful federal spending.  Purpose and Need  States that climate change impacts are occurring now, so why invest tax dollars in an established industry instead of other leading-edge energy technologies. Prefers that DOE fund alternative energy projects other than coal. States that investing in leading or cutting-edge technology would also create jobs.  Purpose and Need  Asks if additional electricity production is needed and if oxy-combustion is a cost-competitive electricity generation technology.  Alternatives  States that project officials have stated that additional injection sites may be required. Generally asks if additional storage sites are possible or expansion of the existing site.  Alternatives  Feels that the storage area should be at the plant site and not in Douglas County and that the risks are too high with a small amount of benefit.  Alternatives  Asks how the decision between the three alternative injection sites will be made. Asks if the sequestration site could be somewhere else, e.g., closer to the plant.  Alternatives  States that project alternatives should include funding energy efficiency and renewable energy projects.  5 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Alternatives  States that saline formations exist across the country and asks why not develop the project in a less inhabited area with less risk to farmland.  Economics; Energy Use  Asks that the complete costs of the project in terms of energy use (e.g., coal hauling) be included; asks that a complete life cycle cost analysis of the project be performed.  Regulation  States that new state legislation must be enacted for the project but nobody has explained what that legislation would be; asks if there is not new legislation if the project would go forward.   Liability Insurance  States that a study was done to determine if the FutureGen 2.0 Project could obtain a major industrial liability insurance policy and it was determined that the project could not.  Coal Mining  Generally asks that impacts of coal mining be addressed with respect to water resources, biological resources, and farmland.  Coal Mining  States that coal mining causes adverse impacts to farming due to land subsidence and states that increased mining for the project would be detrimental to agricultural production.  Coal Mining  General environmental and safety concerns about coal mining.  Coal Mining  States that coal mining causes adverse impacts to agricultural land.  Coal Mining  States coal mining activities cause contamination of streams and groundwater.  Coal Mining  States waste streams at coal mine sites should be included.  Air Quality  Asks that the DEIS analyze emissions, especially in terms of how the project compares to a conventional coal burning plant.  Air Quality  Asks that "uncertain air emissions" be explained and unexpected shutdowns/outages and restarts be explained.  Air Quality  States that all waste streams should be detailed in the DEIS including disposal sites.  6 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Biological  Quotes original FutureGen EIS text on subsurface microbes (Section 3.2.2.5) and asks if these are the building blocks of the planet.  Biological  Asked if transporting warm CO2 could cause insects and molds in the ground to proliferate, which would normally freeze during winter.  Biological  States concern that using the Morgan County injection site could cause pollution by brine groundwater, CO2, carbolic acid, etc. to a nearby stream that drains to the Illinois River (Indian Creek) and adverse impacts to fish, animals, plants, groundwater, and farm fields along the creek would result.  Climate and Greenhouse Gases  Asks that the DEIS analyze emissions, especially in terms of how the project compares to a conventional coal burning plant.  Community Services  States that local services in the Alexander area do not have the infrastructure or money to be able to respond to potential accidents at the Morgan County site or pipeline.  Geology  Stated concern that the Alliance would perform a study of how much subsurface pore space would be required to support the project and asks that an independent 3rd party perform the study.  Geology  Quotes the original FutureGen EIS (Section 3.2.1) stating that there is uncertainty with respect to fate and movement of injected CO2. States that people living in the area of injection do not want to be affected by a learning experience.  Geology  Generally asks that environmental impacts of a CO2 release be analyzed in the DEIS. Address methods for testing for leaks and procedures to stop CO2 release if a leak occurred, including remediation.  Geology  States that unless multiple characterization wells are drilled and tested it cannot be known if the subsurface can contain the injected CO2.  Geology  States that the earth changes (tectonic plates shift and move) and only looking at storage for 30, 50, or even hundreds of years may not be permanent storage.  Geology  States that a number of requirements for the depth to the Mt. Simon formation have been made public (for injection site requirements) and questions whether the depth is adequate at the preferred site.  Geology  Asks that the DEIS analyze seismic impacts of sequestration; consider proximity to New Madrid Fault. States that any seismic activity caused by the project could cause structural damage to buildings in the area.  7 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Geology  Asks for an explanation on why the CO2 will not come out of the ground. Asks that the risks and environmental impacts of any other gases coming to the surface (e.g., methane) be defined.  Geology  States that the Morgan County site is not a good injection location because the Mt. Simon formation is more porous and not as deep there as in other locations and shale layers are discontinuous, which means a higher risk for the CO2 to migrate. States that injecting the CO2 will ultimately force CO2, brine groundwater, or a combination of the two to either travel a large distance laterally or migrate to the surface.  Geology  Stated that the Morgan County injection Site is made up of sandstone and sits at a slight angle, which makes carbon injection problematic.  Geology  Generally questions CCS as being experimental; i.e., would the CO2 stay stored as expected.  Geology  States that a study concluded that more pore space is required than originally thought to store CO2. Questions the size of FutureGen 2.0's storage site and states that the Alliance's CEO has stated that the sequestration site may need to be expanded to 2,500 or as much as 10,000 acres.  Geology  States that the monitoring wells should be over a larger area than 2,500 acres.  Geology  States that remediating contamination in the ground is a long and costly proposition.  Geology  Questions whether CCS and associated CO2 injection pressures, would cause adverse consequences to groundwater, surface water, and the land surface, and how large of a pore space would really be required to store the volume of CO2 anticipated.  Geology  Generally asks that environmental impacts of a CO2 release be analyzed in the DEIS. Address methods for testing for leaks and procedures to stop CO2 release if a leak occurred, including remediation.  Geology  Asks if an odorant (e.g., methanethiol) could be added to CO2 to help detect CO2 leaks.  Geology  States that the Alliance has stated that if a CO2 leak occurred the project would be shut down, but when the Alliance was asked what would happen to the already stored CO2 that was leaking, the Alliance had no answer. Asks if the stored CO2 would just keep migrating to the surface.  8 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Groundwater  States concern that using the Morgan County injection site could cause pollution by brine groundwater, CO2, carbolic acid, etc. to a nearby stream that drains to the Illinois River (Indian Creek) and adverse impacts to fish, animals, plants, groundwater, and farm fields along the creek would result.  Land Use  Asks if the project secured mineral rights for the injection area what would happen to neighboring land values and permitted land uses.  Materials and Waste Management  States that when burning coal some waste can be captured, but other wastes are not (e.g., mercury).  Materials and Waste Management  States that coal ash disposal impacts should be considered.  Materials and Waste Management  States that all waste streams should be detailed in the DEIS including disposal sites.  Materials and Waste Management  States that plant-generated valuable byproduct disposition and revenues should be addressed in the DEIS, including sulfur and nitrogen.  Materials and Waste Management  Asks what will happen to nitrogen byproducts in the process; questions whether an ammonia processing plant would be built. Questions how sulfur byproducts will be dealt with and whether a sulfuric acid processing plant will be built.  Physiography and Soils  States concern that using the Morgan County injection site could cause pollution by brine groundwater, CO2, carbolic acid, etc. to a nearby stream that drains to the Illinois River (Indian Creek) and adverse impacts to fish, animals, plants, groundwater, and farm fields along the creek would result.  Physiography and Soils  States that Morgan County farmland is one of the most productive in the world, so it should not be risked for a dangerous experiment.  Public Health and Safety  Asks if hydrogen sulfide will be transported with the CO2, which is toxic.  Public Health and Safety  States that CO2 is hazardous to public health and asks what would happen if CO2 is released at injection site or along pipeline. Generally questions how hazardous the CO2 product is.  Public Health and Safety  States that the project is supposed to last 30 years; questions who will look after the safety of people in 50, 100, or 1000 years.  9 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Public Health and Safety  States concern about impacts of a CO2 release to public safety and asks what precautions would be taken to evacuate areas if a leak occurred.  Public Health and Safety  States that local services in the Alexander area do not have the infrastructure or money to be able to respond to potential accidents at the Morgan County site or along the pipeline.  Public Health and Safety  States that chemicals are used in CO2 sequestration process, so there are dangers at plant site as well as injection site.  Socioeconomics  Questions the estimated number of employees for construction and operation, i.e., believes they are higher than would actually be used or needed.  Socioeconomics  Asked if parts or percentages of the project could be sold to foreign investors and questioned whether taxpayers would want to fund a project that could be sold to foreign investors.  Socioeconomics  Asks that impacts be addressed to farmers living along the CO2 pipeline in terms of being disrupting or displaced.  Socioeconomics  Asks how local farmers would be compensated if negative impacts arose from the project.  Socioeconomics  States that there is a difference between the required construction workforce in the original FutureGen EIS vs. what has been reported for FutureGen 2.0 and asks that the difference be explained. Also asks that the value of Prime Farmland be discussed in terms of impacts to farmers if detrimental environmental impacts result.  Socioeconomics  Submitted a document describing impacts to land values due to environmental contamination and associated public stigma.  Socioeconomics  States concern about impacts to property values and the inability to build within a certain distance of the pipeline.  Socioeconomics  Questions whether the project would actually end up investing in Morgan County, e.g., there are not any companies in Morgan County that produce the parts needed to retrofit the power plant.  Socioeconomics  Asks if the project secured mineral rights for the injection area what would happen to neighboring land values and permitted land uses.  Socioeconomics  Asks if any state or county tax abatements or incentives or other incentives have been offered with respect to the Morgan County site.  10 DOE/EIS-0460 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT  PUBLIC SCOPING REPORT Table 3. Public Scoping Comment Summary Comment Category or Resource Area  Comment Summary  Socioeconomics  Generally asks if energy costs for consumers would be raised as a result of the project.  Socioeconomics  Questions whether the project would create jobs for local residents.  Surface Water  States concern that using the Morgan County injection site could cause pollution by brine groundwater, CO2, carbolic acid, etc. to a nearby stream that drains to the Illinois River (Indian Creek) and adverse impacts to fish, animals, plants, groundwater, and farm fields along the creek would result.  Surface Water  Asks that water resources be studied in depth. States that the Morgan County injection site and pipeline are close to creeks and stream crossings.  Transportation and Traffic  States that the road to the Morgan County site could not withstand the traffic that would result from the project and a road upgrade would be required.  Utilities  Asks if "irretrievably committed" water used by the project would be reconciled with user needs including growth in Meredosia.  Utilities  Generally asks if energy costs for consumers would be raised as a result of the project.  11 INTENTIONALLY BLANK ATTACHMENT A NOTICE OF INTENT INTENTIONALLY BLANK INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX B Consultation Letters B1 – Native American Tribal Consultation B2 – Protected Species Consultation B3 – Cultural Resources Consultation for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Appendix B Consultation Letters In the course of preparing this EIS, interaction efforts among state and federal agencies were necessary to discuss issues of concern or other interests that could be affected by the proposed project, obtain information pertinent to the environmental impact analysis of the proposed project, and initiate consultations or permit processes. Following are the consultation letters sent to the various agencies accompanied by the agency responses, when responses were received. The appendix is organized as follows: B1 – Native American Tribal Consultation (Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas, Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, Prairie Band of the Potawatomi Nation, Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin, Iowa Tribe of Kansas & Nebraska, Osage Nation, Kaw Nation, Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Forest County Potawatomi Community, Hannahville Indian Community, Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians, Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa, Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska, Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma, Delaware Nation, Oklahoma, Miami Tribe of Oklahoma) B2 – Protected Species Consultation (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Marion Illinois Sub-office) B3 – Cultural Resources Consultation (Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, State Historic Preservation Office) INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX B1 NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBAL CONSULTATION INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Thomas E. Gamble Chief Miami Tribe of Oklahoma P.O. Box 1326 Miami, OK 74355   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Gamble:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Ms. Janice Rowe-Kurak Chairperson Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma Rt. 1, Box 721 Perkins, OK 74059   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Ms. Rowe-Kurak:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. David K. Sprague Chairperson Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians of Michigan P.O. Box 218 Dorr, MI 49323   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Sprague:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Homer A. Mandoka Chairperson Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi, Michigan 2221 - 1 1/2 Mile Rd Fulton, MI 49052   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Mandoka:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. George Blanchard Governor Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 2025 S. Gordon Cooper Drive Shawnee, OK 74801   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Blanchard:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Ms. Glenna J. Wallace Chief Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma P.O. Box 350 Seneca, MO 64865   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Ms. Wallace:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Ron Sparkman Chief The Shawnee Tribe P.O. Box 189 Miami, OK 74354   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Sparkman:  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) issued a Notice of Intent on May 23, 2011 to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in the notice, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Frank Hecksher Special Projects Manager Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma P.O. Box 1527 118 S. Eight Tribes Trail Miami, OK 74355   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Hecksher:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Russell Bradley Chairman Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas P.O. Box 271 1107 Goldfinch Road Horton, KS 66439   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Bradley:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Gilbert Salazar Chairman Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma P.O. Box 70 407 North Hwy. 102 McCloud, OK 74851   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Salazar:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Juan Garza , Jr. Chairman Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas HC 1, Box 9700 Eagle Pass, TX 78852   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Garza , Jr.:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Steve Ortiz Chairman Prairie Band of the Potawatomi Nation 16281 Q Road Mayetta, KS 66509-8970   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Ortiz:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Wilfrid Cleveland President Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin P.O. Box 667 W9814 Airport Road Black River Falls, WI 54615   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Cleveland:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Timothy Rhodd Chairman Iowa Tribe of Kansas & Nebraska 3345 B Thrasher Road White Cloud, KS 66094   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Rhodd:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. John D. Red Eagle Principal Chief Osage Nation P.O. Box 779 627 Grandview Pawhuska, OK 74056   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Red Eagle:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Guy Gene Munroe Chairman Kaw Nation 698 Grandview Drive Kaw City, OK 74641   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Munroe:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. John A. Barrett Chairman Citizen Potawatomi Nation 1601 S. Gordon Cooper Drive Shawnee, OK 74801   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Barrett:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Frank Harold Chairman Forest County Potawatomi Community P.O. Box 340 5416 Everybody's Road Crandon, WI 54520   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Harold:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Kenneth Meshigaud Chairman Hannahville Indian Community N14911 Hannahville B1 Rd. Wilson, MI 49896-9728   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Meshigaud:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Matthew Wesaw Chairman Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians P.O. Box 180 58620 Sink Road Dowagiac, MI 49047   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Wesaw:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Adrian Pushetonequa Chairman Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa 349 Meskwaki Road Tama, IA 52339-9629   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Pushetonequa:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Ms. Twen Barton Chairwoman Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska 305 N. Main Street Reserve, KS 66434   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Ms. Barton:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. George Thurman Principal Chief Sac and Fox Nation of Oklahoma 920883 S. Highway 99, Bldg. A Stroud, OK 74079   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Thurman:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Ms. Tamara Francis Delaware Nation, Oklahoma P.O. Box 825 Anadarko, OK 73005   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Ms. Francis:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified your tribal government of the department’s intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide you with the best available project information and to determine whether your tribe has an interest in the lands potentially affected and wishes to engage in government-to-government consultations in accordance with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, and DOE’s American Indian and Alaskan Native Policy.    For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler, which may result in a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and accommodating your wishes for further consultation and coordination.  Your active participation in this ongoing consultation process will be facilitated if we receive a written response on behalf of your tribal government.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments From: Cliff Whyte To: Cynthia Ong; Fred Carey Cc: Lucy Swartz Subject: Fwd: FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan,Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois(DOE/EIS-0460) Date: Tuesday, November 22, 2011 12:56:00 PM Please add this to the administrative record. Thanks Cliff ************************************* Cliff Whyte, General Engineer U.S. Department of Energy National Energy Technology Laboratory 304-285-2098 Office cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov >>> "George Strack" <gstrack@miamination.com> 11/22/2011 12:46 PM >>> November 22, 2011 Cliff Wyhte NEPA Compliance Officer National Energy Technology Laboratory 3610 Collins Ferry Road PO Box 880 Morgantown, WV 26507 Re: FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan,Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois(DOE/EIS-0460) Aya, kikwehsitoole. My name is George Strack and I am the Tribal Historic Preservation Officer for the Federally Recognized Miami Tribe of Oklahoma. In this capacity, I am the Miami Nation’s point of contact for all Section 106 issues. In reference to the above mentioned construction project, the Miami Nation is not currently aware of existing documentation directly linking a specific Miami cultural or historic site to the above referenced construction site. However, as this site is within the homelands of the Miami Nation, should any human remains or Native American cultural objects falling under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) or anthropological evidence be discovered during any phase of this specific project, the Miami Nation requests immediate consultation with the entity of jurisdiction specific to the location of discovery. The Miami Nation offers no objection to the proposed construction at this time. However, again, should human remains and/or objects be uncovered, regardless of initial determination as to site dating or cultural affiliation, please contact me at 317-625-1288 or by mail at the address listed below to initiate consultation. Sincerely, George J. Strack Tribal Historic Preservation Officer Miami Tribe of Oklahoma PO Box 1326 Miami, OK 74355 gstrack@miamination.com INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX B2 PROTECTED SPECIES CONSULTATION INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Mr. Matt Mangan Biologist Marion Illinois Suboffice Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior 8588 Route 148 Marion, IL 62959   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Mr. Mangan:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified the Fish and Wildlife Service of its intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 Program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 Program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide the best available project information and to initiate consultation with your office for conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the Endangered Species Act, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act.  For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler and the main boiler igniters, which, if realized, would require a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   DOE’s contractor for the EIS, Potomac-Hudson Engineering, Inc. (PHE), will support the consultations for the respective laws, and a representative from PHE will contact your office soon.  PHE will be obtaining data for inclusion in the EIS.  Please note that representatives from Ameren and the Alliance may also periodically contact your office as they continue to develop the project. We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and your assistance with the EIS.  We would appreciate your response within thirty days of the date of this letter.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via email (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304285-2098). We look forward to your support. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Uniteed Statess Departtment of the Inteerior FISH AAND WILDDLIFE SERVVICE Maarion Illinois Sub-Office (ES)) 8588 Roout 148 Marion, ILL 62959 (618) 9977-3344 August 16, 2011 Mr. Clifff Whyte U.S. Deppartment of EEnergy National Energy Technology Labboratory 3610 Colllins Ferry RRoad, P.O. Box 880 Morgantoown, WV 266507 Dear Mr.. Whyte: This is inn response too your letter requesting ppreliminary ccomments onn the propossed FutureGeen 2.0 Progrram.  The prroposed proggram consists of an oxy-combustion large scale ttest and a pipeline aand CO2 storage reservooir componennt.  The oxy-combustionn large scale test and thee preferredd CO2 storagge reservoir ssite are locatted in Morgaan County, Illlinois.  The two alternattive CO2 storaage reservoiir sites are loocated Christtian, and Doouglas Countties Illinois.  These commentts are providded under thee authority oof and in acccordance withh the provisiions of the FFish and Wilddlife Coordinnation Act (448 Stat. 401, as amendedd; 16 U.S.C. 661 et seq.)); the Endanggered Species AAct of 1973, as amendedd; and, the NNational Enviironmental PPolicy Act.  To facilittate compliaance with Secction 7(c) off the Endanggered Species Act of 19773, as amendded, Federal aagencies are required to oobtain from the Fish andd Wildlife Seervice (Servvice) informaation concerninng any speciies, listed or proposed too be listed, wwhich may bee present in the area of aa proposedd action.  Theerefore, we aare furnishinng you the foollowing listt of species wwhich have ranges thhat include thhe oxy-combbustion largee scale test, ppreferred COO2 storage reeservoir, andd two alternativve CO2 storaage reservoirr areas (Morggan, Christiaan, and Dougglas Countiees) and have included backgroundd informationn for each sppecies in an aattachment: Classific ation   Common N Name (Scien ntific Name) )  H Habitat  Endanger red  Indiana ba at  C Caves, mines s; small strea am  (M Myotis sodalis s)  c corridors wit th well devel loped  r riparian woo ds; upland a and  b bottomland f forests  Proposedd as Snuffbox SSmall to meddium-sized Endangerred (Eppioblasma trriquetra) ccreeks and soome larger riivers,  inn areas withh a swift currrent Classification  Threatened Common Name (Scientific Name)  Decurrent false aster     (Boltonia decurrens)  Habitat    Disturbed alluvial soils Threatened  Eastern prairie fringed orchid     (Platanthera leucophaea)  Mesic to wet prairies There is no designated critical habitat in the project area at this time.     For additional information you can go to our technical assistance website at the first link below which provides Section 7 consultation guidance for Federal agencies and their applicants (i.e. project proponents).  From there you can go through the step-by-step instructions for the section 7(a)(2) consultation process.  You will find information on threatened and endangered species and list of species by county (second link below) along with other information on the consultation process.  By following the instructions, you can determine what your action area is, whether listed species may be found within the action area, and if the project may affect listed species.  I have also included the third link below which includes a map showing the area of responsibility for our office and that of our Rock Island Field office which covers a portion of the proposed project.   http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/section7/s7process/index.html http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/lists/illinois-cty.html http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/lists/illinoisfos.html In developing the proposed project we would recommend that impacts to wetlands be avoided or impacts minimized to the greatest extent possible.  We would also recommend that any tree clearing be minimized or avoided if possible to reduce impacts to potential habitat for the Indiana bat and migratory birds.   Thank you for the opportunity to provide preliminary comments on the proposed project.  If you have any questions, please contact Matt Mangan of my staff at (618) 997-3344, ext. 345.       Sincerely,      /s/ Matthew T. Mangan    For Joyce A. Collins      Assistant Field Supervisor FEDERALLY LISTED THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES INFORMATION FOR MORGAN, CHRISTIAN,  AND DOUGLAS COUNTIES, ILLINOIS The endangered Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis) has been noted as occurring in several Illinois counties.  Potential habitat for this species occurs statewide, therefore, Indiana bats are considered to potentially occur in any area with forested habitat.  Indiana bats migrate seasonally between winter hibernacula and summer roosting habitats.  Winter hibernacula include caves and abandoned mines.  Females emerge from hibernation in late March or early April to migrate to summer roosts.  Females form nursery colonies under the loose bark of trees (dead or alive) and/or in cavities, where each female gives birth to a single young in June or early July.  A maternity colony may include from one to 100 individuals.  A single colony may utilize a number of roost trees during the summer, typically a primary roost tree and several alternates.  Some males remain in the area near the winter hibernacula during the summer months, but others disperse throughout the range of the species and roost individually or in small numbers in the same types of trees as females.  The species or size of tree does not appear to influence whether Indiana bats utilize a tree for roosting provided the appropriate bark structure is present.  However, the use of a particular tree does appear to be influenced by weather conditions, such as temperature and precipitation.   During the summer, Indiana bats frequent the corridors of small streams with well-developed riparian woods, as well as mature bottomland and upland forests.  It forages for insects along stream corridors, within the canopy of floodplain and upland forests, over clearings with early successional vegetation (old fields), along the borders of crop lands, along wooded fence rows, and over farm ponds and in pastures.  It has been shown that the foraging range for the bats varies by season, age and sex and ranges up to 81 acres (33 ha).  To avoid impacting the species, tree clearing activities should not occur during the period of April 1 to September 30.  If a proposed action occurs within a 5-mile radius of a winter hibernacula, tree clearing should be prohibited from April 1 to November 15.  If it is necessary to clear trees during this time frame, mist net surveys may be necessary to determine if Indiana bats are present.  A search for this species should be made prior to cave impacting activities. The snuffbox (Epioblasma triquetra) is proposed as endangered and is listed as occurring in the Kankakee and Embarrass Rivers, which includes Coles, Cumberland, Douglas, Kankakee, and Will Counties, Illinois. The species prefers small to medium-sized creeks and some larger rivers, in areas with a swift current. The decurrent false aster (Boltonia decurrens) is listed as threatened and is known to occur in several Illinois counties in the floodplain of the Illinois and Mississippi River.  It is considered to potentially occur in any county bordering the Illinois River and Jersey, Madison and St. Clair Counties bordering the Mississippi River.  It occupies disturbed alluvial soils in the floodplains of these rivers.  Federal regulations prohibit any commercial activity involving this species or the destruction, malicious damage or removal of this species from Federal land or any other lands in knowing violation of State law or regulation, including State criminal trespass law. The eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthera leucophaea) is listed as threatened and occurs in several Illinois counties.  It occupies wet grassland habitats.  Federal regulations prohibit any commercial activity involving this species or the destruction, malicious damage or removal of this species from Federal land or any other lands in knowing violation of State law or regulation, including State criminal trespass law.  This species should be searched for whenever wet prairie remnants are encountered. United States Department of the Interior FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE Marion Illinois Sub-Office (ES) 8588 Rout 148 Marion, IL 62959 (618) 997-3344 January 6, 2012 Mr. Ken Humphreys, CEO FutureGen Alliance, Inc. 1101 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Sixth Floor Washington, D.C. 20004 Dear Mr. Humphreys: We have reviewed the Protected Species Survey Report prepared by Specialized Ecological Services for the FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Incorporated Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower Project located in Morgan County, Illinois.  The proposed project involves the installation of a meteorological tower and soil-gas collection network in support of the FutureGen 2.0 Morgan County carbon sequestration site.  These comments are provided under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (48 Stat. 401, as amended; 16 U.S.C. 661 et seq.); the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended; and the National Environmental Policy Act. Information in the letter indicates that a field survey revealed that no suitable habitat for the decurrent false aster (Boltonia decurrens) and Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis) exists within the proposed project area, thus you have determined the proposed project will have no effect on either species.  The field survey also revealed the eastern prairie fringed orchid is not present within the project area, thus you have determined the proposed project will have no effect on the eastern prairie fringed orchid.  This precludes the need for further action on this project as required under Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended.  Should the project be modified, or new information indicates listed or proposed species may be affected, consultation or additional coordination with this office as appropriate, should be initiated.   Thank you for the opportunity to review the proposed project.  If you have any questions, please contact Matt Mangan of my staff at (618) 997-3344, ext. 345.  Sincerely, /s/ Matthew T. Mangan     For Joyce A. Collins      Assistant Field Supervisor cc: Mr. Robert O. Rinella, Specialized Ecological Services Ms. Amanda Stegen, Battelle Mr. Cliff Whyte, USDOE Mr. Tyson Zobrist, USACE APPENDIX B3 CULTURAL RESOURCES CONSULTATION INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  July 18, 2011  Ms. Anne Haaker Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Preservation Services Division Illinois Historic Preservation Agency 1 Old State Capitol Plaza Springfield, IL 62701-1507   SUBJECT:  FutureGen 2.0 Program Environmental Impact Statement; Morgan, Christian, and Douglas Counties, Illinois (DOE/EIS-0460)  Dear Ms. Haaker:  In a letter dated May 24, 2011, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) notified the Illinois State Historic Preservation Officer of its intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in Federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 program.  As described in that letter, the FutureGen 2.0 program consists of an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance).  Additional information is now available on the extent of lands that may be affected by the proposed action.  The purpose of this correspondence is to provide the best available project information and to initiate consultation with your office for conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), particularly 36 CFR 800.4.  For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an approximately 200-megawatt electricity (MWe) gross output advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois.  The process would be designed to capture approximately 1.3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the oxy-combustion system and is targeted to achieve a CO2 capture rate exceeding 90 percent.  Information about the project component is available at Ameren’s website: www.ameren.com/CommunityMembers/Environment/Pages/FutureGenProject.aspx.  In addition, there is the potential that natural gas would be required as fuel for the auxiliary boiler and the main boiler igniters, which, if realized, would require a new natural gas pipeline. The pipeline would be constructed within a 70-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) and located within a permanent 20-foot wide easement.  Attachment 1 is an illustration of the Meredosia Power Station site showing areas where land would be disturbed both for temporary features and staging areas during construction and for permanent structures to support operations.  Attachment 2 is an illustration of potential routes for the natural gas pipeline.  For the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir, the Alliance would design, construct, and operate a transmission pipeline and geologic injection and storage facility.  The CO2 captured at Ameren’s facility would be transported via the pipeline to the selected storage site where it would be injected through deep wells into the Mount Simon sandstone formation, which is one of the Illinois Basin’s major deep saline geologic formations.  The Alliance has identified its preferred sequestration site in Morgan County, Illinois, and has identified two alternative sites, one in Christian County, Illinois and one in Douglas County, Illinois.  Information about this project component is available at the Alliance’s website: www.futuregenalliance.org.  Attachment 3 is an illustration showing the location of the Meredosia Power Station, the preferred and alternative CO2 storage sites, and the alternative 4-mile wide corridors in which the CO2 transmission pipeline may be constructed depending upon the storage site selected.  Ultimately, the pipeline would be constructed in a single corridor along one of the routes to a single storage site in Morgan County, Christian County, or Douglas County, respectively 30, 75 or 125 miles from the Meredosia Power Station.  The construction and permanent ROWs would be 80 feet and 50 feet in width, respectively. A 100-foot ROW may be needed for special requirements, such as pipe transportation in wooded hilly terrain or where side slope construction may be unavoidable.  The pipeline would be buried at least four feet underground.  Additional depth of cover would be provided for crossings, drain ditches, and irrigation tiles. For agricultural land, the pipeline would be buried at least five feet deep in accordance with Illinois Department of Agriculture Pipeline Construction Standards and Policies.   3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507               Two injection wells, 25 monitoring wells, and miscellaneous support facilities would be constructed at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Although currently unknown at this time, the final location of injection wells would be based on results from ongoing characterization studies.  The Alliance does not plan to identify the location of injection wells at the Christian or Douglas County sites unless concerns arise around the technical, legal, or public acceptability of the preferred Morgan County site.  Instead, the Alliance has identified 25-square mile (16,000-acre) study areas in Christian and Douglas counties for injection sites. It is expected that up to approximately 25 acres would be disturbed within the storage site study areas.   DOE’s contractor for the EIS, Potomac-Hudson Engineering, Inc. (PHE), will support the consultations for the respective laws, and a representative from PHE will contact your office soon.  PHE will be seeking information for inclusion in the EIS.  Please note that representatives from Ameren and the Alliance may also periodically contact your office as they continue to develop the project.  We are very interested in receiving your comments on the proposed action and your assistance with the EIS.  We would appreciate your response within thirty days of the date of this letter.  If you require any additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me via email (cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov) or phone (304-285-2098).  We look forward to your support. Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer Attachments Albany, OR    Morgantown, WV    Pittsburgh, PA  January 26, 2012    Ms. Anne E. Haaker Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer Illinois Historic Preservation Agency 1 Old State Capitol Plaza Springfield, IL 62701  RE: FutureGen 2.0 Initiative  Dear Ms. Haaker,  The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) would like to thank you and your staff for meeting with staff from the FutureGen Alliance in December and back in March.  The purpose of this letter is to help clarify roles and responsibilities for complying with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).  On August 5, 2010, DOE awarded American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 funding to the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance) and Ameren Energy Resources to build FutureGen 2.0, a clean coal repowering program and carbon dioxide storage network.    On November 28, 2011, the Alliance announced that it is negotiating an option to purchase portions of the Meredosia Energy Center from Ameren Energy Resources Company.  The purchase option would provide the Alliance with the assets it would need to continue the development of the FutureGen 2.0 clean coal power program in Morgan County, Illinois.  DOE is in the process of drafting an environmental impact statement, which is expected to be published in 2012.  DOE sent consultation letters to 24 tribal organizations.  DOE is requesting that your office continue to work with staff from the Alliance regarding the FutureGen 2.0 initiative to identify cultural resource issues and seek comments regarding specific work plans at various stages of this project.  Mr. Tom Anderson is the environmental permitting task leader for the Alliance and will continue to be Illinois Historic Preservation Agency’s (IHPA’s) point of contact.  DOE is responsible for complying with Section 106 of NHPA.  DOE will likely be contacting your office regarding a Programmatic Agreement in the foreseeable future. 3610 Collins Ferry Road, P.O. Box 880, Morgantown, WV  26507  cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov    Voice (304) 285-2098    Fax (304) 285-4403    www.netl.doe.gov   If you have any questions, please contact me at 304-285-2098 or by email at cliff.whyte@netl.doe.gov Sincerely, Cliff Whyte NEPA Compliance Officer cc:  Joseph Phillippe, Chief Archaeologist of the IHPA Tom Anderson, Environmental Permitting for the Alliance APPENDIX C Map Views of Pipeline  C1 – Pipeline Corridor Overview C2 – Pipeline Routes with Mile Markers for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX C1 PIPELINE CORRIDOR OVERVIEW INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX C2 PIPELINE ROUTES WITH MILE MARKERS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Note: This Map View 14 shows the route that was analyzed in the DEIS along with a short modification to the end of the southern pipeline route. The modification to the southern pipeline route occurs along the last 2 miles of the route before it enters the CO2 storage study area. The Alliance recently notified landowners along the southern route (modified) of their interest in obtaining pipeline easements. The modified route does not change the impact analysis, as the changes to the route are minor. The final EIS will reflect the updated route. APPENDIX D Wetlands Surveys D1 – Ameren Wetlands Report for Meredosia Energy Center D2 –  Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation for the Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower D3 –  Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination and Wetlands Delineation for the Proposed FutureGen Development (Stratigraphic Well) for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX D1 AMEREN WETLANDS REPORT FOR MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Table of Contents 1 INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................................................1 2 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................3 2.1 Wetlands ..............................................................................................................................3 2.2 Ordinary High Water Mark...................................................................................................4 3 METHODOLOGY ..........................................................................................................................5 3.1 Wetlands Delineation Methodology ......................................................................................5 3.1.1 Vegetation................................................................................................................ 5 3.1.2 Soils......................................................................................................................... 5 3.1.3 Hydrology ................................................................................................................6 3.1.4 Non-jurisdictional Wetlands.....................................................................................6 3.2 Wetlands Field Delineation Procedures.................................................................................6 3.3 OrdinaryHighWater MarkDetermination Method ...............................................................6 4 EXISTING CONDITIONS..............................................................................................................7 4.1 Onsite Areas (within Ameren Property) ................................................................................7 4.1.1 Review ofMapsfrom Other Sources ........................................................................7 4.1.2 General Onsite Description.......................................................................................7 4.1.3 Summary of Wetland Features..................................................................................9 4.2 Offsite Areas ...................................................................................................................... 10 4.2.1 RailroadProperty at Southeast Corner.................................................................... 10 4.2.2 RailroadProperty at Northeast Corner.................................................................... 10 4.2.3 Village Property to the North.................................................................................. 10 4.2.4 Offsite Area to the East .......................................................................................... 10 4.3 Illinois River Ordinary High Water Mark............................................................................ 11 5 REFERENCES.............................................................................................................................. 13 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 1 INTRODUCTION The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the proposed action of providing approximately $1 billion in federal funding (most of it appropriated by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act) for the FutureGen 2.0 Project (the “Project”). The Project consists of the repowering of an existing electricity generator with clean coal technologies integrated with a pipeline that would transport carbon dioxide (CO2) to a sequestration site where it would be injected and stored in a deep geologic formation. These actions would be completed in two separate project components: (1) an Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test undertaken by Ameren Energy Resources (Ameren) and (2) a Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir undertaken by the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance). For the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test, Ameren and its team would construct and operate an advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at Ameren’s Meredosia Power Station in west central Illinois. A concentrated and compressed CO2 stream produced in the process would be transferred to a pipeline for transmission to the Alliance’s storage location. Potomac-Hudson Engineering, Inc. (PHE) has prepared this wetlands report to support the EIS and future wetland permitting activities for the Project with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). This report has been prepared for the Ameren portion of the Project, the Oxy-Combustion Large Scale Test component, and does not include analyses of areas that may be affected by the Alliance’s portion of the Project, the Pipeline and CO2 Storage Reservoir component. Wetland evaluations were performed at potential impact areas at the Meredosia Power Station site and nearby offsite locations within the project area. The boundaries of the project area have been superimposed on all the figures in this report. In addition, Figures A-2 through A-7 depict temporary and permanent impact areas. Concurrent with the wetland evaluation, an initial assessment of the “ordinary high water mark” (OHWM) of the Illinois River was also conducted in areas at the north end of the Ameren site (Area 3 in Figure A-5) as well as property further to the north of Ameren, which is currently a public boat launch (Area 1 in Figure A-5). These are areas that may be altered by Ameren to support barge unloading during construction. This evaluation was also conducted to support possible USACE permitting efforts. After reviewing an earlier draft of this report, USACE conducted a site visit on August 16, 2011, during which the OHWM was identified. The OHWM (set at 440 feet) is shown in the aerial images provided in Appendix A. The remaining report is organized as follows: • Section 2 – Definitions discusses the wetland and ordinary high water mark definitions as contained in the Clean Water Act (CWA). • Section 3 – Methodology discusses the three-parameter wetland delineation methodology, the ordinary high water mark determination methodology, and field procedures employed. • Section 4 – Existing Conditions describes the study area and summarizes the wetlands that were delineated. In addition, the following attachments are provided in this report: • Attachment A – Figures o Figure A-1 – USGS Map -Meredosia Quadrangle o Figure A-2 – National Wetland Inventory Map o Figure A-3 -Soils Map o Figure A-4 – FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map o Figure A-5 -Vegetation Map o Figure A-6 – Delineated Wetlands Map o Figure A-7 – Delineated Wetlands Map (enlarged) o Figure A-8 – Photograph Locations Map o Figure A-9 – Survey Map with Spot Elevations for Ordinary High Water Mark (Benton & Associates, Inc.) o Figure A-10 – Impacted Areas Map with Ordinary High Water Mark Contour (URS, 2011c) • Attachment B – Site Photographs • Attachment C – Wetland Data Sheets • Attachment D – Qualifications of Preparers FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROGRAM  AMEREN WETLAND REPORT FEBRUARY 01, 2012  2  DEFINITIONS  2.1  WETLANDS  Wetlands are defined under the CWA (40 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 230) as follows: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Certain features, called “Waters of the U.S.,” (WOUS) are regulated by the USACE under the CWA, because they are important for the preservation of navigable waterways and interstate commerce. WOUS are subject to federal jurisdiction and permitting under Section 404 of the CWA. The regulatory definition of WOUS in the CWA (40 CFR Part 230) is as follows: (1) All waters which are currently used, or were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; (2) All interstate waters including interstate wetlands; (3) All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation or destruction of which could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: (i) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; or (ii) From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or (iii)Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; (4) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; (5) Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (s)(1) through (4) of this section; (6) The territorial sea; (7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraphs (s)(1) through (6) of this section; waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any other Federal agency, for the purposes of the CWA, the final authority regarding CWA jurisdiction remains with EPA. Wetland boundary determinations are typically conducted by applying the Routine Methodology listed in the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (the “Manual”). This methodology requires that three criteria be present in order for an area to qualify as a federally jurisdictional wetland. The three wetland criteria are identified as (USACE, 1987): Hydrophytic vegetation is defined as macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. The USFWS has developed a list of wetland plants and their affinity for wetland conditions. The “National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: North Central (Region 3)” (USFWS, 1988) lists wetland plants common to the north central United States. (1)  hydrophytic vegetation;  (2)  hydric soils; and  (3)  wetland hydrology.  Hydric soils are defined as soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions within the major portion of the root zone. The National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils has developed criteria for hydric soil determination in addition to a list of hydric soil types. Wetland hydrology is the permanent or periodic inundation or soil saturation for a significant period during the vegetative growing season. Many factors influence the hydrology of an area, including precipitation, topography, soil permeability and plant cover. The frequency and duration of inundation or soil saturation are the important factors in the determination of the existence of wetland hydrology (USACE, 1987). 2.2 ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK USACE regulations define the term “ordinary high water mark” (OHWM) for purposes of the CWA, as found in 33 CFR 328.3(e): The term ordinary high water mark means that line on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank, shelving, changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of litter and debris, or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas. 3 METHODOLOGY 3.1 WETLANDS DELINEATION METHODOLOGY 3.1.1 Vegetation As vegetation serves as an indicator of existing environmental conditions, the methodology of the Manual directs the researcher to analyze the existing vegetation. This involves estimation of existing plant species composition by direct observation. Wetlands are usually characterized by the predominance of hydrophytic plant species. Conversely, upland areas would be dominated by plant species better adapted to drier soil conditions. A mesic zone, or the transition zone between wetland and upland habitat, is often comprised of a mixture of facultative wetland species, facultative, and facultative upland species. With respect to vegetation, the Manual places great emphasis on the presence of hydrophytic species (dominance) as indicators of wetland areas. The determination of whether or not a species is dominant is based upon its percentage of cover. Dominance, as defined herein, refers to the spatial extent of a species. Commonly, the most abundant species in each vegetation stratum (trees, shrubs, vines, and herbs) exceeds 50 percent of the total dominance measure (i.e., aerial cover or basal area) (USACE, 1987). Table 3-1 presents the criteria for determining wetland indicator classifications. Table 3-1. USFWS Wetland Plant Indicator Status Wetland Indicator Classification  Percent Occurrence in Wetlands  Obligate Wetland (OBL)  Greater than 99%  Facultative Wetland (FACW)  67 to 99%  Facultative (FAC)  33 to 66%  Facultative Upland (FACU)  1 to 33%  Obligate Upland (UPL)  Less than 1%  Source: USFWS, 1988a A positive (+) or negative (-) symbol used in conjunction with one of the facultative indicator classes relates to a species preference to either the drier or the wetter end of its indicator class. The positive sign indicates preference to the wetter end of the category and a negative sign is a preference to the drier end (USFWS, 1988a). These wetlands indicator classifications were determined for species found in the project area and used in conjunction with their percentage of cover to determine whether a prevalence of wetland species are dominant in any of the vegetation communities occurring in the project area. 3.1.2 Soils A hydric soil is formed when it lies within a saturated, flooded, or ponded area for a sufficient duration during the growing season, which aids in the development of anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil profile. Typical hydric soil indicators include a low-chroma matrix, redoximorphic features (lowchroma mottles or high-chroma mottles), gleying, oxidized rhizospheres, iron concretions, and manganese nodules. A soil is generally considered to be hydric if it has a chroma of 1 or a chroma of 2 with mottling (USACE, 1987). An auger was used to extract soil profiles for inspection from multiple points along wetland boundaries and adjacent uplands. Soil samples were taken to a depth of approximately 12 inches below ground surface and examined for hydric soil traits (i.e. color, texture, and moisture content). The color of the soil matrix was then compared to the colors presented in the Munsell Soil Color Chart to confirm whether the colors were consistent with the hydric soil criteria. 3.1.3 Hydrology Wetland hydrology is often the least exact and most difficult parameter to establish in the field, largely due to seasonal fluctuations of ground water elevation and seasonal precipitation. Additional factors that influence wetland hydrology include topography, plant cover, soil texture, and depth to bedrock. Documenting the existence of wetland hydrology involves the observations of wetland field indicators, which provide direct or indirect evidence of inundation or soil saturation for extended periods during the growing season. Although these indicators are quickly assessed in the field, professional judgment must be used to decide whether these indicators demonstrate that the wetland hydrology criterion has been satisfied. Drift lines, water marks, sediment deposits, root staining, scour areas, buttressed trees and drainage patterns are some of the indicators which commonly identify wetland hydrology (USACE, 1987). 3.1.4 Non-jurisdictional Wetlands WOUS include all navigable waterways, their tributaries, as well as wetlands contiguous to and adjacent to those navigable waterways and tributaries. Isolated wetlands (those that have no surface hydrologic connection to WOUS) are not regulated under federal jurisdiction unless they are adjacent to or within the 100-year floodplain of WOUS. Determinations of whether features should be considered WOUS were based on field observations and desktop reviews of available mapping (e.g., U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps) based on the CWA definition provided in Section 2. 3.2 WETLANDS FIELD DELINEATION PROCEDURES The field investigation of potentially affected areas of the Meredosia Power Station site and offsite locations occurred on May 25, 26 and 27, 2011. The wetland delineation activities were conducted using the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (1987) (the “Manual”) guidelines based upon the three-parameter approach defined earlier (hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetland hydrology). The locations of all wetland features identified were marked in the field using flagging tape and subsequently recorded using a Trimble ProXRT Global Positing System (GPS) unit capable of sub-meter accuracy using real-time differential GPS and/or data post-processing procedures. All features were recorded for horizontal position using Illinois State Plane West, North American Datum, 1983 (NAD 83) coordinates in feet. 3.3 ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK DETERMINATION METHOD A site visit was conducted on May 25, 2011 of the two areas of the banks of the Illinois River that could be potentially disturbed during construction of the project, namely in Area 1 and Area 3 (see Figure A-5 and Photos 1 through 7). Site observations were then reviewed in light of the USACE’s definition of the OHWM, as discussed in Section 2.2. On August 16, 2011, a USACE representative conducted a site visit and identified the OHWM at the 440-foot elevation. Based on this determination, spot elevations for the OHWM were taken during a survey conducted August 25, 2011 (Figure A-9). The OHWM contour line was then interpolated and is shown in the aerial images of Appendix A. A full topographic survey will be completed prior to construction of the project and will more accurately locate the OHWM. 4 EXISTING CONDITIONS 4.1 ONSITE AREAS (WITHIN AMEREN PROPERTY) 4.1.1 Review of Maps from Other Sources Prior to, during, and after the site visit a variety of maps were consulted in order to assist PHE with the field work and determinations regarding potential wetlands and WOUS. These included: • The USGS map (USDOI, 2001) is included as Figure A-1. An overlay of the areas that may be potentially disturbed is shown on the map. Since the USGS map is based on 2001 conditions, it is not completely reflective of current conditions. For example, the road to the ash ponds is not shown. Thus, the tree lines and topographic contours depicted in the vicinity of that road are not accurate based on current conditions. • The National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) wetlands features (USF&W, 2010) are overlaid on a recent (2010) aerial photograph and included as Figure A-2. An additional overlay of the areas to be potentially disturbed is also shown on the map. No NWI wetlands are within the areas of potential disturbance. For reference purposes, the wetlands that were identified in the field (and discussed later in Section 4.2) are also shown in Figure A-2. As discussed in Section 4.2, hydric soils extended upslope from the flagged wetlands. • The boundaries of the soil types in the Morgan County Soil Survey (USDA, 2006) are overlaid on a recent (2010) aerial photograph and included as Figure A-3. According to this mapping, which was based on aerials and field work that apparently predated construction of the Ash Road, there are no hydric soils within the areas of potential disturbance. For reference purposes, the wetlands that were identified in the field (and discussed in Section 4.2) are also shown in Figure A-3. • The boundaries of the 100-year and 500-year floodplains (FEMA, 2011) are overlaid on a recent (2010) aerial photograph and included as Figure A-4. According to this mapping, which was apparently based on pre-2006 aerials that predated construction of the Ash Road, there is a large floodplain south of the main entrance to the facility. The FEMA map shows that the main entrance, while out of the 100-year floodplain, is within the 500-year floodplain. For reference purposes, the wetlands that were identified in the field (and discussed in Section 4.2) are also shown in Figure A-4. 4.1.2 General Onsite Description Ameren’s property has been subject to a variety of disturbances over the years. These include: construction of houses and other features (pre-Ameren); filling and construction of the Ameren facility (including the power plant and associated features, such as roads, parking lots, railroad lines, storage tanks, barge unloading facilities, etc.); and maintenance of the facility that includes periodic mowing of the open field areas. A Vegetation Map is included as Figure A-5. The vegetation boundaries for the areas that would be potentially disturbed are overlaid on a 2010 aerial photograph. These areas are described below. Area 2 is a wooded area approximately 4.9 acres in size between the Illinois River to the west and a dirt road (Front Street) leading from the Meredosia Power Station property to the north, offsite. Area 2 is on the right side of Photo 8. The canopy is generally closed. There is a scattered shrub layer and lush herbaceous layer. Trees in the area include elm (Ulmus sp.), ash (Fraxinus sp.), silver maple (Acer saccharinum), northern catalpa (Catalpa speciosa), red mulberry (Morus rubra), and a few black walnut (Juglans nigra). Groundcover consists primarily of a Panicum grass and also includes Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia), catchweed bedstraw (Galium aparine), giant ragweed (Ambrosia trifida), and a Pachysandra species. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 3 is a small (0.7 acre), heavily disturbed area adjacent to the Illinois River just north of the fenceline of the Meredosia Power Station. The area consists of a narrow area of fill along the fenceline, a rip-rap slope (see Photo 4) down to the flats along the river that are shown in Photos 5 and 6. Vegetation consists of patchy grassy areas with a few shrubs (e.g., eastern red cedar [Juniperus virginiana] and silver maple saplings) and other herbaceous vegetation (e.g., false aster [Boltonia asteroides]). The filled areas and steep slopes are gravelly and rocky, while the flats along the river are sandy. Area 4 is an 8.4-acre wooded area on the east side of the dirt road (Front Street) and Area 2. Area 4 is on the left side of Photo 8. Vegetation is similar to Area 2. The differences include: the frequency of black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia), and the lack of silver maple. Groundcover is dominated by catchweed bedstraw and has pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) and poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) with the other species from Area 2. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 6 is a 6.9-acre field consisting of mowed grasses and other herbaceous vegetation adjacent to the Meredosia Power Station. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 7 is a 16.7-acre field that contains grassy/herbaceous vegetation in open areas that surround seven wooded islands (with an additional 4.8 acres), which are identified in Figure A-5 as Area 7A. In the open areas vegetation consists of species such as prickly pear cactus, a milkweed species (Asclepias sp.), and multiple grasses. See Photos 13 and 14. The area contains a steep, linear low spot in the eastern part, roughly parallel to the access road to the ash ponds. See Photos 10 and 11 that have north and south views of this depression. Photo 12 is a view from the Ash Road down into the depression. As compared to the portion of the site at higher elevation, the most notable difference in vegetation is the presence of eastern cottonwood seedlings. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Areas 7A, the seven wooded areas totaling 4.8 acres imbedded in Area 7, contain tree species such as black locust, smooth sumac (Rhus glabra), sassafrass (Sassafras albidum), black oak, and mulberry (Morus sp.). Herbaceous vegetation in the wooded areas consists of species such as Virginia creeper, catchweed bedstraw, and greenbrier (Smilax sp.). These wooded areas are on the fringes of the aforementioned Photos 10 to 14. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 8 consists of mostly grassy/herbaceous vegetation in the open areas (8.6 acres) with a large wooded portion (6.8 additional arces on the eastern edge identified as Area 8A in Figure A-5) and two central wetland areas (0.6 additional acres identified as Area 8B in Figure A-5). The topography of the entire area creates a bowl effect for Area 8B (see Photo 15), though it is undulating, especially within much of the wooded area. Vegetation in the open areas (Area 8) consists primarily of multiple grasses including sedge, black locust, and smooth sumac saplings. Trees in the wooded portion (Area 8A) consist primarily of black locust with species such as eastern cottonwood, black oak, eastern red cedar, and smooth sumac. Dogwood (Cornus sp.) and honeysuckle (Lonicera sp.) shrubs are also present. Herbs and vines include species, such as common pokeweed, Virginia creeper, poison ivy, prickly pear cactus, catchweed bedstraw, and grape. Vegetation in the wetland areas consists of herbaceous species, including cattail (Typha sp.) and sedges that are sometimes ringed by eastern cottonwood saplings in greater abundance at slightly higher elevations. The soils within the two wetland areas and immediately adjacent to the wetlands were clayey with a chroma of 1 or 2 and clearly hydric. The boundary of the wetlands was defined by the topography (hydrology) and changes in the vegetative community. Area 9 consists of a relatively small area (0.8 acre) around the fuel unloading area. Vegetation consists only of trees, (primarily silver maple and willow (Salix sp.)), which were in the water of the Illinois River at the time of the site visit in May 2011. They are well below the elevation of the rest of the Meredosia Power Station Site. Because of the water level it was impossible to take any soil samples. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 10 is a rectangular field between the old ash ponds to the west and a wooded lot to the east (Area 11) that is 6.5 acres in size. It consists mostly of grassy/herbaceous vegetation with species such as sedges, Panicum, Rubus species, and curly dock (Rumex crispus) covering most of the area with common pokeweed and milkweed around woodland edges. There are a few trees in the area such as black locust and black oak. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 11 consists of a 7.6-acre wooded area between two fields, Area 10 to the west and Area 12 to the east. The herbaceous layer is thick in some spots and more open on others. Trees in the area consist of species such as pignut hickory (Carya glabra), sassafrass, ash, silver maple, and smooth sumac. Herbaceous vegetation consists of species such as catchweed bedstraw, Virginia creeper, and common pokeweed. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. Area 12 consists of an open area with vegetation consisting mainly of grasses such as purple tridens (Tridens flavus). Scattered smooth sumac saplings are also present. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. 4.1.3 Summary of Wetland Features Two wetland areas were identified onsite – shown as Vegetation Community Area 8B in Figure A-5 and as Wetlands Areas PA (0.37 acres) and PB (0.26 acres) in Figures A-6 and A-7. Soils are hydric throughout. Standing water in large portions was observed at both areas on May 25, 26 and 27 with soils saturated to the surface in nearby areas. One pair of Wetland Determination Data Forms were recorded for each wetlands area (see Attachment C). Their locations are shown in Figure A-7. Based on the FEMA maps, these wetlands are within the 100-year floodplain, associated with the Illinois River. A USACE representative conducted a site visit on August 16, 2011. In an e-mail follow-up to the site visit, dated August 18, 2011, USACE stated that they agreed with the boundaries of the delineated wetlands onsite and stated that these wetland areas are not isolated and would be considered under federal, USACE jurisdiction (Zobrist, 2011). Although there is no surface hydrologic connection to WOUS beyond their presence in the floodplain, USACE stated that there is a groundwater connection to the Illinois River, which allows the wetlands to be inundated due to river water level fluctuation. The wetlands classification of these areas, following Cowardin et al. (1979), are as follows: • System – Palustrine; • Class – Emergent Wetland; • Subclass – Persistent; and • Dominance Type – Mud. 4.2 OFFSITE AREAS 4.2.1 Railroad Property at Southeast Corner 4.2.1.1 General Site Description The area is shown as Area 14 and Area 14A in Figure A-5. It is primarily a mowed field that is 24.7 acres consisting of various grasses, prickly pear cactus, and purple vetch that is bisected by a rail line that provides access to industrial properties to the west (see Photos 16 and 17). There is a small deciduous wooded area in the southwest corner (Area 14A) that is 0.9 acres in size. The young overstory is dominated by oaks and mulberry. The understory contains sassafras and black walnut seedlings, multiflora rose, and honeysuckle. The herbaceous layer includes grasses and Virginia creeper. The soils are loamy sand and well drained throughout both areas. 4.2.1.2 Summary of Wetland Features There were no areas identified as wetlands on this property. 4.2.2 Railroad Property at Northeast Corner 4.2.2.1 General Site Description The area is shown as Area 5 in Figure A-5. Area 5 is a mostly grassy area that is 5.6 acres in size. It is dominated by herbaceous vegetation, but also contains two small wooded islands. The wooded areas consist of tree species such as eastern cottonwood, black locust, red mulberry, and black oak (Quercus velutina). Herbaceous vegetation within the wooded area consists of species such as Virginia creeper, poison ivy, and grape (Vitis sp.). The field areas goatsbeard (Tragopogon pratensis), chives (Allium schoenoprasum), prickly pear cactus (Opuntia humifusa), common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), yellow sweet-clover (Melilotus officinalis), Ohio spiderwort (Tradescantia ohiensis), and multiple grass species including sedges (Carex sp.). The soils are loamy sand and well drained. 4.2.2.2 Summary of Wetland Features There were no areas identified as wetlands on this property. 4.2.3 Village Property to the North 4.2.3.1 General Site Description This area is shown as Area 1 in Figure A-5. It is an approximate 4.4-acre area, the majority of which is a paved parking area adjacent to the Illinois River. There are three eastern cottonwoods (Populus deltoides) in the sandy beach between the parking lot and the river when the river is at or near normal pool elevation. The two northern trees are shown in Photo 1 and the southern one in Photo 2, which also shows the sandy beach. The southern end of Area 1 is a grassy swale that carries runoff to the river. The soils are loamy sand and well drained. 4.2.3.2 Summary of Wetland Features There were no areas identified as wetlands on this property. 4.2.4 Offsite Area to the East 4.2.4.1 General Site Description Area 13 consists of a gravel parking lot. Around the edges of the lot are areas of herbaceous/grassy vegetation. The site was gravel on top of a loamy sand and is well drained. 4.2.4.2 Summary of Wetland Features There were no areas identified as wetlands on this property. 4.3 ILLINOIS RIVER ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK As discussed in Section 3.3, site observations were conducted in two areas along the banks of the Illinois River – Area 1 and Area 3 – that could be potentially disturbed during construction (see Figure A-5 and Photos 1 through 7). In reviewing the definition of the OHWM and the physical conditions at the two areas, a definitive opinion was not possible. The water level at the time of the site visit, while above the normal pool elevation (as evidenced by the inundation of large areas of non-aquatic vegetation) was still well below other water levels (as evidenced by the drift line in the middle of the parking lot, Photo 1 and aerial photographs from 2010 that show the entire parking lot under water). During a site visit on August 16, 2011, a USACE representative identified the OHWM at the location as 440 feet above mean sea level, which is located well into the parking lot. Based on this determination, a 440-foot OHWM contour line was interpolated based on recent survey efforts (Figure A-9) and is shown in Figures A-2 through A-6 and A-8. A full topographic survey will be completed prior to construction of the project and will more accurately locate the OHWM. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 5 REFERENCES Benton & Associates, Inc. 2011. Survey Map with Spot Elevations for Ordinary High Water Mark. August 25, 2011. Bull, J. and J. Farrand, Jr. 1977. The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds, Eastern Region. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Cobb, Boughton. 1963. The Peterson Field Guide Series; A Field Guide to Ferns and their Related Families, Northeastern and a North America. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. Conant, Roger. 1975. The Peterson Field Guide Series; A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians of Eastern and Central North America. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. Cowardin, L.M., V. Carter, F.C. Golet and E.T. Laroe. December 1979. Classification of wetlands and deepwater habitats of the United States (USFWS Office of Biological Service, FWS/OBL-79/31). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2011. National Flood Hazard Layer for the State of Illinois – FIRM ID: 17171C0025C, effective August 8, 2009. Washington, DC. Map Service Center request submitted March 29, 2011, at http://www.msc.fema.gov Gleason, H.A. and A. Cronquist. 1991. Manual of vascular plants of northeastern U.S. and adjacent Canada, second edition. Bronx, NY: The New York Botanical Garden. Holmgren, Noel H. 1998. Illustrated companion to Gleason and Cronquist's Manual: Illustrations of the vascular plants of northeastern U.S. and adjacent Canada. Bronx, NY: The New York Botanical Garden. Knobel, Edward. 1980. Field Guide to the Grasses, Sedges and Rushes of the United States. New York: Dover Publications, Inc. Little, Elbert L. 1983. The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Trees, Eastern Region. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Munsell. 2000 Munsell Soil Color Charts. New Windsor, NY. Gretagmacbeth. Niering, W. A. and N. C. Olmstead. 1983. The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Wildflowers, Eastern Region. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Peterson, R.T. and M. McKenny. 1968. A field guide to wildflowers. Boston, MA: The Houghton Mifflin Company. URS. 2011a. Impact Areas. Map depicting potential impact areas at the Meredosia Power Station for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. Dated April 2011. URS. 2011b. Ordinary High Water Mark (interpolated). November 10, 2011. URS. 2011c. Impacted Areas Map with Ordinary High Water Mark Contour. November 10, 2011. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Environmental Laboratory. 1987. Corps of Engineers wetlands delineation manual (Technical Report Y-87-1). Vicksburg, MS: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2006. Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database for Morgan County, Illinois. Fort Worth, Texas. Accessed May 19, 2011 at http://SoilDataMart.nrcs.usda.gov/ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, National Cartography & Geospatial Center. 2001. USDA-NRCS-NCGC Digital Raster Graphic MrSID Mosaic, USGS 1:24,000 Topographic Quadrangle Series Index – Meredosia Quadrangle. Fort Worth, Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior, Geological Survey. 2001 7.5 Minute Series (Topographic) Meredosia Quadrangle Sheet. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1988. National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: North Central (Region 3). May. Biological Report 88 (26.3). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1988a. National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: Northeast (Region 1). May. Biological Report 88 (26.1). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Division of Habitat and Resource Conservation. 2010. Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States, WETDBA.CONUS_wet_poly for the State of Illinois. Washington, DC. Accessed on May 17, 2011at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/data/DataDownload.html Zobrist, Tyson. 2011. Email communication between T. Zobrist (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St. Louis District, Regulatory Branch) and Kenny Lynn (Ameren). August 18, 2011. ATTACHMENT A FIGURES INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Figure A-1. USGS Map -Meredosia Quadrangle (Source: USDOI, 2001) Figure A-2. National Wetlands Inventory Map (Source: USF&W, 2010) A-4 Figure A-3. Soils Map (Source: USDA, Natural Resource Conservation Service, 2006) Figure A-4. FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (Source: FEMA, 2011) Figure A-5. Vegetation Map A-7 Figure A-6. Delineated Wetlands Map A-8 Figure A-7. Delineated Wetlands Map (enlarged) A-9 Figure A-8. Photograph Locations Map A-10 FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROGRAM AMEREN WETLAND REPORT Figure A-9. Survey Map with Spot Elevations for Ordinary High Water Mark (Benton & Associates, Inc.) A-11 Figure A-10. Impacted Areas Map with Ordinary High Water Mark Contour (URS, 2011c) ATTACHMENT B SITE PHOTOGRAPHS (May 25-26, 2011) INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Photo 1. Drift Line Observed in parking lot at Village Property (Area 1). Photo 2. Edge of parking lot and beach adjacent to boat ramp on Village Property (Area 1). Photo 3. Existing rip-rap bank on west side of Ameren facility along the Illinois River. Photo 4. View from top of bank towards the Illinois River. Photo 5. View of Area 3 on north side of Ameren Site, looking northeast. Photo 6. View of Area 3 on north side of Ameren Site, looking north. Photo 7. Looking downstream from Area 3 at existing coal unloading operations. Photo 8. View of existing trail (formerly Front Street) through the wooded area on the north side of the Ameren Site (between Areas 2 and 4). Photo 9. View of Area 5, looking northeast from near the entrance to the Ameren facility. Photo 10. View looking north along Ash Road in Area 7. Photo 11. View looking south along Ash Road in Area 7. Photo 12. View looking west across Area 7 from near Ash Road. Photo 13. View looking northwest across a portion of Area 7 towards existing fuel oil storage tanks. Photo 14. View looking southwest from Area 7 towards Area 8. Photo 15. View of wetland area (PB), looking south. Photo 16. Looking south across offsite Railroad Property (Area 14). Photo 17. View of Area 14, looking west. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK ATTACHMENT C WETLAND DATA SHEETS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK ATTACHMENT D QUALIFICATIONS OF PREPARERS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK A. Brook Crossan, Ph.D., P.E. – Senior Environmental Engineer Ph.D., Geophysical Fluid Dynamics M.S., Mechanical Engineering B.S., Mechanical Engineering 37 years of experience with NEPA documentation and analysis on projects for federal agencies. Anthony Becker – Environmental Scientist M.S., Biology B.S., Biology 5 years of experience in NEPA documentation and analysis and ecological investigations on projects for federal agencies. Christopher Rua – Environmental Scientist B.S., Environmental Planning & Design 9 years of experience in environmental compliance, due diligence, and field studies for land development and NEPA projects. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX D2 PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL DETERMINATION AND WETLANDS DELINEATION FOR THE PROPOSED FUTUREGEN SOIL-GAS MONITORING AND METEOROLOGICAL TOWER INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Specialized Ecological Services 105 East OakStreet, Greenville, Illinois 62246 888-511-7735, 618-741-0426(cell), bob@specialized-ecological.com November 28, 2011 Tyson Zobrist US Army Corps of Engineer 1222 Spruce Street Saint Louis, MO 63103 Re: Jurisdictional Wetlands Survey FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Incorporated Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower Sites Morgan County, Illinois Dear Mr. Zobrist, Enclosed is a copy of our report documenting the results of our survey for jurisdictional wetlands at the above referenced project in Morgan County, Illinois, for FutureGen Industrial Alliance of Washington, D.C. As indicated in our report, no jurisdictional wetlands were identified and no impacts to wetlands are anticipated from this project. I am also including the results of our survey for state and federal threatened and endangered species at the project site. As reported, no protected species were identified and no impacts to protected species are anticipated. Please mail comments to: FutureGen Alliance, Inc.  U.S. Department of Energy National Technology Laboratory  1101 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  3610 Collins Ferry Road  Sixth Floor  P.O. Box 880  Washington, D.C. 20004  Morgantown, WV 26507  Contact Person: Mr. Ken Humphreys, CEO  Contact Person: Mr. Cliff Whyte, NEPA Compliance Officer  Phone Number: (202) 280-6019  Phone Number: (304) 285-2098  Please include myself and Amanda Stegen, Research Scientist, Battelle on any correspondence. Amanda Stegen Battelle 902 Battelle Blvd P.O. Box 999 MSIN K3-66 Richland, Washington, 99352 amanda.stegen@pnl.gov 509-372-4511 Sincerely, Specialized Ecological Services Cc: Mr. Chris Burger, Patrick Engineering Ms. Amanda Stegen, Battelle Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination & Wetlands Delineation Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower Morgan County, Illinois Date: November28,2011 Prepared for FutureGen Alliance under contract with: PatrickEngineering 300WestEdwardsStreet,Suite200 Springfield,Illinois62704 (630)795-7200 Prepared by: SpecializedEcologicalServices P.O.Box136 105EastOakStreet Greenville,IL 62246 INTRODUCTION WETLANDS........................................................................................................................................1 HYDROLOGY.............................................................................................................................1 SOILS.......................................................................................................................................1 VEGETATION..............................................................................................................................2 STATE WETLANDS LEGISLATION................................................................................................................2 STUDYAREA METEOROLOGICAL TOWER.....................................................................................................................4 SOIL-GAS MONITORING NETWORK..........................................................................................................4 PURPOSE&PROCEDURE PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION &REVIEW................................................................................................7 US FISH & WILDLIFE SERVICE NATIONAL WETLAND INVENTORY MAP.......................................................7 USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAP.........................................................................................................7 NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY.............................................................................................7 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................7 VEGETATION..............................................................................................................................8 SOILS.......................................................................................................................................8 HYDROLOGY.............................................................................................................................8 RESULTS PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION &REVIEW................................................................................................9 US FISH & WILDLIFE SERVICE NATIONAL WETLAND INVENTORY MAP.......................................................9 USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAP.........................................................................................................9 NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY.............................................................................................9 FIELD SURVEY..................................................................................................................................10 VEGETATION............................................................................................................................10 SOILS.....................................................................................................................................10 HYDROLOGY...........................................................................................................................10 SUMMARY OF JURISDICTIONAL AREAS......................................................................................................10 DISCUSSION  11  LIMITSOFRESEARCH  12  LITERATURECITED  13  ATTACHMENTA: WETLANDDELINEATORQUALIFICATIONS  A  ATTACHMENTB: WETLANDDATA  B  ATTACHMENTC: NWIAERIALANDUSGSTOPOGRAPHICMAPS  C  ATTACHMENTD: PROJECTSOILSMAPANDHYDRICSOILSOFMORGANCOUNTY  D  INTRODUCTION This report documents an investigation of wetland concerns related to proposed construction of FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. facilities near Jacksonville, Illinois. The current proposed action involves the installation of a meteorological tower and soil-gas collection network in support of the FutureGen 2.0 Morgan County carbon sequestration site. The network will provide samples of soil gas for evaluating baseline CO2 concentrations and, once site operations begin, a means of assessing possible increases in CO2 concentration or co-injected tracer compounds. The network includes one meteorological tower and seven soil-gas monitoring chambers. Wetlands The ecological functions and social values associated with wetland habitats afford them special regulatory protection. In keeping with the regulatory requirements of the Clean Water Act (CWA), wetlands on properties to be altered by commercial activities must be identified and impacts to those wetlands mitigated. As authorized by Section 404 of the CWA, the US Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) jointly define wetlands as “those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, the prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (Corps 33 CFR 328.3 and EPA 40 CFR 230.3).” This definition is currently the standard for jurisdictional wetland delineation. To be a jurisdictional wetland and therefore fall under federal and state regulatory limitations, an ecological community must exhibit three wetland characteristics: (1) wetland hydrology, (2) hydric soils, and (3) hydrophytic vegetation. Hydrology Because hydrology is the most independent variable among the three-wetland criteria, its influence is extremely important. Hydrologic fluctuations not only affect soil formation (Buol and Rebertus 1988) and vegetation growth (Hutchinson 1975), but also every wetland function. Wetland hydrology is described by the Corps as “inundation or saturation to the surface for at least 5% of the growing season in most years.” Saturation exists when the capillary fringe occurs within a major portion of the root zone (ie. within 12 inches of the soil surface). The growing season is defined as the portion of the year when soil temperature at 20 inches below the surface is above 41oF (5oC). Soils Wetland hydrology (saturation and/or inundation) results in soil anaerobiosis as biological and chemical processes deplete oxygen in the soil. Soils developed in anoxic conditions are called hydromorphic (Buol and Rebertus 1988) or hydric (Megonigal, Patrick, and Faulkner 1993). The Natural Resource Conservation Service defines hydric soils as “saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil (SCS 1991). Vegetation For most species of vegetation, oxygen deprivation is an extreme condition limiting survival. For certain adapted species, however, anoxic rooting conditions are an environmental condition allowing them the ecological advantage. The National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils (SCS 1991) defines hydrophytic vegetation as “plant life growing in water or on a saturated substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.” The keystone to regulatory consideration of hydrophytic vegetation is inundation or saturation sufficient to exert a controlling influence on the plant species present. The Corps requires a predominance (>50%) of hydrophytic species. In January of 2001, a U.S. Supreme Court ruling added another characteristic as a requirement for a wetland to come under the Corps regulatory jurisdiction. In essence, a wetland is now required to have a surface water connection to a “navigable waterway” in order to be protected by the wetland provisions of the CWA. This ruling was reinforced in the 2006 U.S. Supreme Court case, United States v. Rapanos. State Wetlands Legislation The Illinois Interagency Wetland Policy Act of 1989 establishes a state goal that there be, “no overall net loss of the state's existing wetland acres or their functional values due to state supported activities” (20 ILCS 830). To accomplish this goal, the Act established a review process for all projects being pursued by a state agency or being accomplished with state funds, that have the potential to adversely affect a wetland. This review consists of a two part process. Projects must first be reviewed by the Division of Natural Resources Review & Coordination to confirm if a wetland impact will occur. If it is determined there will not be an impact, the project will be approved and funds may be released. If it is determined an impact is going to occur, the entity requesting approval must prepare a plan which details how it will compensate for the impact before the project may move forward (20 ILCS 830). All compensation plans must be approved by IDNR. The Act does not require wetlands to have a surface water connection to a navigable waterway in order for those wetlands to fall within the state's regulatory jurisdiction. The Illinois Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act (615 ILCS 5) grants the IDNR Office of Water Resources (IDNR/OWR) the authority to regulate construction activities in floodplains. According to the Act, persons proposing such activities must first secure a permit from IDNR/OWR.  Related regulations recognize six northeastern counties (Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry, and Will) separately from the rest of "downstate" Illinois. The purpose of both programs is to, "protect the rights, safety, and welfare of private and public landowners by the regulation of floodway development, [because] construction activities which restrict a stream's capacity to carry flood flows may result in channel instability and increased flood damages to neighboring properties" (State of Illinois 1994). The downstate regulatory program requires permits for construction in the floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 640 acres in urban areas or 6,400 acres in rural areas. The Northeastern Illinois Program does not limit the tributary area (State of Illinois 1994). IDNR/OWR uses a joint application form entitled Protecting Illinois Waters for its floodplain, public waters, and dam safety permits. STUDY AREA Meteorological Tower The meteorological tower will be installed on a small strip of pasture located approximately 230 feet west of the soil-gas monitoring station, SG-1 (Illustration 1). Planned coordinates are 90.060917W and 39.813090N. Soil disturbance for the meteorological tower includes one concrete footing, approximately 2 feet wide, 2 feet long, and 3 feet deep. Also, a pad of landscape pavers (approximately 4 feet wide by 4 feet long) will be used to minimize vegetative growth around the tower and solar panel. Soil-Gas Monitoring Network The soil-gas monitoring network will consist of six spatially distributed monitoring locations (SG-1 through SG-6, Illustration 2), and one additional location at the site of an abandoned oil and gas well (SG-OGW-1, Illustration 2). A second abandoned well, SGOGW-2, will be accessed for a one-time soil gas measurement but no permanent soil gas collector will be installed. The soil gas monitoring points SG-1 through SG-6 are located adjacent to county roads on what is thought to be the public right–of-way between the road surface and private property. However, selected locations may actually extend onto private property. All locations are sited on high ground where saturation of the soil is least likely to occur. Monitoring point SG-OGW-1 is located in the middle of a fenced pasture. The soil disturbance caused by installation of the soil-gas monitoring collector at each site will be approximately 2 feet wide, 2 feet long, and 3 feet deep. Illustration 1: Proposed meteorological towerlocation. Illustration 2: Proposed locationsof soil-gasmonitoring points.FutureGen – Soil-Gas Monitoring & Meteorological Tower 6 Wetland Delineation PURPOSE & PROCEDURE The purpose of this investigation was to determine the extent of regulated wetlands at each of the soil-gas monitoring locations in the proposed network and at the proposed meteorological tower site. The wetlands investigation was conducted in conformation with the guidelines found in the Corps’ Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987). The following tasks have been completed and the results are reported below: • Using available reference materials determine the presence of previously identified wetland hydrology, hydric soils, and/or hydrophytic vegetation. • Perform a field survey to ground-truth data gathered through available references. Preliminary Data Collection & Review Prior to conducting the wetland determination, the following resources were reviewed: US Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map The National Wetland Inventory (NWI) map data (USFWS 2011) for the project site were examined to obtain a preliminary estimate of potential wetlands occurring at the proposed power plant site, related new construction areas, and the region of influence. Given that wetland identification criteria differ between the US Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the Corps, wetlands shown on a NWI map may not be under the jurisdiction of the Corps. Similarly, jurisdictional wetlands may not always be identified on NWI maps. Consequently, wetland presence based on NWI maps alone cannot be assumed to be an accurate assessment of jurisdiction. USGS Topographic Map The project site was superimposed on the corresponding topographic map (updated in 1990) (Microsoft 2011). These maps indicate topography, land use, water bodies, drainage ways, and other basic information pertinent to the project area. Of obvious importance for wetland research is the topographic and hydrologic information available on USGS map. National Cooperative Soil Survey Soils maps from the National Cooperative Soil Survey website (NCSS 2011) were examined to determine the characteristics of soils at the project site. County hydric soils lists from Morgan County were also reviewed prior to fieldwork. Field Survey Pedestrian surveys for jurisdictional wetlands and protected species were conducted on the subject property on November 1, 2011. Surveys were performed by Specialized Ecological Services’ Consulting Ecologist, Robert Rinella. Vegetation identification was performed by Specialized Ecological Services' Senior Botanist, James Lang. Qualifications are provided in Attachment A. Wetland field investigations were performed based on the guidelines of the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987). The manual recommends a minimum of three transects through a project area aligned perpendicular to the longest axis. In this study, a single sample site was established at each soil-gas monitoring location.  Because the ground cover of these areas was primarily cool-season turf grasses and common weeds and pasture grass and because the areas' sizes are limited, it was possible to observe any variance in habitat type from a single sampling point. Routine Wetland Determination Data Forms were completed to characterize the jurisdictional wetland areas and adjacent uplands (Attachment B). At these locations, vegetation, hydrologic indicators, and soil conditions were recorded. Vegetation Plant identifications and nomenclature were based on Flora of Missouri (Steyermark 1963).  The USFWS wetland indicator status of species follows Reed (1988). Soils Site-specific data were examined to determine the characteristics of soils of the project area. A Munsell soil color chart (Munsell Soil 1975) was used to describe soil color and other significant characteristics. Field observations were used to verify mapped soils survey information.  Hydrology During field investigations, hydrologic indicators were observed and used to verify reference data shown on NWI maps, USGS topographic maps, soils surveys, and other sources. Specific field indicators may include, but are not limited to: inundation, saturation, watermarks, drift lines, sediment deposits, and water-stained leaves. RESULTS Preliminary Data Collection & Review US Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map Review of the National Wetland Inventory (NWI) map (USFWS 2011) revealed only those wetland areas associated with Indian Creek. These are all well outside the project area. NWI and USGS topographic maps are provided in Attachment C. USGS Topographic Map USGS topographic maps revealed no waterways or wetlands within the project boundaries. National Cooperative Soil Survey Soils maps (NCSS 2011) show several soil types in the proposed project area. The soil map and county hydric soils list are included in Attachment D.  Four of the project areas are mapped with Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes. Ipava silt loam may contain hydric listed Denny, Sable, or Virden soils in depressions. Field Survey Vegetation The project areas associated with the soil-gas monitoring wells contain primarily cool-season grasses and common weeds, but also areas of agricultural row crop. Grassed Pasture and Road Right-of-Way This terrestrial community was observed at all locations with the exception of SG-OGW-2. Various grasses (Festuca arundinaceae, Setaria spp.) and broadleaf weeds (e.g. Plantago rugelii, Taraxacum officinale, and Trifolium spp.) were the dominant herbaceous species. No woody species were observed. Agricultural Row Crop This terrestrial community type is most common throughout the project area. In season, it would be planted in agricultural row crops. During field observations, there were no live cultivated species present. Evidence of Glycine max and Zea mays from previous plantings was observed. Soils The soils observed coincide with those soils shown in the soil survey maps. The native vegetation of the majority of the project site would have been a mix of tall-grass prairie and deciduous hardwoods. Hydrology Indian Creek and its unnamed tributaries drain all areas of the proposed project site westward into the Illinois River. The Illinois River terminates in the Mississippi River. Summary of Jurisdictional Areas No  jurisdictional wetlands were observed within the project area. DISCUSSION The impact of proposed FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc project was evaluated for the presence of jurisdictional wetlands and other U.S. waters during November 2011 by Specialized Ecological Services. This work was conducted using the standards of practice for wetland delineation. No jurisdictional wetlands were observed in the study area. As proposed, the actions of this project should not have impacts to wetlands or require wetland fill permits. LIMITS OF RESEARCH As Cowardin et al. (1979) point out, “there is no single, correct, indisputable, ecologically sound definition for wetlands, primarily because of the diversity of wetlands and because the demarcation between dry and wet environments lies along a continuum.” Wetlands, by their nature are dynamic systems. A single field investigation cannot possibly enable any investigator to have an absolutely complete understanding of the complex ecological interactions and components of a site.  However, by combining information collected from many sources at many different times, a clearer understanding is attainable. The results and conclusions of this investigation represent the integration of all information and data currently available. Literature and map data were combined with on-site reconnaissance to assure that this report is complete, comprehensive, and accurately reflects conditions at the subject property. Although every effort has been made to conduct this study according to the current standards of practice and to present the results clearly and completely, a one time sampling effort can only depict a ‘snap-shot’ of the complex biological, chemical, and ecological conditions at the study site. Sufficient support can be drawn from this sampling effort and associated analytical results, as well as from the scientific literature, for the discussion and conclusions provided herein. LITERATURE CITED 20 ILCS 830.  1989.  Inter agency Wetland Policy Act of 1989.  Illinois Public Act 86-157. 615 ILCS 5.  1994.  Illinois Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act.  Illinois Public Act 86-1324. Buol, S. W., and R. A. Rebertus. 1988. “Soil Formation Under Hydromorphic Conditions.” In The ecology and Management of Wetlands, Vol. 1: Ecology of Wetlands. pp 253-262. Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. Cowardin, L.M., V. Carter, F.C. Golet, and E.T. La Roe. 1979. “Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States.” FWS/OBS-79/31. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, Office of Biological Services, Washington, D.C. Environmental Laboratory. 1987. “Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual.” Technical Report Y-87-1. U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station. Vicksburg, MS. Hutchinson, G. E. 1975. Limnological Botany. A Treatise on Limnology. John Wiley and Sons.  New York. Megonigal, J. P., W. H. Patrick, Jr., and S. P. Faulkner. “Wetland Identification in Seasonally Flooded Forest Soils: Soil Morphology and Redox Dynamics.” Soil Science Society of America Journal.  57(1):140-149. Mohlenbrock, R. H. 1986. Guide to the Vascular Flora of Illinois. Southern Illinois University. 507p. Munsell Color.  1975.  Munsell Soil Color Charts.  Kollmorgan Corporation.  Baltimore, MD. National Cooperative Soil Service (NCSS). 2011. “NCSS Web Soil Survey.” Accessed November 6, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (last updated April 12, 2011). Reed, P.B., Jr. 1988. “National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: National Summary.” U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Biological Report 88(24). U.S. Government Printing Office.  Washington, D.C. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 1991. National List of Hydric Soils. National Technical Committee on Hydric Soils, US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Taft, J. B., G. S. Wilhelm, D. M. Ladd, and L. A. Masters. 1997. “Floristic Quality Assessment for Vegetation in Illinois, a Method for Assessing Vegetation Integrity.” Erigenia. 15:195. Microsoft. 2011. Microsoft Research Web Site. Accessed November 6, 2011 at http://msrmaps.com/default.aspx (last updated November 6, 2011). U.S. Department of Agriculture – Soil Conservation Service. 1975. Soil Taxonomy. Agriculture Handbook Number 436. U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, D.C. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2011. Wetlands Online Mapper. Accessed November 6, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Data/Mapper.html (last updated October 6, 2011). ATTACHMENT A: WETLAND DELINEATOR QUALIFICATIONS Bob Rinella, Environmental Professional and Wetland Ecologist, Specialized Ecological Services. Three years with Southern Illinois University Cooperative Wildlife Research Laboratory, fifteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eighteen (18) years experience with environmental research including wetlands, plant biology, wildlife biology, and environmental planning. Master of Science in Environmental Studies at Southern Illinois University,  Bachelor of Science in Biology at Jacksonville University. James Lang, PhD., Senior Botanist, Specialized Ecological Services. Twenty five (25) years with Greenville College, thirteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Over thirty five (35) years experience with plant biology and endangered species research. Doctorate in Botany at Iowa University, Master of Science in Botany and Bachelor of Arts in Science at University of Arkansas. Eric Ahern, Environmental Technician, Specialized Ecological Services. Two years with Zahniser Institute for Environmental Studies, nine years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eleven (11) years experience in environmental research including lacustrine water quality studies, wetland restoration, and GIS/GPS mapping. Master of Science in Education at University of Phoenix  and Bachelor of Arts in Biology at Greenville College. ATTACHMENT B: WETLAND DATA ATTACHMENT C: NWI AERIAL AND USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS FutureGen 2 Nov 15, 2011 This map is for general reference only. The US Fish and Wildlife Service is not responsible for the accuracy or currentness of the  base data shown on this map. All wetlands related data should be used in accordance with the layer metadata found on the Wetlands Mapper web site. User Remarks: Meteorological Tower & Soil Gas Monitoring Sites ATTACHMENT D: PROJECT SOILS MAP AND HYDRIC SOILS OF MORGAN COUNTY United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service A product of the National Cooperative Soil Survey, a joint effort of the United States Department of Agriculture and other Federal agencies, State agencies including the Agricultural Experiment Stations, and local participants Custom Soil Resource Report for Morgan County, Illinois November 15, 2011 Preface Soil surveys contain information that affects land use planning in survey areas. They highlight soil limitations that affect various land uses and provide information about the properties of the soils in the survey areas. Soil surveys are designed for many different users, including farmers, ranchers, foresters, agronomists, urban planners, community officials, engineers, developers, builders, and home buyers. Also, conservationists, teachers, students, and specialists in recreation, waste disposal, and pollution control can use the surveys to help them understand, protect, or enhance the environment. Various land use regulations of Federal, State, and local governments may impose special restrictions on land use or land treatment. Soil surveys identify soil properties that are used in making various land use or land treatment decisions. The information is intended to help the land users identify and reduce the effects of soil limitations on various land uses. The landowner or user is responsible for identifying and complying with existing laws and regulations. Although soil survey information can be used for general farm, local, and wider area planning, onsite investigation is needed to supplement this information in some cases. Examples include soil quality assessments (http://soils.usda.gov/sqi/) and certain conservation and engineering applications. For more detailed information, contact your local USDA Service Center (http://offices.sc.egov.usda.gov/locator/app? agency=nrcs) or your NRCS State Soil Scientist (http://soils.usda.gov/contact/ state_offices/). Great differences in soil properties can occur within short distances. Some soils are seasonally wet or subject to flooding. Some are too unstable to be used as a foundation for buildings or roads. Clayey or wet soils are poorly suited to use as septic tank absorption fields. A high water table makes a soil poorly suited to basements or underground installations. The National Cooperative Soil Survey is a joint effort of the United States Department of Agriculture and other Federal agencies, State agencies including the Agricultural Experiment Stations, and local agencies. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) has leadership for the Federal part of the National Cooperative Soil Survey. Information about soils is updated periodically. Updated information is available through the NRCS Soil Data Mart Web site or the NRCS Web Soil Survey. The Soil Data Mart is the data storage site for the official soil survey information. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Contents Preface....................................................................................................................2 How Soil Surveys Are Made.................................................................................. Soil Map..................................................................................................................7 Soil Map................................................................................................................8 Legend..................................................................................................................9 Map Unit Legend................................................................................................ Map Unit Descriptions........................................................................................10 Morgan County, Illinois...................................................................................13 19C3—Sylvan silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded.....13 36B—Tama silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes................................................13 36C2—Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded..............................14 43A—Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes................................................ 43B—Ipava silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes................................................16 45—Denny silt loam....................................................................................17 68—Sable silty clay loam............................................................................18 119D2—Elco silt loam, 10 to 15 percent slopes, eroded............................19 119E2—Elco silt loam, 15 to 20 percent slopes, eroded.............................19 257A—Clarksdale silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes...................................... 259C2—Assumption silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded...................21 279B—Rozetta silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes..........................................22 279C2—Rozetta silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded.........................23 279C3—Rozetta silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded...................................................................................................23 451—Lawson silt loam................................................................................24 W—Water.................................................................................................... Soil Information for All Uses...............................................................................26 Suitabilities and Limitations for Use....................................................................26 Land Classifications........................................................................................26 Hydric Rating by Map Unit...........................................................................26 References............................................................................................................31 How Soil Surveys Are Made Soil surveys are made to provide information about the soils and miscellaneous areas in a specific area. They include a description of the soils and miscellaneous areas and their location on the landscape and tables that show soil properties and limitations affecting various uses. Soil scientists observed the steepness, length, and shape of the slopes; the general pattern of drainage; the kinds of crops and native plants; and the kinds of bedrock. They observed and described many soil profiles. A soil profile is the sequence of natural layers, or horizons, in a soil. The profile extends from the surface down into the unconsolidated material in which the soil formed or from the surface down to bedrock. The unconsolidated material is devoid of roots and other living organisms and has not been changed by other biological activity. Currently, soils are mapped according to the boundaries of major land resource areas (MLRAs). MLRAs are geographically associated land resource units that share common characteristics related to physiography, geology, climate, water resources, soils, biological resources, and land uses (USDA, 2006). Soil survey areas typically consist of parts of one or more MLRA. The soils and miscellaneous areas in a survey area occur in an orderly pattern that is related to the geology, landforms, relief, climate, and natural vegetation of the area. Each kind of soil and miscellaneous area is associated with a particular kind of landform or with a segment of the landform. By observing the soils and miscellaneous areas in the survey area and relating their position to specific segments of the landform, a soil scientist develops a concept, or model, of how they were formed. Thus, during mapping, this model enables the soil scientist to predict with a considerable degree of accuracy the kind of soil or miscellaneous area at a specific location on the landscape. Commonly, individual soils on the landscape merge into one another as their characteristics gradually change. To construct an accurate soil map, however, soil scientists must determine the boundaries between the soils. They can observe only a limited number of soil profiles. Nevertheless, these observations, supplemented by an understanding of the soil-vegetation-landscape relationship, are sufficient to verify predictions of the kinds of soil in an area and to determine the boundaries. Soil scientists recorded the characteristics of the soil profiles that they studied. They noted soil color, texture, size and shape of soil aggregates, kind and amount of rock fragments, distribution of plant roots, reaction, and other features that enable them to identify soils. After describing the soils in the survey area and determining their properties, the soil scientists assigned the soils to taxonomic classes (units). Taxonomic classes are concepts. Each taxonomic class has a set of soil characteristics with precisely defined limits. The classes are used as a basis for comparison to classify soils systematically. Soil taxonomy, the system of taxonomic classification used in the United States, is based mainly on the kind and character of soil properties and the arrangement of horizons within the profile. After the soil scientists classified and named the soils in the survey area, they compared the individual soils with similar soils in the same taxonomic class in other areas so that they could confirm data and assemble additional data based on experience and research. The objective of soil mapping is not to delineate pure map unit components; the objective is to separate the landscape into landforms or landform segments that have similar use and management requirements. Each map unit is defined by a unique combination of soil components and/or miscellaneous areas in predictable proportions. Some components may be highly contrasting to the other components of the map unit. The presence of minor components in a map unit in no way diminishes the usefulness or accuracy of the data. The delineation of such landforms and landform segments on the map provides sufficient information for the development of resource plans. If intensive use of small areas is planned, onsite investigation is needed to define and locate the soils and miscellaneous areas. Soil scientists make many field observations in the process of producing a soil map. The frequency of observation is dependent upon several factors, including scale of mapping, intensity of mapping, design of map units, complexity of the landscape, and experience of the soil scientist. Observations are made to test and refine the soil-landscape model and predictions and to verify the classification of the soils at specific locations. Once the soil-landscape model is refined, a significantly smaller number of measurements of individual soil properties are made and recorded. These measurements may include field measurements, such as those for color, depth to bedrock, and texture, and laboratory measurements, such as those for content of sand, silt, clay, salt, and other components. Properties of each soil typically vary from one point to another across the landscape. Observations for map unit components are aggregated to develop ranges of characteristics for the components. The aggregated values are presented. Direct measurements do not exist for every property presented for every map unit component. Values for some properties are estimated from combinations of other properties. While a soil survey is in progress, samples of some of the soils in the area generally are collected for laboratory analyses and for engineering tests. Soil scientists interpret the data from these analyses and tests as well as the field-observed characteristics and the soil properties to determine the expected behavior of the soils under different uses. Interpretations for all of the soils are field tested through observation of the soils in different uses and under different levels of management. Some interpretations are modified to fit local conditions, and some new interpretations are developed to meet local needs. Data are assembled from other sources, such as research information, production records, and field experience of specialists. For example, data on crop yields under defined levels of management are assembled from farm records and from field or plot experiments on the same kinds of soil. Predictions about soil behavior are based not only on soil properties but also on such variables as climate and biological activity. Soil conditions are predictable over long periods of time, but they are not predictable from year to year. For example, soil scientists can predict with a fairly high degree of accuracy that a given soil will have a high water table within certain depths in most years, but they cannot predict that a high water table will always be at a specific level in the soil on a specific date. After soil scientists located and identified the significant natural bodies of soil in the survey area, they drew the boundaries of these bodies on aerial photographs and identified each as a specific map unit. Aerial photographs show trees, buildings, fields, roads, and rivers, all of which help in locating boundaries accurately. Soil Map The soil map section includes the soil map for the defined area of interest, a list of soil map units on the map and extent of each map unit, and cartographic symbols displayed on the map. Also presented are various metadata about data used to produce the map, and a description of each soil map unit. Custom Soil Resource Report MAP LEGEND Very Stony Spot Wet Spot Other MAP INFORMATION Map Scale: 1:12,200 if printed on A size (8.5" × 11") sheet. The soil surveys that comprise your AOI were mapped at 1:15,840. Area of Interest (AOI) Area of Interest (AOI) Soils Soil Map Units Special Point Features Blowout Borrow Pit Clay Spot Closed Depression Gravel Pit Gravelly Spot Landfill Lava Flow Marsh or swamp Mine or Quarry Miscellaneous Water Perennial Water Rock Outcrop Saline Spot Sandy Spot Severely Eroded Spot Sinkhole Slide or Slip Sodic Spot Spoil Area Stony Spot Special Line Features Gully Short Steep Slope Other Political Features Warning: Soil Map may not be valid at this scale. Enlargement of maps beyond the scale of mapping can cause misunderstanding of the detail of mapping and accuracy of soil line placement. The maps do not show the small areas of contrasting soils that could have been shown at a more detailed scale. Cities Water Features Streams and Canals Transportation Rails Interstate Highways US Routes Major Roads Local Roads Please rely on the bar scale on each map sheet for accurate map measurements. Source of Map:  Natural Resources Conservation Service Web Soil Survey URL:  http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov Coordinate System:  UTM Zone 15N NAD83 This product is generated from the USDA-NRCS certified data as of the version date(s) listed below. Soil Survey Area:  Morgan County, Illinois Survey Area Data:  Version 2, Jul 10, 2006 Date(s) aerial images were photographed:  6/20/2007 The orthophoto or other base map on which the soil lines were compiled and digitized probably differs from the background imagery displayed on these maps. As a result, some minor shifting of map unit boundaries may be evident. Map Unit Legend Morgan County, Illinois (IL137) 19C3 36B 36C2 43A 43B 45 68 119D2 119E2 257A 259C2 279B 279C2 279C3 451 W Totals for Area of Interest Sylvan silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded Tama silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes Ipava silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Denny silt loam Sable silty clay loam Elco silt loam, 10 to 15 percent slopes, eroded Elco silt loam, 15 to 20 percent slopes, eroded Clarksdale silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes Assumption silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Rozetta silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Rozetta silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Rozetta silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded Lawson silt loam Water 16.9 30.8 6.7 217.7 20.9 2.4 37.4 30.1 36.0 20.9 5.8 128.2 22.6 18.3 15.1 1.6 611.5 2.8% 5.0% 1.1% 35.6% 3.4% 0.4% 6.1% 4.9% 5.9% 3.4% 1.0% 21.0% 3.7% 3.0% 2.5% 0.3% 100.0% Map Unit Descriptions The map units delineated on the detailed soil maps in a soil survey represent the soils or miscellaneous areas in the survey area. The map unit descriptions, along with the maps, can be used to determine the composition and properties of a unit. A map unit delineation on a soil map represents an area dominated by one or more major kinds of soil or miscellaneous areas. A map unit is identified and named according to the taxonomic classification of the dominant soils. Within a taxonomic class there are precisely defined limits for the properties of the soils. On the landscape, however, the soils are natural phenomena, and they have the characteristic variability of all natural phenomena. Thus, the range of some observed properties may extend beyond the limits defined for a taxonomic class. Areas of soils of a single taxonomic class rarely, if ever, can be mapped without including areas of other taxonomic classes. Consequently, every map unit is made up of the soils or miscellaneous areas for which it is named and some minor components that belong to taxonomic classes other than those of the major soils. Most minor soils have properties similar to those of the dominant soil or soils in the map unit, and thus they do not affect use and management. These are called noncontrasting, or similar, components. They may or may not be mentioned in a particular map unit description. Other minor components, however, have properties and behavioral characteristics divergent enough to affect use or to require different management. These are called contrasting, or dissimilar, components. They generally are in small areas and could not be mapped separately because of the scale used. Some small areas of strongly contrasting soils or miscellaneous areas are identified by a special symbol on the maps. If included in the database for a given area, the contrasting minor components are identified in the map unit descriptions along with some characteristics of each. A few areas of minor components may not have been observed, and consequently they are not mentioned in the descriptions, especially where the pattern was so complex that it was impractical to make enough observations to identify all the soils and miscellaneous areas on the landscape. The presence of minor components in a map unit in no way diminishes the usefulness or accuracy of the data. The objective of mapping is not to delineate pure taxonomic classes but rather to separate the landscape into landforms or landform segments that have similar use and management requirements. The delineation of such segments on the map provides sufficient information for the development of resource plans. If intensive use of small areas is planned, however, onsite investigation is needed to define and locate the soils and miscellaneous areas. An identifying symbol precedes the map unit name in the map unit descriptions. Each description includes general facts about the unit and gives important soil properties and qualities. Soils that have profiles that are almost alike make up a soil series. Except for differences in texture of the surface layer, all the soils of a series have major horizons that are similar in composition, thickness, and arrangement. Soils of one series can differ in texture of the surface layer, slope, stoniness, salinity, degree of erosion, and other characteristics that affect their use. On the basis of such differences, a soil series is divided into soil phases. Most of the areas shown on the detailed soil maps are phases of soil series. The name of a soil phase commonly indicates a feature that affects use or management. For example, Alpha silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes, is a phase of the Alpha series. Some map units are made up of two or more major soils or miscellaneous areas. These map units are complexes, associations, or undifferentiated groups. A complex consists of two or more soils or miscellaneous areas in such an intricate pattern or in such small areas that they cannot be shown separately on the maps. The pattern and proportion of the soils or miscellaneous areas are somewhat similar in all areas. Alpha-Beta complex, 0 to 6 percent slopes, is an example. An association is made up of two or more geographically associated soils or miscellaneous areas that are shown as one unit on the maps. Because of present or anticipated uses of the map units in the survey area, it was not considered practical or necessary to map the soils or miscellaneous areas separately. The pattern and relative proportion of the soils or miscellaneous areas are somewhat similar. Alpha-Beta association, 0 to 2 percent slopes, is an example. An undifferentiated group is made up of two or more soils or miscellaneous areas that could be mapped individually but are mapped as one unit because similar interpretations can be made for use and management. The pattern and proportion of the soils or miscellaneous areas in a mapped area are not uniform. An area can be made up of only one of the major soils or miscellaneous areas, or it can be made up of all of them. Alpha and Beta soils, 0 to 2 percent slopes, is an example. Some surveys include miscellaneous areas. Such areas have little or no soil material and support little or no vegetation. Rock outcrop is an example. Morgan County, Illinois 19C3—Sylvan silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Sylvan and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Sylvan Setting Landform: Ground moraines, loess hills Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 5 to 10 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: More than 80 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 35 percent Available water capacity: Very high (about 12.2 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 4e Typical profile 0 to 6 inches: Silty clay loam 6 to 25 inches: Silty clay loam 25 to 60 inches: Silt loam 36B—Tama silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Tama and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Tama Setting Landform: Ground moraines, knolls Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Convex Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 2 to 5 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 48 to 72 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 10 percent Available water capacity: High (about 11.9 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 2e Typical profile 0 to 14 inches: Silt loam 14 to 55 inches: Silty clay loam 55 to 60 inches: Silt loam 36C2—Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Tama and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Tama Setting Landform: Ground moraines, knolls Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 5 to 10 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 48 to 72 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 10 percent Available water capacity: High (about 11.7 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3e Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 46 inches: Silty clay loam 46 to 60 inches: Silt loam 43A—Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Ipava and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Ipava Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 0 to 2 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Somewhat poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high (0.20 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 12 to 36 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: High (about 10.5 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 1 Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 54 inches: Silty clay loam 54 to 60 inches: Silt loam Minor Components Virden Percent of map unit: Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Denny Percent of map unit: Landform: Depressions Down-slope shape: Concave Across-slope shape: Concave Sable Percent of map unit: Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear 43B—Ipava silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Ipava and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Ipava Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Convex Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 2 to 5 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Somewhat poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high (0.20 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 12 to 36 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: High (about 10.5 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 2e Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 54 inches: Silty clay loam 54 to 60 inches: Silt loam Minor Components Virden Percent of map unit: Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Denny Percent of map unit: Landform: Depressions Down-slope shape: Concave Across-slope shape: Concave Sable Percent of map unit: Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear 45—Denny silt loam Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Denny and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Denny Setting Landform: Depressions Down-slope shape: Concave Across-slope shape: Concave Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 0 to 2 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately low to moderately high (0.06 to 0.20 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 0 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: Frequent Available water capacity: High (about 11.3 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3w Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 17 inches: Silt loam 17 to 48 inches: Silty clay 48 to 60 inches: Silty clay loam 68—Sable silty clay loam Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Sable and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Sable Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 0 to 2 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 0 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: Occasional Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 30 percent Available water capacity: Very high (about 12.2 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 2w Typical profile 0 to 17 inches: Silty clay loam 17 to 42 inches: Silty clay loam 42 to 60 inches: Silt loam 119D2—Elco silt loam, 10 to 15 percent slopes, eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Elco and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Elco Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess over paleosol formed in till Properties and qualities Slope: 10 to 15 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high (0.20 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 30 to 54 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: High (about 11.4 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3e Typical profile 0 to 5 inches: Silt loam 5 to 23 inches: Silty clay loam 23 to 60 inches: Silty clay loam 119E2—Elco silt loam, 15 to 20 percent slopes, eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Elco and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Elco Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess over paleosol formed in till Properties and qualities Slope: 15 to 25 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high (0.20 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 30 to 54 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: High (about 11.4 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 6e Typical profile 0 to 5 inches: Silt loam 5 to 23 inches: Silty clay loam 23 to 60 inches: Silty clay loam 257A—Clarksdale silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Clarksdale and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Clarksdale Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 0 to 3 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Somewhat poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high (0.20 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 12 to 36 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 15 percent Available water capacity: High (about 11.0 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 1 Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 19 inches: Silt loam 19 to 56 inches: Silty clay 56 to 60 inches: Silt loam Minor Components Virden Percent of map unit: Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear 259C2—Assumption silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 680 to 1,020 feet Mean annual precipitation: 29 to 35 inches Mean annual air temperature: 50 to 54 degrees F Frost-free period: 160 to 180 days Map Unit Composition Assumption and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Assumption Setting Landform: Ground moraines Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess over till Properties and qualities Slope: 5 to 10 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately low to moderately high (0.06 to 0.60 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 30 to 54 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: High (about 11.6 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3e Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 36 inches: Silty clay loam 36 to 60 inches: Clay loam 279B—Rozetta silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes Map Unit Setting Elevation: 620 to 690 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Rozetta and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Rozetta Setting Landform: Loess hills, ground moraines Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Convex Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 2 to 5 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 48 to 72 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 15 percent Available water capacity: Very high (about 12.6 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 2e Typical profile 0 to 7 inches: Silt loam 7 to 15 inches: Silt loam 15 to 39 inches: Silty clay loam 39 to 60 inches: Silt loam 279C2—Rozetta silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Rozetta and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Rozetta Setting Landform: Loess hills, ground moraines Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 5 to 10 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 48 to 72 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 15 percent Available water capacity: Very high (about 12.4 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3e Typical profile 0 to 9 inches: Silt loam 9 to 39 inches: Silty clay loam 39 to 60 inches: Silt loam 279C3—Rozetta silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded Map Unit Setting Elevation: 440 to 670 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Rozetta and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Rozetta Setting Landform: Loess hills, ground moraines Down-slope shape: Convex Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Loess Properties and qualities Slope: 5 to 10 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Moderately well drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 48 to 72 inches Frequency of flooding: None Frequency of ponding: None Calcium carbonate, maximum content: 10 percent Available water capacity: High (about 11.9 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 4e Typical profile 0 to 5 inches: Silty clay loam 5 to 37 inches: Silty clay loam 37 to 60 inches: Silt loam 451—Lawson silt loam Map Unit Setting Elevation: 420 to 440 feet Mean annual precipitation: 22 to 58 inches Mean annual air temperature: 43 to 59 degrees F Frost-free period: 150 to 190 days Map Unit Composition Lawson and similar soils: 100 percent Description of Lawson Setting Landform: Flood plains Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear Parent material: Alluvium Properties and qualities Slope: 0 to 2 percent Depth to restrictive feature: More than 80 inches Drainage class: Somewhat poorly drained Capacity of the most limiting layer to transmit water (Ksat): Moderately high to high (0.60 to 2.00 in/hr) Depth to water table: About 12 to 36 inches Frequency of flooding: Frequent Frequency of ponding: None Available water capacity: Very high (about 12.1 inches) Interpretive groups Land capability (nonirrigated): 3w Typical profile 0 to 11 inches: Silt loam 11 to 35 inches: Silt loam 35 to 60 inches: Silt loam Minor Components Sawmill Percent of map unit: Landform: Flood plains Down-slope shape: Linear Across-slope shape: Linear W—Water Map Unit Composition Water: 100 percent Soil Information for All Uses Suitabilities and Limitations for Use The Suitabilities and Limitations for Use section includes various soil interpretations displayed as thematic maps with a summary table for the soil map units in the selected area of interest. A single value or rating for each map unit is generated by aggregating the interpretive ratings of individual map unit components. This aggregation process is defined for each interpretation. Land Classifications Land Classifications are specified land use and management groupings that are assigned to soil areas because combinations of soil have similar behavior for specified practices. Most are based on soil properties and other factors that directly influence the specific use of the soil. Example classifications include ecological site classification, farmland classification, irrigated and nonirrigated land capability classification, and hydric rating. Hydric Rating by Map Unit This rating indicates the proportion of map units that meets the criteria for hydric soils. Map units are composed of one or more map unit components or soil types, each of which is rated as hydric soil or not hydric. Map units that are made up dominantly of hydric soils may have small areas of minor nonhydric components in the higher positions on the landform, and map units that are made up dominantly of nonhydric soils may have small areas of minor hydric components in the lower positions on the landform. Each map unit is designated as "all hydric," "partially hydric," "not hydric," or "unknown hydric," depending on the rating of its respective components. "All hydric" means that all components listed for a given map unit are rated as being hydric, while "not hydric" means that all components are rated as not hydric. "Partially hydric" means that at least one component of the map unit is rated as hydric, and at least one component is rated as not hydric. "Unknown hydric" indicates that at least one component is not rated so a definitive rating for the map unit cannot be made. Hydric soils are defined by the National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils (NTCHS) as soils that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part (Federal Register, 1994). Under natural conditions, these soils are either saturated or inundated long enough during the growing season to support the growth and reproduction of hydrophytic vegetation. The NTCHS definition identifies general soil properties that are associated with wetness. In order to determine whether a specific soil is a hydric soil or nonhydric soil, however, more specific information, such as information about the depth and duration of the water table, is needed. Thus, criteria that identify those estimated soil properties unique to hydric soils have been established (Federal Register, 2002). These criteria are used to identify map unit components that normally are associated with wetlands. The criteria used are selected estimated soil properties that are described in "Soil Taxonomy" (Soil Survey Staff, 1999) and "Keys to Soil Taxonomy" (Soil Survey Staff, 2006) and in the "Soil Survey Manual" (Soil Survey Division Staff, 1993). If soils are wet enough for a long enough period of time to be considered hydric, they should exhibit certain properties that can be easily observed in the field. These visible properties are indicators of hydric soils. The indicators used to make onsite determinations of hydric soils are specified in "Field Indicators of Hydric Soils in the United States" (Hurt and Vasilas, 2006). References: Federal Register. July 13, 1994. Changes in hydric soils of the United States. Federal Register. September 18, 2002. Hydric soils of the United States. Hurt, G.W., and L.M. Vasilas, editors. Version 6.0, 2006. Field indicators of hydric soils in the United States. Soil Survey Division Staff. 1993. Soil survey manual. Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 18. Soil Survey Staff. 1999. Soil taxonomy: A basic system of soil classification for making and interpreting soil surveys. 2nd edition. Natural Resources Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 436. Soil Survey Staff. 2006. Keys to soil taxonomy. 10th edition. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Custom Soil Resource Report MAP LEGEND Area of Interest (AOI) Area of Interest (AOI) Soils Soil Map Units Soil Ratings All Hydric Partially Hydric Not Hydric Unknown Hydric Not rated or not available Political Features Cities Water Features Streams and Canals Transportation Rails Interstate Highways US Routes Major Roads Local Roads MAP INFORMATION Map Scale: 1:12,200 if printed on A size (8.5" × 11") sheet. The soil surveys that comprise your AOI were mapped at 1:15,840. Warning: Soil Map may not be valid at this scale. Enlargement of maps beyond the scale of mapping can cause misunderstanding of the detail of mapping and accuracy of soil line placement. The maps do not show the small areas of contrasting soils that could have been shown at a more detailed scale. Please rely on the bar scale on each map sheet for accurate map measurements. Source of Map:  Natural Resources Conservation Service Web Soil Survey URL:  http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov Coordinate System:  UTM Zone 15N NAD83 This product is generated from the USDA-NRCS certified data as of the version date(s) listed below. Soil Survey Area:  Morgan County, Illinois Survey Area Data:  Version 2, Jul 10, 2006 Date(s) aerial images were photographed:  6/20/2007 The orthophoto or other base map on which the soil lines were compiled and digitized probably differs from the background imagery displayed on these maps. As a result, some minor shifting of map unit boundaries may be evident. Table—Hydric Rating by Map Unit Hydric Rating by Map Unit— Summary by Map Unit — Morgan County, Illinois (IL137) 19C3 Sylvan silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded 36B Tama silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes 36C2 Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded 43A Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes 43B Ipava silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes 45 Denny silt loam 68 Sable silty clay loam 119D2 Elco silt loam, 10 to 15 percent slopes, eroded 119E2 Elco silt loam, 15 to 20 percent slopes, eroded 257A Clarksdale silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes 259C2 Assumption silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded 279B Rozetta silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes 279C2 Rozetta silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded 279C3 Rozetta silty clay loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, severely eroded 451 Lawson silt loam W Water Totals for Area of Interest Not Hydric Not Hydric Not Hydric Partially Hydric Partially Hydric All Hydric All Hydric Not Hydric Not Hydric Partially Hydric Not Hydric Not Hydric Not Hydric Not Hydric Partially Hydric Unknown Hydric 16.9  2.8%  30.8  5.0%  6.7  1.1%  217.7  35.6%  20.9  3.4%  2.4  0.4%  37.4  6.1%  30.1  4.9%  36.0  5.9%  20.9  3.4%  5.8  1.0%  128.2  21.0%  22.6  3.7%  18.3  3.0%  15.1  2.5%  1.6  0.3%  611.5  100.0%  Rating Options—Hydric Rating by Map Unit Aggregation Method:  Absence/Presence Tie-break Rule:  Lower References American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 2004. Standard specifications for transportation materials and methods of sampling and testing. 24th edition. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 2005. Standard classification of soils for engineering purposes. ASTM Standard D2487-00. Cowardin, L.M., V. Carter, F.C. Golet, and E.T. LaRoe. 1979. Classification of wetlands and deep-water habitats of the United States. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service FWS/OBS-79/31. Federal Register. July 13, 1994. Changes in hydric soils of the United States. Federal Register. September 18, 2002. Hydric soils of the United States. Hurt, G.W., and L.M. Vasilas, editors. Version 6.0, 2006. Field indicators of hydric soils in the United States. National Research Council. 1995. Wetlands: Characteristics and boundaries. Soil Survey Division Staff. 1993. Soil survey manual. Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 18.  http://soils.usda.gov/ Soil Survey Staff. 1999. Soil taxonomy: A basic system of soil classification for making and interpreting soil surveys. 2nd edition. Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 436.  http://soils.usda.gov/ Soil Survey Staff. 2006. Keys to soil taxonomy. 10th edition. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  http://soils.usda.gov/ Tiner, R.W., Jr. 1985. Wetlands of Delaware. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control, Wetlands Section. United States Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Laboratory. 1987. Corps of Engineers wetlands delineation manual. Waterways Experiment Station Technical Report Y-87-1. United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. National forestry manual.  http://soils.usda.gov/ United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. National range and pasture handbook. http://www.glti.nrcs.usda.gov/ United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. National soil survey handbook, title 430-VI.  http://soils.usda.gov/ United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2006. Land resource regions and major land resource areas of the United States, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Basin. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 296. http://soils.usda.gov/ United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 1961. Land capability classification. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 210. INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX D3 PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL DETERMINATION AND WETLANDS DELINEATION FOR THE PROPOSED FUTUREGEN DEVELOPMENT (STRATIGRAPHIC WELL) INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Specialized Ecological Services 105 East Oak Street, Greenville, Illinois 62246 888-511-7735, 618-741-0426 (cell), bob@specialized-ecological.com May 25, 2011 Tyson Zobrist US Army Corps of Engineer 1222SpruceStreet Saint Louis, MO 63103 Re: Jurisdictional Wetlands Survey FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Incorporated Site Characterization Well Locale Morgan County, Illinois Dear Mr.Zobrist, Enclosed is a copy of our report documenting the results of our survey for jurisdictional wetlands at the above referenced project in Morgan County, Illinois, for FutureGen Industrial Alliance of Washington, D.C. As indicated in our report, no jurisdictionalwetlandswereidentifiedandnoimpacts towetlandsareanticipatedfromthisproject. Iamalsoincludingthe results of our survey for state and federal threatened and endangered species at the project site. As reported, no protected species were identifiedand no impacts to protected species are anticipated. Pleasemail comments to: FutureGen Alliance, Inc. U.S.Department of Energy National Technology Laboratory 1101Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 3610CollinsFerry Road Sixth Floor P.O.Box 880 Washington, D.C. 20004 Morgantown,WV 26507 Contact Person: Mr.Ken Humphreys, CEO ContactPerson: Mr.Cliff Whyte, NEPA Compliance Officer Phone Number: (202)280-6019 PhoneNumber: (304)285-2098 Pleaseincludemyself and Amanda Stegen, ResearchScientist, Battelle on any correspondence. AmandaStegen Battelle 902Battelle Blvd P.O.Box 999 MSIN K3-66 Richland,Washington, 99352 amanda.stegen@pnl.gov 509-372-4511 Sincerely, SpecializedEcological Services RobertO.Rinella ConsultingEcologist Cc: Mr.Chris Burger, Patrick Engineering Ms.Amanda Stegen, Battelle INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Preliminary Jurisdictional Determination & Wetlands Delineation Proposed FutureGen Development Morgan County, Illinois Date: May 25, 2011 Prepared for FutureGen Alliance under contract with: Patrick Engineering 300 West Edwards Street, Suite 200 Springfield, Illinois 62704 (630)795-7200 Prepared by: Specialized Ecological Services P.O. Box 136 105 East Oak Street Greenville, IL 62246 INTRODUCTION WETLANDS........................................................................................................................................1 HYDROLOGY..................................................................................................................................1 SOILS...........................................................................................................................................1 VEGETATION..................................................................................................................................2 STATE WETLANDS LEGISLATION................................................................................................................2 STUDY AREA BEILSCHMIDT CHARACTERIZATION PAD.......................................................................................................4 HOAGLAND CHARACTERIZATION PAD.......................................................................................................4 BEILSCHMIDT ROAD IMPROVEMENTS..........................................................................................................4 FARM ROAD IMPROVEMENT AND EXTENSION................................................................................................5 PURPOSE & PROCEDURE PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................7 US FISH & WILDLIFE SERVICE NATIONAL WETLAND INVENTORY MAP.........................................................7 USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAP.............................................................................................................7 NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY................................................................................................7 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................8 VEGETATION..................................................................................................................................8 SOILS...........................................................................................................................................8 HYDROLOGY..................................................................................................................................8 RESULTS PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................9 US FISH & WILDLIFE SERVICE NATIONAL WETLAND INVENTORY MAP.........................................................9 USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAP.............................................................................................................9 NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY................................................................................................9 FIELD SURVEY..................................................................................................................................10 VEGETATION................................................................................................................................10 SOILS.........................................................................................................................................10 HYDROLOGY................................................................................................................................10 SUMMARY OF JURISDICTIONAL AREAS......................................................................................................10 DISCUSSION  11  LIMITS OF RESEARCH  12  LITERATURE CITED  13  ATTACHMENT A: WETLAND DELINEATOR QUALIFICATIONS  A  ATTACHMENT B: WETLAND DATA FORMS  B  ATTACHMENT C: NWI AERIAL AND USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS  C  ATTACHMENT D: PROJECT SOILS MAP AND HYDRIC SOILS OF MORGAN COUNTY  D  INTRODUCTION This report documents an investigation of wetland concerns related to proposed construction of FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. facilities near Jacksonville, Illinois. Our investigation includes two possible characterization pad areas (the Beilschmidt Property and the Hoagland Property), several truck pull-offs and road modifications on Beilschmidt Road, and widening and extending an existing farm access road. Wetlands The ecological functions and social values associated with wetland habitats afford them special regulatory protection. In keeping with the regulatory requirements of the Clean Water Act (CWA), wetlands on properties to be altered by commercial activities must be identified and impacts to those wetlands mitigated. As authorized by Section 404 of the CWA, the US Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) jointly define wetlands as “those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, the prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (Corps 33 CFR 328.3 and EPA 40 CFR 230.3).” This definition is currently the standard for jurisdictional wetland delineation. To be a jurisdictional wetland and therefore fall under federal and state regulatory limitations, an ecological community must exhibit three wetland characteristics: (1) wetland hydrology, (2) hydric soils, and (3) hydrophytic vegetation. Hydrology Because hydrology is the most independent variable among the three-wetland criteria, its influence is extremely important. Hydrologic fluctuations not only affect soil formation (Buol and Rebertus 1988) and vegetation growth (Hutchinson 1975), but also every wetland function. Wetland hydrology is described by the Corps as “inundation or saturation to the surface for at least 5% of the growing season in most years.” Saturation exists when the capillary fringe occurs within a major portion of the root zone (ie. within 12 inches of the soil surface). The growing season is defined as the portion of the year when soil temperature at 20 inches below the surface is above 41oF (5oC). Soils Wetland hydrology (saturation and/or inundation) results in soil anaerobiosis as biological and chemical processes deplete oxygen in the soil. Soils developed in anoxic conditions are called hydromorphic (Buol and Rebertus 1988) or hydric (Megonigal, Patrick, and Faulkner 1993). The Natural Resource Conservation Service defines hydric soils as “saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during FutureGen  –  Morgan County 1 Wetland Delineation the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil (SCS 1991). Vegetation For most species of vegetation, oxygen deprivation is an extreme condition limiting survival. For certain adapted species, however, anoxic rooting conditions are an environmental condition allowing them the ecological advantage. The National Technical Committee for Hydric Soils (SCS 1991) defines hydrophytic vegetation as “plant life growing in water or on a saturated substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.” The keystone to regulatory consideration of hydrophytic vegetation is inundation or saturation sufficient to exert a controlling influence on the plant species present. The Corps requires a predominance (>50%) of hydrophytic species. In January of 2001, a U.S. Supreme Court ruling added another characteristic as a requirement for a wetland to come under the Corps regulatory jurisdiction. In essence, a wetland is now required to have a surface water connection to a “navigable waterway” in order to be protected by the wetland provisions of the CWA. This ruling was reinforced in the 2006 U.S. Supreme Court case, United States v. Rapanos. State Wetlands Legislation The Illinois Interagency Wetland Policy Act of 1989 establishes a state goal that there be, “no overall net loss of the state's existing wetland acres or their functional values due to state supported activities” (20 ILCS 830). To accomplish this goal, the Act established a review process for all projects being pursued by a state agency or being accomplished with state funds, that have the potential to adversely affect a wetland. This review consists of a two part process. Projects must first be reviewed by the Division of Natural Resources Review & Coordination to confirm if a wetland impact will occur. If it is determined there will not be an impact, the project will be approved and funds may be released. If it is determined an impact is going to occur, the entity requesting approval must prepare a plan which details how it will compensate for the impact before the project may move forward (20 ILCS 830). All compensation plans must be approved by IDNR. The Act does not require wetlands to have a surface water connection to a navigable waterway in order for those wetlands to fall within the state's regulatory jurisdiction. The Illinois Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act (615 ILCS 5) grants the IDNR Office of Water Resources (IDNR/OWR) the authority to regulate construction activities in floodplains. According to the Act, persons proposing such activities must first secure a permit from IDNR/OWR.  Related regulations recognize six northeastern counties (Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry, and Will) separately from the rest of "downstate" Illinois. The purpose of both programs is to, "protect the rights, safety, and welfare of private and public landowners by the regulation of floodway development, [because] construction activities which restrict a stream's capacity to carry flood flows may result in channel instability and increased flood damages to neighboring properties" (State of FutureGen  –  Morgan County 2 Wetland Delineation Illinois 1994). The downstate regulatory program requires permits for construction in the floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 640 acres in urban areas or 6,400 acres in rural areas. The Northeastern Illinois Program does not limit the tributary area (State of Illinois 1994). IDNR/OWR uses a joint application form entitled Protecting Illinois Waters for its floodplain, public waters, and dam safety permits. STUDY AREA Beilschmidt Characterization Pad The Beilschmidt Characterization Pad is located approximately 6 miles north of Alexander, Illinois. This property occupies a 700 ft X 700 ft portion of the northeastern quarter of the southeastern quarter of Section 25, Township 16 North, Range 9 West, 3rd Prime Meridian, in Morgan County. The area of the site is approximately 11.25 acres. Topography within the site ranged between 540 and 570 feet msl. The property contains agricultural fields. Hoagland Characterization Pad The Hoagland Characterization Pad is also located approximately 6 miles north of Alexander, Illinois. This property occupies a 500 ft X 1340 ft portion of the eastern half of the northwestern quarter of Section 25, Township 16 North, Range 9 West, 3rd Prime Meridian, in Morgan County. The area of the site is approximately 15.38 acres. Topography within the site ranged between 540 and 570 feet msl. The property contains agricultural fields and grassed pasture. Beilschmidt Road Improvements Improvements to Beilschmidt Road include 5 truck pull-off areas and modifications to three curves. These improvements are necessary to allow large trucks to safely access Characterization Pads during construction. The first truck pull-off is located at the intersection of County Highway 123 and Beilschmidt Road, on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. Another pull-off is located approximately 1750 feet west of County Highway 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. A third pull-off is located approximately 3540 feet west of County Highway 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. A fourth pull-off is located approximately 1 mile west of County Road 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. The fifth truck pull-off is located adjacent to the Hoagland Characterization Pad on the east side of Beilschmidt Road. Each of these pull-off sites measures approximately 30 ft by 150 ft. Between County Highway 123 and the existing farm access road (described below), Beilschmidt Road makes three 90o curves. Modifications to the road alignment would affect areas on the inside of these curves. The first corner area of impact includes a triangular area 150 feet wide by 150 feet long south and east of Beilschmidt road approximately 4500 feet west of County Highway 123. Approximately 500 feet south from the first curve, a second area of impact includes a triangular area 150 feet wide by 150 feet long on the north and west sides of Beilschmidt Road. Approximately 1350 feet further west, an area of impact approximately 150 feet wide by 150 feet long is located on the south and east sides of Beilschmidt Road. Farm Road Improvement and Extension The existing farm access road begins near the northwest corner of the Beilschmidt farm. This unnamed road extends south from its intersection with Beilschmidt Road for approximately 2580 feet along the wester border of the Beilschmidt farm. The road continues east, bisecting the Martin Property, approximately 2170 feet. An extension of this road northward approximately 870 feet, roughly parallel to the eastern border of the Beilschmidt farm, would allow access to the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad. PURPOSE & PROCEDURE The purpose of this investigation was to determine the extent of regulated wetlands within the proposed characterization pad sites, Beilschmidt Road improvement areas, and areas affected by the improvement and extension of an existing farm access road. The wetlands investigation was conducted in conformation with the guidelines found in the Corps’ Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987). The following tasks have been completed and the results are reported below: • Using available reference materials determine the presence of previously identified wetland hydrology, hydric soils, and/or hydrophytic vegetation. • Perform a field survey to ground-truth data gathered through available references. Preliminary Data Collection & Review Prior to conducting the wetland determination, the following resources were reviewed: US Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map The National Wetland Inventory (NWI) map data (USFWS 2011) for the project site were examined to obtain a preliminary estimate of potential wetlands occurring at the proposed power plant site, related new construction areas, and the region of influence. Given that wetland identification criteria differ between the US Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the Corps, wetlands shown on a NWI map may not be under the jurisdiction of the Corps. Similarly, jurisdictional wetlands may not always be identified on NWI maps. Consequently, wetland presence based on NWI maps alone cannot be assumed to be an accurate assessment of jurisdiction. USGS Topographic Map The project site was superimposed on the corresponding topographic map (updated in 1990) (Microsoft 2011). These maps indicate topography, land use, water bodies, drainage ways, and other basic information pertinent to the project area. Of obvious importance for wetland research is the topographic and hydrologic information available on USGS map. National Cooperative Soil Survey Soils maps from the National Cooperative Soil Survey website (NCSS 2011) were examined to determine the characteristics of soils at the project site. County hydric soils lists from Morgan County were also reviewed prior to fieldwork. Field Survey Pedestrian surveys for jurisdictional wetlands and protected species were conducted on the subject property on April 27, 2011. Surveys were performed by Specialized Ecological Services’ Consulting Ecologist, Robert Rinella. Vegetation identification was performed by Specialized Ecological Services' Senior Botanist, James Lang. Qualifications are provided in Attachment A. Wetland field investigations were performed based on the guidelines of the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987). The manual recommends a minimum of three transects through a project area aligned perpendicular to the longest axis. In this case, three transects were aligned perpendicular to the western border of both the Beilschimdt and Hoagland Characterization Pads. For the areas affected by improvements to Beilschmidt Road, the entire length of each area was traversed. Similarly, the entire length of the farm access road and its proposed extension were traversed. Because the ground cover of these areas was primarily agricultural weeds and pasture grass and because the areas' widths are limited, it was possible to observe any variance in habitat type while walking the length of the corridors. Within the proposed characterization pad sites, sample plots were established at each vegetation community along the transects. Routine Wetland Determination Data Forms were completed to characterize the jurisdictional wetland areas and adjacent uplands (Attachment B). At these locations, vegetation, hydrologic indicators, and soil conditions were recorded. In related areas affected by improvements to Beilschmidt Road and by the improvement and extension of an existing farm access road, Routine Wetland Determination Data Forms were completed for each vegetation community encountered. Vegetation Plant identifications and nomenclature were based on Flora of Missouri (Steyermark 1963).  The USFWS wetland indicator status of species follows Reed (1988). Soils Site-specific data were examined to determine the characteristics of soils of the project area. A Munsell soil color chart (Munsell Soil 1975) was used to describe soil color and other significant characteristics. Field observations were used to verify mapped soils survey information. Hydrology During field investigations, hydrologic indicators were observed and used to verify reference data shown on NWI maps, USGS topographic maps, soils surveys, and other sources. Specific field indicators may include, but are not limited to: inundation, saturation, watermarks, drift lines, sediment deposits, and water-stained leaves.  FutureGen  –  Morgan County 8 Wetland Delineation RESULTS Preliminary Data Collection & Review US Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map Review of the National Wetland Inventory (NWI) map (USFWS 2011) revealed only those wetland areas associated with Indian Creek. These are all well outside the project area. NWI and USGS topographic maps are provided in Attachment C. USGS Topographic Map USGS topographic maps revealed the presence of an unnamed tributary to Indian Creek located on the eastern border of the Beilschmidt Property. This tributary is mapped flowing north across the Beilschmidt farm. This waterway is outside the project area; approximately 300 feet east of the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad boundary. National Cooperative Soil Survey Soils maps (NCSS 2011) show several soil types in the proposed project area. The soil map and county hydric soils list are included in Attachment D.  None of the soils associated with either the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad or Hoagland Characterization Pad are listed as hydric. A portion of of the Hoagland Characterization Pad site contains Clarksdale silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes which may contain hydric listed Virden soils in depressions.  None of the soils associated with Beilschmidt Road improvements are listed as hydric. A small area of the farm access road is mapped with a Sable Silty Clay Loam. This soil type is listed as hydric. Another portion of the farm access road is mapped with Ipava silt loam, 0 to 2 percent slopes. Ipava silt loam may contain hydric listed Denny, Sable, or Virden soils in depressions.  Field Survey Vegetation The Beilschmidt Characterization Pad supports a single vegetation community, agricultural row crops. The Hoagland Characterization Pad supports pasture composed of cool season grasses and common weeds. Project areas associated with improvements to Beilschmidt Road support cool-season grasses and weeds common in road right-of-way. The project areas associated with the improvement and extension of the existing farm access road contain primarily cool-season grasses and common weeds, but also areas of agricultural row crop.    Agricultural Row Crop This terrestrial community type is most common throughout the project area. In season, it would be planted in agricultural row crops. During field observations, there were no cultivated species present.  Only bare soil and common agricultural weeds were observed. Common species observed include Barbarea vulgaris, Capsella bursa-pastoris, Conium maculatum, Erigeron canadensis, Lamium amplexicaule, Rananculus abortivus, and Stellaria media. Grassed Pasture and Road Right-of-Way This terrestrial community was observed at the Hoagland Characterization Pad, along Beilschmidt Road, and along the farm access road. Various grasses (Festuca arundinaceae, Phalaris arundinacea, Setaria spp.) and broadleaf weeds (Barbarea vulgaris, Lamium amplexicaule, Rumex chrispus, Taraxacum officinale, and Thalaspia arvense) were the dominant herbaceous species.  No woody species were observed. Soils The soils observed coincide with those soils shown in the soil survey maps. The native vegetation of the majority of the project site would have been a mix of tall-grass prairie and deciduous hardwoods. Hydrology Indian Creek and its unnamed tributaries drain all areas of the proposed project site westward into the Illinois River. The Illinois River terminates in the Mississippi River. Summary of Jurisdictional Areas No  jurisdictional wetlands were observed within the project area. FutureGen  –  Morgan County 10 Wetland Delineation DISCUSSION The impact of proposed FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc project was evaluated for the presence of jurisdictional wetlands and other U.S. waters during April and May 2011 by Specialized Ecological Services. This work was conducted using the standards of practice for wetland delineation. No jurisdictional wetlands were observed in the study area. As proposed, the actions of this project should not have impacts to wetlands or require wetland fill permits. LIMITS OF RESEARCH As Cowardin et al. (1979) point out, “there is no single, correct, indisputable, ecologically sound definition for wetlands, primarily because of the diversity of wetlands and because the demarcation between dry and wet environments lies along a continuum.” Wetlands, by their nature are dynamic systems. A single field investigation cannot possibly enable any investigator to have an absolutely complete understanding of the complex ecological interactions and components of a site. However, by combining information collected from many sources at many different times, a clearer understanding is attainable. The results and conclusions of this investigation represent the integration of all information and data currently available. Literature and map data were combined with on-site reconnaissance to assure that this report is complete, comprehensive, and accurately reflects conditions at the subject property. Although every effort has been made to conduct this study according to the current standards of practice and to present the results clearly and completely, a one time sampling effort can only depict a ‘snap-shot’ of the complex biological, chemical, and ecological conditions at the study site. Sufficient support can be drawn from this sampling effort and associated analytical results, as well as from the scientific literature, for the discussion and conclusions provided herein. LITERATURE CITED 20 ILCS 830.  1989.  Inter agency Wetland Policy Act of 1989.  Illinois Public Act 86-157. 615 ILCS 5.  1994.  Illinois Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act.  Illinois Public Act 86-1324. Buol, S. W., and R. A. Rebertus. 1988. “Soil Formation Under Hydromorphic Conditions.” In The ecology and Management of Wetlands, Vol. 1: Ecology of Wetlands. pp 253-262. Timber Press, Portland, Oregon. Cowardin, L.M., V. Carter, F.C. Golet, and E.T. La Roe. 1979. “Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States.” FWS/OBS-79/31. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, Office of Biological Services, Washington, D.C. Environmental Laboratory. 1987. “Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual.” Technical Report Y-87-1. U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station. Vicksburg, MS. Hutchinson, G. E. 1975. Limnological Botany. A Treatise on Limnology. John Wiley and Sons.  New York. Megonigal, J. P., W. H. Patrick, Jr., and S. P. Faulkner. “Wetland Identification in Seasonally Flooded Forest Soils: Soil Morphology and Redox Dynamics.” Soil Science Society of America Journal.  57(1):140-149. Mohlenbrock, R. H. 1986. Guide to the Vascular Flora of Illinois. Southern Illinois University. 507p. Munsell Color.  1975.  Munsell Soil Color Charts.  Kollmorgan Corporation.  Baltimore, MD. National Cooperative Soil Service (NCSS). 2011. “NCSS Web Soil Survey.” Accessed May 1, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (last updated November 11, 2009). Reed, P.B., Jr. 1988. “National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: National Summary.” U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Biological Report 88(24). U.S. Government Printing Office.  Washington, D.C. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 1991. National List of Hydric Soils. National Technical Committee on Hydric Soils, US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Taft, J. B., G. S. Wilhelm, D. M. Ladd, and L. A. Masters. 1997. “Floristic Quality Assessment for Vegetation in Illinois, a Method for Assessing Vegetation Integrity.” Erigenia. 15:195. Microsoft. 2011. Microsoft Research Web Site. Accessed May 3, 2011 at http://msrmaps.com/default.aspx (last updated May 3, 2011). U.S. Department of Agriculture – Soil Conservation Service. 1975. Soil Taxonomy. Agriculture Handbook Number 436. U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, D.C. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2011. Wetlands Online Mapper. Accessed May 3, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Data/Mapper.html (last updated March 29, 2011). ATTACHMENT A:  WETLAND DELINEATOR QUALIFICATIONS Bob Rinella, Environmental Professional and Wetland Ecologist, Specialized Ecological Services. Three years with Southern Illinois University Cooperative Wildlife Research Laboratory, fifteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eighteen (18) years experience with environmental research including wetlands, plant biology, wildlife biology, and environmental planning. Master of Science in Environmental Studies at Southern Illinois University,  Bachelor of Science in Biology at Jacksonville University. James Lang, PhD., Senior Botanist, Specialized Ecological Services. Twenty five (25) years with Greenville College, thirteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Over thirty five (35) years experience with plant biology and endangered species research. Doctorate in Botany at Iowa University, Master of Science in Botany and Bachelor of Arts in Science at University of Arkansas. Eric Ahern, Environmental Technician, Specialized Ecological Services. Two years with Zahniser Institute for Environmental Studies, nine years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eleven (11) years experience in environmental research including lacustrine water quality studies, wetland restoration, and GIS/GPS mapping. Master of Science in Education at University of Phoenix  and Bachelor of Arts in Biology at Greenville College. ATTACHMENT B:  WETLAND DATA FORMS ATTACHMENT C:  NWI AERIALAND USGS TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS   National Wetland Inventory Map (USFWS 2011). FutureGen  –  Morgan County C-1 Wetland Delineation USGS Topograpic Map (updated in 1990) (Microsoft 2011). FutureGen  –  Morgan County C-2 Wetland Delineation ATTACHMENT D:  PROJECT SOILS MAP AND HYDRIC SOILS OF MORGAN COUNTY APPENDIX D3 ADDENDUM PRELIMINARY JURISDICTIONAL DETERMINATION AND WETLANDS DELINEATION FOR THE PROPOSED FUTUREGEN DEVELOPMENT (STRATIGRAPHIC WELL) INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK INTRODUCTION This addendum updates an investigation of wetland concerns related to proposed construction of FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. facilities near Jacksonville, Illinois. Our previous investigation, dated 25 May 2011, included two possible characterization pad areas (the Beilschmidt Property and the Hoagland Property), several truck pull-offs and road modifications on Beilschmidt Road, and widening and extending an existing farm access road. The project plan was recently modified to accommodate a temporary water line extending from Beilschmidt Road southward to the Beilschmidt characterization pad. Project Description The temporary waterline will begin just outside an existing water meter located south Beilschmidt Road approximately 3,250 feet west of County Road 123. An existing pipe has been stubbed out of the meter pit and is extending out of the ground. Above ground, the temporary waterline will be connected to the stub with a valve and a backflow preventer. The temporary water line will then extended approximately 3,077 feet southward on the grass surface immediately east of the agriculture field. Immediately east of the drilling pad the piping will turn westward into the agricultural field and extend to the pad where a second valve will be placed. In areas where the grass strip between the edge of cultivation and the top of the bank of the drainage ditch is greater than 10 feet a low ground pressure single seat all terrain vehicle will be used to transport pipe, fittings, and other necessary items. In other areas all materials will be hand carried. The water line will be either “Lay Flat Hose” or Schedule 40 PVC pipe. In either case, the pipeline will be staked with bent rebar or wooden stakes in order to keep the water line in place. Upon completion of the drilling operations the temporary water line, valves, backflow preventer and staking will be completely removed from site. No above-ground piping will remain. The only subsurface disturbance will be at the meter where the section of piping extending upwards from the pit will be cut off and capped below ground. STUDY AREA Temporary Water Supply to Beilschmidt Characterization Pad The temporary waterline will extend southward from an existing water meter located on the south side of Beilschmidt Road to the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad; a distance of approximately 3,077 feet. Activities related to the placement of this water line will affect the grass buffer zone immediately east of the agriculture field. The vegetation of this area is dominated by cool-season grass. Common weeds and trees are present but not prevalent. PURPOSE & PROCEDURE Pedestrian survey for the area described in this Addendum was completed on 1 June 2011 by Specialized Ecological Services’ personnel, Robert Rinella and James Lang and Patrick Engineering's, Jeff Deckard. As recommended by the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory 1987) the entire length of the proposed water supply pipeline was traversed. Sample plots were established at each vegetation community type. Each community type was characterized using Routine Wetland Determination Data Forms (Attachment A). Because the ground cover of the area was primarily pasture grass with common weeds and and because the area's width is limited, it was possible to observe any variance in vegetation community type while walking the length of the area. Otherwise, the purpose and procedure of this research are identical to that described in our original report, dated 25 May 2011. RESULTS Preliminary Data Collection & Review National Wetland Inventory maps, USGS topographic map, and soils surveys used for this research are identical to those described in our original report, dated 25 May 2011. US Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Map No new data. USGS Topographic Map No new data. National Cooperative Soil Survey Now new data. Field Survey Vegetation The temporary water line area-of-impact supports a grassed buffer zone composed of cool season grasses and common weeds.  Trees are also intermittently present. Grassed  Buffer Zone Tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea) is the most common species. All other species are present with clumped distribution. Other common herbaceous species include various grasses (Phalaris arundinacea, Setaria spp.) and broadleaf weeds (Solidago gigantea, Conium maculatum, Cirsium vulgare, Impatiens capensis, Ambrosia trifida, Thalaspi arvense). Woody species are present as isolated individuals or in small groupings (2-10 individuals). Common tree species include Maclura pomifera, Morus rubra and Gleditsia triacanthos. Soils The soils observed coincide with those soils shown in the soil survey maps. The native vegetation of the project site would have been tall-grass prairie. Hydrology No new data. Summary of Jurisdictional Areas No  jurisdictional wetlands were observed within the project area. DISCUSSION The impact of proposed FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc project was evaluated for the presence of jurisdictional wetlands and other U.S. waters during early-June 2011 by Specialized Ecological Services. This work was conducted using the standards of practice for wetland delineation. No jurisdictional wetlands were observed in the study area. As proposed, the actions of this project should not impact wetlands or require wetland fill permits. Although the non-jurisdictional grassed buffer is typically more than 10 feet wide, it is approximately 5 feet wide (between the tilled ground and the top of the unnamed tributary channel) at its thinnest point. Construction activity should be restricted to that smallest width to protect the integrity of the tributary channel. The grassed buffer is not jurisdictional wetland and its vegetation is not sensitive; however, this area does act as an important barrier, protecting the waterway. Construction impacts should be minimized. Materials could be hand delivered or delivered on a low ground pressure single seat all-terrain vehicle without adversely impacting the vegetation in this area. LITERATURE CITED Environmental Laboratory. 1987. “Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual.” Technical Report Y-87-1. U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station. Vicksburg, MS. National Cooperative Soil Service (NCSS). 2011. “NCSS Web Soil Survey.” Accessed June 1, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (last updated November 11, 2009). Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 1991. National List of Hydric Soils. National Technical Committee on Hydric Soils, US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Microsoft. 2011. Microsoft Research Web Site. Accessed May 3, 2011 at http://msrmaps.com/default.aspx (last updated May 3, 2011). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2011. Wetlands Online Mapper. Accessed May 3, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Data/Mapper.html (last updated March 29, 2011). ATTACHMENT A:  WETLAND DATAFORMS APPENDIX E Biological Surveys E1 – An Investigation for Illinois Chorus Frogs (Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis) and Possible Impacts E2 – An Investigation of Potential Habitat for Regal Fritillary Butterfly (Speyeria idalia) E3 – Protected Species Survey for Proposed FutureGen Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower E4 – Protected Species Survey for Proposed FutureGen Development (Stratigraphic Well) for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX E1 AN INVESTIGATION FOR ILLINOIS CHORUS FROGS, Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis AND POSSIBLE IMPACTS FOR THE FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT/ MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER MORGAN COUNTY ILLINOIS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK AN INVESTIGATION FOR  ILLINOIS CHORUS FROGS, Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis AND POSSIBLE IMPACTS  FOR THE  FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT/ MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER MORGAN COUNTY ILLINOIS July 2012 Vernon L. LaGesse Jr. 1619 S. Pasfield Springfield, IL 62704 Illinois Chorus Frog.  Photo by: Chris Young, State Journal Register 1|Page PROJECT The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The FutureGen Project is a public-private partnership, with costs shared by DOE, the FutureGen Industrial Alliance (Alliance), and other project partners. The Project consists of the repowering of an existing electricity generator with clean coal technologies integrated with a pipeline that would transport carbon dioxide (CO2) to a sequestration site where it would be injected and stored in a deep geologic formation. As currently envisioned, the Alliance would be responsible for constructing and operating an advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at the Meredosia Energy Center in west central Illinois, which is currently owned by Ameren Energy Resources. A concentrated and compressed CO2 stream produced in the process would be transferred to a pipeline for transmission to the Alliance’s proposed storage location located approximately 30 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center. Historic occurrences of the Illinois Chorus Frog (ICF), Pseudacris streckeri illinoensis, were known to be in the proposed project area.  To document where ICFs did occur, this study was conducted to assist in any future permitting required for the FutureGen Project.  This report addresses both the energy center and the CO2 pipeline and storage portions of the FutureGen Project. PROJECT LOCATIONS The Meredosia Energy Center lies just south of the Village of Meredosia, Illinois. The proposed CO2 pipeline from the power plant to the proposed CO2 storage site  cross the east side of the Illinois River Valley heading across to the bluff line and across central Morgan County in Illinois. The ICF study area for the FutureGen Project is located within the Illinois/Mississippi Sand Areas Natural Division and portions of the Grand Prairie Natural Division (IDNR 2005).  The sand prairies of Meredosia, Illinois are some of the most southerly sand prairies in Illinois.  For this report, only the Illinois River Valley, the east bluff-line and the upland area along Illinois Route 67 to areas around Chaplin, Illinois were surveyed. The remainder of the proposed pipeline route would not be located within ICF habitat and thus is outside of the ICF study area. MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER The Meredosia Energy Center is located just south of the Village of Meredosia, Illinois and covers 263-acres along the east side of the Illinois River.  The features of the plant include a power plant, coal stock pile areas, cinder areas, and settling pools.  The plant area includes approximately 72-acres of degraded sand prairie.  PIPELINE Outside the energy center fence-line, a study area was identified along the proposed pipeline alignment for 10-miles, from the Meredosia Energy Center entrance, through the floodplain, and along the proposed pipeline alignment east to areas near Chaplin, Illinois.  Also, all ICF Habitat Model sites within 3-miles of this study area were monitored. ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG (ICF) The Illinois Chorus Frog is a small early spring resident of central Illinois in areas that have sandy soils.  ICFs found near Meredosia, Illinois are currently known as Pseudacris streckeri 2|Page illinoensis, a locally found subspecies that is listed as threatened in Illinois, under the endangered species act.  The frogs use sand prairies and remnants such as agricultural fields and waste areas as habitat.  They burrow in sand and emerge after heavy early spring rains to breed in nearby flooded fields, ditches and other vernal pools, then they return under the sand (Phillips 1999). ICF SURVEY METHODS Nocturnal audible surveys were conducted in March 2012, to determine the presence/absence of Illinois Chorus Frogs within the project boundaries. Surveys started after 19:30 hours on evenings with air temperatures over 50 degrees Fahrenheit, during times ICF’s were known to be out calling.  A known ICF reference site (Illinois Sands Area) was also monitored to confirm that ICFs were calling within this same region of Illinois.  For this study, areas south of Beardstown were used as the reference site. Surveys were conducted by automobile, by driving to each location, turning the automobile off and listen for breeding frogs calling.  Weather, temperature, time, and frog results were recorded from each survey point for this investigation. Survey points were laid out during daylight hours to locate possible ICF habitat and to confirm the ICF Habitat Model (IDNR 2009) locations (See Map #1).  The ICF Habitat Model was created by Illinois Department of Natural Resources in 2008 and 2009.  It is based on the presence of small ponds and hydric sandy soils and on the occurrence of a wet spring weather pattern. On the Meredosia Energy Center site, ten survey points were established: three along the Illinois River, two along the northern settling pond, and four along the east side of the plant (See Map #2) where the pipeline is to be located, to monitor for calling ICFs.   Along the proposed pipeline route, 30 survey points were established and monitored.  These included surrounding ICF Habitat Model areas and opportunistic points along 10-miles of the proposed pipeline alignment back through to the town of Chaplin on Illinois Route 67 (See Map #3 and 4). RESULTS Surveys were conducted on the evenings of 15, 19, 23 & 24 March 2012.  Only three species of amphibians were heard calling during this investigation.  The Plains Leopard Frog, Rana blairi was heard calling from the Illinois River.  The American Toad, Bufo americanus, and the Western Chorus Frog, Pseudacris triserrata, were heard calling from the very southern settling pond and from a small creek (points 29) north of Chaplin.   No ICFs were documented during this survey, including within the ICF Habitat Model zones. This is possibly due to high temperatures and drought conditions present this spring.  All historic occurrences occur within the predicted ICF Habitat Model zones.  The ICF Habitat model shows no potential habitat to be impacted along the alignment except for P-133.  I believe this is a slight mapping error and P-133 should be connected to the settling pool on the plant.  Also within this survey, all ICF Habitat Model areas that could be driven to, were investigated for a three-mile buffer of the Meredosia Energy Center and the first 10 miles of the proposed CO2 pipeline route.  One perceived flaw in the ICF Habitat Model is that it does not consider roadside or agricultural ditch habitat.  There is one potential ICF Habitat east of the Meredosia Energy Center along Yeck Road.  There is a small agricultural ditch south of where Yeck Road curves north. It did not 3|Page have much water present this spring, but during a wet year, this would be a possible breeding pool. Two other ICF investigators from IDNR have monitored that same ditch for the past two years and had negative results for the presence of ICF’s (Personal conversation with Eric Golden 2012). DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS No ICFs were documented in this survey.  The closest active breeding pool observed during this survey is located south of Beardstown, Illinois, which is over 12 miles away from the study area.   As for P-133, I do not believe it to have proper ICF habitat because of its lack of any wetland vegetation or sandy soils. No other habitat was observed on the Meredosia Energy Center site, the proposed pipeline alignment, or the bluffs on the east side of the Illinois River Valley.).  More ICF monitoring may be required if there is a wet spring before or during construction to reconfirm the absence of any ICF impacts. LITERATURE CITED IDNR. 2005.  Illinois Wildlife Action Plan.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources. Springfield, IL.  IDNR. 2008. Illinois Chorus Frog Habitat Model.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Springfield, IL. Phillips, C.A., R. A. Brandan, and E. O Mall.  1999.  Field Guide of Amphibians and Reptiles of Illinois,  Illinois Natural History Survey, Manual #8, 300pp. APPENDIXES 4|Page MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG DATA SHEET LaGesse & Associates Inc.  2012DATE: __3-15-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse____________________________ Survey #  North  West   ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Weather  Samp-1  39-49.28.40N  90-33.54.83W  NEG  77  19:49  Light rain  Samp-2  39-49.28.08N  90-33.57.99W  NEG  77  19:52  LF  Samp-3  39-49.20.55N  90-34.08.11W  NEG  74  19:56  Light winds  Samp-4  39-49.14.62N  90-34.18.45W  P133  NEG  74  20:01  Light winds  Samp-5  39-49.09.65N  90-34.18.44W  P133  NEG  74  20:06  WC  Samp-6  39-49.09.03N  90-34.10.61W  NEG  74  20:10  Light winds  Samp-7  39-49.07.42N  90-34.05.14W  NEG  74  20:14  Light winds  Samp-8  39-49.04.04N  90-33.47.86W  NEG  74  20:18  Light winds  Samp-9  39-49.14.42N  90-33.44.09W  NEG  74  20:23  Light winds  Samp-10  39.49.18.05N  90-33-45.55W  NEG  74  20:27  Calm  DATE: __3-19-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse____________________________ Survey #  North  West   ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Weather  Samp-1  39-49.28.40N  90-33.54.83W  NEG  77  20:05  Light winds  Samp-2  39-49.28.08N  90-33.57.99W  NEG  77  20:11  AT  Samp-3  39-49.20.55N  90-34.08.11W  NEG  77  20:16  Light winds  Samp-4  39-49.14.62N  90-34.18.45W  P133  NEG  77  20:21  Light winds  Samp-5  39-49.09.65N  90-34.18.44W  P133  NEG  77  20:35  WC  Samp-6  39-49.09.03N  90-34.10.61W  NEG  77  20:40  Windy  Samp-7  39-49.07.42N  90-34.05.14W  NEG  77  20:44  Windy  Samp-8  39-49.04.04N  90-33.47.86W  NEG  77  20:49  Windy  Samp-9  39-49.14.42N  90-33.44.09W  NEG  77  20:54  Windy  Samp-10  39.49.18.05N  90-33-45.55W  NEG  77  21:00  Windy  DATE: __3-24-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse____________________________ Survey #  North  West  ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Comments  Samp-1  39-49.28.40N  90-33.54.83W  NEG  68  19:50  Light breeze  Samp-2  39-49.28.08N  90-33.57.99W  NEG  68  19:55  Light breeze  Samp-3  39-49.20.55N  90-34.08.11W  NEG  68  20:00  Light breeze  Samp-4  39-49.14.62N  90-34.18.45W  P133  NEG  68  20:05  Light breeze  Samp-5  39-49.09.65N  90-34.18.44W  P133  NEG  68  20:10  Light breeze  Samp-6  39-49.09.03N  90-34.10.61W  NEG  68  20:15  Light breeze  Samp-7  39-49.07.42N  90-34.05.14W  NEG  68  20:20  Light breeze  Samp-8  39-49.04.04N  90-33.47.86W  NEG  68  20:25  Light breeze  Samp-9  39-49.14.42N  90-33.44.09W  NEG  68  20:30  Light breeze  Samp-10  39.49.18.05N  90-33.45.55W  NEG  68  20:35  Light breeze  WC=Western Chorus, AT=American Toad, LF Plains Leopard Frog 5|Page ALLIANCE PIPELINE ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG SURVEY DATA SHEET ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG DATA SHEET LaGesse & Associates Inc. 2012 DATE: __3-15-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse Survey #  North  West  ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Comments  1  39-49.27.21N  90-33.40.85W  NEG  76  20:42  Light winds  2  39-49.10.13N  90-33.39.63W  P132  NEG  76  20:44  Light winds  3  39-48.54.82N  90-33.39.32W  NEG  76  20:46  Light winds  4  39-48.24.26N  90-33.38,11W  P129  NEG  73  20:49  Light winds  5  39-47.24.06N  90-33.19.09W  P124  NEG  67  22:25  Light winds  6  39-48.55.10N  90-33.17.85W  NEG  73  20:52  Light winds  7  39-48.55.48N  90-33.08.18W  NEG  73  20:54  Light winds  8  39-48.54.89N  90-32.38.80W  Ditch  NEG  73  20:57  Light winds  9  39-49.07.63N  90-32.25.75W  NEG  74  20:59  Light winds  10  39-49.20.85N  90-32.23.26W  HS18  NEG  74  21:01  Light winds  11  39-49.07.52N  90-32.05.61W  NEG  74  21:03  Light winds  12  39-49.07.47N  90-31.28.11W  NEG  74  21:05  Light winds  13  39-49.06.86N  90-31.01.86W  Creek  NEG  72  21:07  Light winds  14  39-48.59.46N  90-30.53.92W  NEG  72  21:09  Light winds  15  39-48.54.60N  90-30.32.20W  HW100  NEG  72  21:11  Light winds  16  39-48.49.44N  90-30.34.85W  NEG  71  21:13  Light winds  17  39-48.45.15N  90-30.35.71W  NEG  71  21:15  Light winds  18  39-48.27.97N  90-30.42.75W  P128  NEG  70  21:17  Light winds  19  39-48.20.92N  90-30.48.27W  P127  NEG  70  21:20  Light winds  20  39-50.25.23N  90-30.55.35W  P135  NEG  67  21:29  Light winds  21  39-49.57.35N  90-29.40.10W  HS12  NEG  68  21:36  Light winds  22  39-48.39.9N  90-30.13.44W  NEG  68  21:42  Light winds  23  39-48.08.75N  90-29.44.03W  NEG  69  21:46  Light winds  24  39-47.54.43N  90-29.12.93W  NEG  70  21:49  Light winds  25  39-47.37.97N  90-27.30.43W  NEG  70  21:51  Light winds  26  39-47.20.18N  90-26.42.54W  NEG  69  21:53  Light winds  27  39-47.16.84N  90-47.16.84W  NEG  66  21:55  Light winds  28  39-47.16.71N  90-25.22.45W  NEG  65  21:58  Light winds  29  39-47.19.10N  90-25.10.79W  NEG  65  22:00  Light winds  30  39-47.10.31N  90-24.17.45W  NEG  65  22:15  Light winds  COMMENTS: 6|Page ALLIANCE PIPELINE ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG SURVEY DATA SHEET ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG DATA SHEET LaGesse & Associates Inc. 2012 DATE: __3-19-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse Survey #  North  West  ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Comments  1  39-49.27.21N  90-33.40.85W  NEG  77  21:05  Windy  2  39-49.10.13N  90-33.39.63W  P132  NEG  77  21:08  Windy  3  39-48.54.82N  90-33.39.32W  NEG  77  21:10  Windy  4  39-48.24.26N  90-33.38,11W  P129  NEG  74  21:13  Windy  5  39-47.24.06N  90-33.19.09W  P124  NEG  74  21:34  Windy  6  39-48.55.10N  90-33.17.85W  NEG  76  21:16  Windy  7  39-48.55.48N  90-33.08.18W  NEG  77  21:18  Windy  8  39-48.54.89N  90-32.38.80W  Ditch  NEG  78  21:20  Windy  9  39-49.07.63N  90-32.25.75W  NEG  78  21:23  Windy  10  39-49.20.85N  90-32.23.26W  HS18  NEG  78  21:25  Windy  11  39-49.07.52N  90-32.05.61W  NEG  74  21:40  Windy  12  39-49.07.47N  90-31.28.11W  NEG  74  21:43  Windy  13  39-49.06.86N  90-31.01.86W  Creek  NEG  76  21:45  Windy  14  39-48.59.46N  90-30.53.92W  NEG  76  21:47  Windy  15  39-48.54.60N  90-30.32.20W  HW100  NEG  75  21:49  Windy  16  39-48.49.44N  90-30.34.85W  NEG  75  21:51  Windy  17  39-48.45.15N  90-30.35.71W  NEG  75  21:53  Windy  18  39-48.27.97N  90-30.42.75W  P128  NEG  73  21:56  Windy  19  39-48.20.92N  90-30.48.27W  P127  NEG  73  21:59  Windy  20  39-50.25.23N  90-30.55.35W  P135  NEG  73  22:05  Windy  21  39-49.57.35N  90-29.40.10W  HS12  NEG  74  22:17  Windy  22  39-48.39.9N  90-30.13.44W  NEG  73  22:20  Windy  23  39-48.08.75N  90-29.44.03W  NEG  73  22:22  Windy  24  39-47.54.43N  90-29.12.93W  NEG  73  22:25  Windy  25  39-47.37.97N  90-27.30.43W  NEG  73  22:28  WC  26  39-47.20.18N  90-26.42.54W  NEG  72  22:30  Windy  27  39-47.16.84N  90-47.16.84W  NEG  71  22:33  Windy  28  39-47.16.71N  90-25.22.45W  NEG  71  22:38  WC  29  39-47.19.10N  90-25.10.79W  NEG  71  22:40  WC, AT  30  39-47.10.31N  90-24.17.45W  NEG  71  22:45  Windy  COMMENTS:  WC= WESTERN CHORUS FROG, AT= AMERICAN TOAD 7|Page ALLIANCE PIPELINE ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG SURVEY DATA SHEET ILLINOIS CHORUS FROG DATA SHEET LaGesse & Associates Inc. 2012 DATE: __3-23-2012______ INVESTIGATORS: ___V. LaGesse Survey #  North  West  ICF HAB #  ICF +/-  Temp  Time  Comments  1  39-49.27.21N  90-33.40.85W  NEG  58  20:41  Calm  2  39-49.10.13N  90-33.39.63W  P132  NEG  58  20:43  Calm  3  39-48.54.82N  90-33.39.32W  NEG  60  20:45  Calm  4  39-48.24.26N  90-33.38,11W  P129  NEG  60  20:49  Calm  5  39-47.24.06N  90-33.19.09W  P124  NEG  55  20:52  Calm  6  39-48.55.10N  90-33.17.85W  NEG  59  20:54  Calm  7  39-48.55.48N  90-33.08.18W  NEG  54  20:56  Calm  8  39-48.54.89N  90-32.38.80W  Ditch  NEG  54  20:58  Calm  9  39-49.07.63N  90-32.25.75W  NEG  54  21:00  Calm  10  39-49.20.85N  90-32.23.26W  HS18  NEG  54  21:02  Calm  11  39-49.07.52N  90-32.05.61W  NEG  55  21:04  Calm  12  39-49.07.47N  90-31.28.11W  NEG  55  21:06  Calm  13  39-49.06.86N  90-31.01.86W  Creek  NEG  55  21:08  Calm  14  39-48.59.46N  90-30.53.92W  NEG  55  21:10  Calm  15  39-48.54.60N  90-30.32.20W  HW100  NEG  55  21:12  Calm  16  39-48.49.44N  90-30.34.85W  NEG  55  21:17  Calm  17  39-48.45.15N  90-30.35.71W  NEG  52  21:30  Calm  18  39-48.27.97N  90-30.42.75W  P128  NEG  53  21:36  Calm  19  39-48.20.92N  90-30.48.27W  P127  NEG  54  21:38  Calm  20  39-50.25.23N  90-30.55.35W  P135  NEG  55  21:40  Calm  21  39-49.57.35N  90-29.40.10W  HS12  NEG  55  21:42  Calm  22  39-48.39.9N  90-30.13.44W  NEG  56  21:44  Calm  23  39-48.08.75N  90-29.44.03W  NEG  55  21:46  Calm  24  39-47.54.43N  90-29.12.93W  NEG  55  21:48  Calm  25  39-47.37.97N  90-27.30.43W  NEG  56  21:50  Calm  26  39-47.20.18N  90-26.42.54W  NEG  56  21:52  Calm  27  39-47.16.84N  90-47.16.84W  NEG  53  21:54  Calm  28  39-47.16.71N  90-25.22.45W  NEG  51  21:58  Calm  29  39-47.19.10N  90-25.10.79W  NEG  51  21:59  WC, AT  30  39-47.10.31N  90-24.17.45W  NEG  52  22:02  Calm  COMMENTS:  WC=WESTERN CHORUS FROG, AT=AMERICAN TOAD 8|Page 9|Page 10|Page 11|Page 12|Page APPENDIX E2 AN INVESTIGATION OF POTENTIAL HABITAT FOR REGAL FRITILLARY BUTTERFLY Speyeria idalia FUTUREGEN / MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER PROJECT MORGAN COUNTY ILLINOIS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK An Investigation of Potential Habitat for Regal Fritillary Butterfly Speyeria idalia Futuregen / Meredosia Energy Center Project Morgan County Illinois July 1, 2012 Vernon L. LaGesse Jr. 1619 S. Pasfield Springfield, IL 62704 Female regal fritillary butterfly-Meredosia Energy Center 2012, Photo by: Vern LaGesse Contents 1.0 Project ................................................................................................................................. 1 2.0 Project Locations ................................................................................................................. 2 2.1 Meredosia Energy Center ........................................................................................... 2 2.2 Pipeline........................................................................................................................ 2 3.0 Regal Fritallary Butterfly ...................................................................................................... 3 3.1 Introduction-Regal Fritillary Butterfly ........................................................................... 3 3.2 Natural History of the Regal Fritillary........................................................................... 3 3.3 Adult Regal Fritillary Census Report-(Coming in September) ..................................... 4 4.0 Violet Population Survey Methods ....................................................................................... 5 4.1 Results – Violet Population Study ............................................................................... 5 4.2 Larval Habitat on Meredosia Energy Center/Pipeline Properties ................................ 7 5.0 Johnny Jump-Up Investigation............................................................................................ 8 5.1 Methods ....................................................................................................................... 8 5.2 Results – Johnny Jump-Up Investigation .................................................................... 8 6.0 Astragalus distortus, Bent-Leave Milk Vetch ....................................................................... 9 7.0 Discussions ....................................................................................................................... 11 7.1 Recommendations .................................................................................................... 11 7.2 Acknowledgments ..................................................................................................... 11 8.0 Literature Cited .................................................................................................................. 12 Appendix A – Maps ................................................................................................................... A-1 Appendix B – Butterflies Observed During Regal Study 2012.................................................. B-1 Appendix C – Violet Data .......................................................................................................... C-1 1.0 Project The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is preparing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the FutureGen 2.0 Project. The FutureGen Project is a public-private partnership, with costs shared by DOE, the FutureGen Industrial Alliance (Alliance), and other project partners. The Project consists of the repowering of an existing electricity generator with clean coal technologies integrated with a pipeline that would transport carbon dioxide (CO2) to a sequestration site where it would be injected and stored in a deep geologic formation. As currently envisioned, the Alliance would be responsible for constructing and operating an advanced oxy-combustion system to repower an existing steam turbine generator (Unit 4) at the Meredosia Energy Center (MEC) in west-central Illinois, which is currently owned by Ameren Energy Resources. A concentrated and compressed CO2 stream produced in the process would be transferred to a pipeline for transmission to the Alliance’s proposed storage location located approximately 30 miles east of the Meredosia Energy Center. Historic occurrences of the Illinois state threatened regal fritillary butterfly, Speyeria idalia, (Drury), have been recorded in the Illinois River Valley in the vicinity of the proposed project.  This study was conducted to document the occurrence of the regal fritillary and potential habitat within the project area and to assist in any future permitting required for the FutureGen project.  The investigation also documented occurrences of state listed species within the project area.  This report addresses both the Meredosia Energy Center and the proposed pipeline corridor in the Illinois River Valley. 2.0 Project Locations This project lies just south of the town of Meredosia, Illinois, and crosses the east side of the Illinois River Valley heading across to the bluff line and across central Morgan County in Illinois. The project is located within the Illinois/Mississippi Sand Areas Natural Division and portions of the Grand Prairie Natural Division (IDNR 2005; Schwegman 1997).  The sand prairies of Meredosia, Illinois, are some of the most southerly sand prairies in Illinois.  Suitable habitat for the regal fritillary butterfly occurs in the Illinois River Valley and areas east to the bluff-line.  These areas were the focus of the surveys and this report. 2.1 Meredosia Energy Center The Meredosia Energy Center is located just south of the town of Meredosia, Illinois, and covers 263 acres along the east side of the Illinois River.  The features of the plant include a power plant, coal stock pile areas, cinder areas, and settling pools.  The plant area includes approximately 72 acres of degraded sand prairie. This 72-acre site was investigated for the presence/absence of the regal fritillary butterflies. 2.2 Pipeline The proposed pipeline runs east from the MEC to central Morgan County.  It is proposed to cross a 62-acre Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) grassland field in the Illinois River Valley that has been planted with warm season grasses.  This is the only suitable regal fritillary habitat within the proposed pipeline route.  A 300 foot corridor (15.7 acres) of the planting was investigated for the presence/absence of the regal fritillary butterflies.  3.0 Regal Fritallary Butterfly 3.1 Introduction-Regal Fritillary Butterfly The regal fritillary has been historically documented from 33 states.  Historic loss, fragmentation, and degradation of prairie landscape have been the primary factors contributing to the decline of the regal fritillary populations.  The regal fritillary is listed as endangered in Michigan, New York, Ohio, Indiana, and Wisconsin; and is listed as threatened in Illinois; and is listed as a species of concern in four states.  It is presumed extirpated in seven states, and possibly extirpated in an additional ten states (Selby 2007).     Regal fritillary populations have declined in Illinois, causing this butterfly to be listed as threatened under the Illinois Endangered Species Act (Herkert 1992).  .Currently, Mason and Cass counties contain the largest known metapopulations of regal fritillary butterflies in Illinois (Wiker 2004).  Large populations exist around the towns of Meredosia, Beardstown, and Arenzville, in Cass and Morgan Counties, in the Illinois River Valley.     The purpose of this study was to document suitable habitat within the study area by surveying the occurrences of regal fritillary butterflies and their host plant populations. 3.2 Natural History of the Regal Fritillary  The large strong flying regal fritillary is a member of the family Nymphalidae, or brush-footed butterflies.  Its flight dates are 4 June – 16 September (Sedman and Hess 1985; Wiker 2004).   In the spring, larvae begin feeding on birds-foot violet (Viola pedata L.), arrow-leaved violet (Viola sagittata Air), and prairie violet (Viola pedatifida G. Don) (WDNR 2000) and they have been documented to use the annual, Johnny jump-up (Viola rafinesquii Greene) in central Illinois (LaGesse et.al. 2004).  Larvae of Lepidoptera, in general, are very specific in their feeding requirements and, in many cases, require a specific species (Ehrlich and Raven 1964).  After feeding and completing six instars, they pupate.  In early June adult males emerge and are followed by adult females approximately two weeks later (Scudder 1889; Kopper 2001).  Mating begins soon after female emergence with each female copulating once.  After two weeks of mating, the male regal fritillaries die (Nagel, et al. 1991; Kopper 2001), and fertilized females enter reproductive diapause for the next two months (Kopper et al. 2001).  During this period females nectar on common milkweed (Asclepias syriaca L.), butterfly milkweed (Asclepias tuberosa L.), dogbane (Apocynum spp.), bull thistle (Cirsium pumilum (Nutt.) Spreng.), and boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum L.) (Sedman and Hess 1985; LaGesse et al. 2006).  The diapause period between mating and oviposition is the most precarious time in the life span of the regal fritillary.  If drought, disease, predation, parasitism, or other environmental catastrophes occur, the entire brood for the following year is at risk.  By early September females begin oviposition, depositing over 1,000 eggs in clusters on violets (Wagner, et al. 1997; Kopper 2001).  The eggs hatch and larva feed on the egg case and enter winter dormancy (Scudder 1889; Mattoon et al. 1971; Kopper 2001; Zercher 2002).  3.3 Adult Regal Fritillary Census Report-(Coming in September) 4.0 Violet Population Survey Methods All violets populations were documented on the MEC and throughout the northern 300 foot end of the CRP field (15.7 of 62 acres).  The perimeter and area of each violet population were determined.  Wire flags were used to mark the perimeters of all populations to facilitate violet monitoring and mapping.  Area mapping was completed using a Trimble® Pro-XR backpack global positioning system (GPS) with sub-meter accuracy to determine the size of each violet population (LaGesse et al. 2004). Violet populations were classified based on patch size.  Areas that were >1,000/m² were classified as “Large”, patches from 100-1000/m² were classified as “medium”, and patches <100/m² were classified as “small”.  Then using a random numbers chart, populations within each size class were selected for intensive transect sampling of violets (described below).  Violets were also inspected for leaf damage and flagged for larval investigations if damage was observed. In selected populations, random one meter-square plots were established for sampling, violets, cactus, woody plants, grasses, other forbs, thatch and/or bare ground.  Twenty plots were sampled in large violet populations, 10 plots were sampled in medium-sized populations, and 5 plots were sampled in small populations. A cover class was assigned for each plant group, using a modified Daubenmire method to determine plant percent frequency (%), relative frequency (Rel. Freq.), relative cover (Rel. Cov.) and Importance Values (IV)  (Rel. Cov. + Rel. Freq.) for each plant group (Ebinger 1998).  4.1 Results – Violet Population Study Johnny jump-up plants (Viola rafinesquii) dominated areas that have not been disturbed for 7 years or more.  A new road was constructed in 2005 on the MEC property, and the disturbance from that project limits the current distribution of Johnny jump-up on the plant property. A series of aerial photographs shows the past disturbance history (Google Earth 2012) (See photos # 15).  The new road was planted with prairie grasses and flowers.  That planting has matured, but lacks any colonization of Johnny jump-up plants.  Johnny jump-up plants seem to be associated with a thick grass thatch build up.  The author has observed a thatch layer seems to repress other spring plant competition and this is when Johnny jump-up can reach high plant densities. A total of 104 populations of Johnny jump-up, and only one population of Viola pratincola (Greene), common blue violet (found in the timber on the MEC) were located during this investigation.  Sixty-five violet populations were documented inside the Meredosia Energy Center and 7 populations outside the Meredosia Energy Center (See maps # 1, 2 & 4) and 33 violet population in the 300 foot northern edge of the CRP prairie field (See maps # 3 & 5).     Fourteen large (>1,000m2) populations were documented on the MEC property.  A total of forty-two medium (100-1,000m2) violet populations were documented: 33 on the Meredosia Energy Center property, 5 outside the power plant property and 4 in the CRP field.  Forty-nine small violet populations were documented: 18 on the MEC property, 3 outside the MEC property (3 populations) and 28 in the CRP field.  Five- large, 16- medium, and 18 small violet populations were selected for plot sampling. Among populations on MEC property, there was considerable variation in the density of violets and habitat conditions within violet patches.  Violet density and IV of violets were somewhat lower in small patches.  Evidence of grazing of violets (by larval regal fritillaries, likely also rabbits, deer, etc.) was higher weakly related to population size but more frequently observed in large populations (27%) compared to medium (16%) or small populations (12.5%).  Ranges of vegetation IV’s are provided in the tables below. Table 1.  Summary Data of IV’s from Plots within Meredosia Energy Center Violet Density  Population size  (per sq meter)  IV Grass  IV Forbs  IV Thatch  IV Violets  Large (n=5)  12.5 - 54.8  37.4 - 97.3  32.6 - 60.2  20.8 - 51.2  14.9 - 44.1  Medium (n=10)  8.6 - 102.1  28.3 - 80.5  33.9 - 80.1  24.4 - 39.1  18.4 - 43.8  Small (n=10)  3.8 - 33.8  35.1 - 84.6  32.9 - 91.7  23.7 - 37.8  13.6 - 30.1  Table 2.  Summary Data of IV’s from Plots within CRP Field/Pipeline Area Violet Density  Population size  (per sq meter)  IV Grass  IV Forbs  IV Thatch  IV Violets  Medium (n=6)  14.1 - 73.8  21.1 - 106.2  27.5 - 106.5  25.6 - 38.5  27.5 - 43.9  Small (n=8)  5.6 - 70.2  28.5 - 107.2  27.4 - 77.6  22.8 - 63.1  22.4 - 43.0  Outside the MEC and the CRP field, no large violet populations were identified. Habitat conditions from populations outside the Meredosia Energy Center were even more variable than those within.  Grazing was not observed in any of the medium populations, but was observed in 20% of small populations in the pipeline area. The author observed that areas with violet densities of 40 violets per square meter appeared to have enough violet density to facilitate habitat for regal fritillary butterflies, with 33% of all large plots sampled had over 40 violets per meter and 37% of all medium plots sampled (See Table 3). Table 3.  Percent of Plots Sampled that had 40 Violets or more Per Square Meter   MEC Large  MEC Med  MEC Small  Pipeline Med  Pipeline Small  Plots > 40 violet/m²  33%   25%  10%  57%  25%  (N=100)  (N=100)  (N=50)  (N=60)  (N=40)  4.2 Larval Habitat on Meredosia Energy Center/Pipeline Properties Male regal fritillary butteries were observed emerging on 24 &  25 May 2012 and females on 4 & 6 June 2012 on the Meredosia Energy Center and pipeline properties.  On the Meredosia Energy Center site male and female regal butterfly emergent flights were observed from violet populations 1.11, 1.27, 1.28 & 1.34.  On the pipeline prairie site male and female regal butterfly emergent flights were observed from violet populations 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.13, 2.21, 2.27, 2.25, 2.31 & 2.32 on the same dates.  On 4 June 2012, I was accompanied with Tim Kelley, Natural Heritage Biologist IDNR and we walked through the pipeline prairie and observed female regal butterflies emerging throughout the rest of the pipeline field.  Later that same day an investigation throughout the surrounding area was established including other CRP fields and degraded sand prairies north and south of Meredosia.  Ten other CRP fields and sand prairies were observed from the road to have emerging regal fritillary butteries (See Map #6).  All CRP fields documented were warm season prairie plantings that were seven years old or more in their CRP contracts (Pers. Conv. Eric Golden IDNR 2012).  This follows the same pattern of stability and lack of disturbance that I have observed at the sand prairies at the Meredosia Energy Center and the pipeline prairie.  Other fritillary butterflies were observed during this investigation.  The variegated fritillary butterfly, Euptoita claudia, was the dominate fritillary observed follow by the regal and a few great spangle fritillary’s, Speyeria cybele, were observed in both areas.  5.0 Johnny Jump-Up Investigation  5.1 Methods During the late spring, Johnny jump-up plants were collected to document flower production, investigate seed production, and collect violet seeds.  Johnny jump-up is an annual violet species.  Like all violets, its seeds are expelled from its seed pods once the pods dry.  In order to investigate seed production and collect seeds, violet plants were hand-pulled from the MEC site.  Plants were later separated into five gallon buckets with cloth covers so that the plants could continue to dry and the seeds could be captured in the buckets.  For the Johnny jump-up plant investigation, 36 plants that had all of their stems and intact roots were pressed and dried for later investigation. 5.2 Results – Johnny Jump-Up Investigation Thirty-three violet specimens were collected for this investigation.  Only plant specimens that had all stems and intact roots were used.  These specimens were pressed, dried and later measured and counted.  Of the violets sampled, they had an average height of 208.03 millimeters, with a range of 170 – 260 millimeters tall.  The violets sampled had an average 15.1 flowers per plant and had a range of 4 – 35 flowers per plant.  Each flower produced 27 seeds per flower, 9 seeds per ovary.  For Johnny jump-up plants, one plant could produce from 108 to 948 seeds in one year, with an average of 407 seeds produced per plant.  Approximately 12 ounces of Johnny jump-up seed was collected during this investigation. 6.0 Astragalus distortus, Bent-Leave Milk Vetch Photo #1.  Bent-Leave Milk Vetch, Photo by V. LaGesse During investigation of the violet species on the Meredosia Energy Center, three subpopulations of the Illinois State Endangered plant, Astragalus distortus, Bent-Leaved Milk Vetch were documented.  This perennial, tap-rooted herb is currently known from only three counties (Mason, Cass & Morgan) in Illinois with only six known populations (IESPB 2004). The Meredosia Energy Center population is a new documented population.  The three subpopulations occur near the front gate and along the east fence line near the front gate.  The distribution appears to be scattered along the disturbance of the road construction for the haul road and entrance gate that was constructed in 2005-2006.  A total of 95 plants were documented during the week of 23 April through 25 April 2012.  All plants were flagged and there locations were mapped using the Trimble Pro-X GPS.  Two plants were collected, dried and pressed as vouchers.  There are no state laws to protect state listed plant species in Illinois.  Therefore, preservation and protection of these plant species is the responsibility of the landowner.  There are only seven known populations of this species currently known to exist in Illinois, including the population on the Meredosia Energy Complex. If possible, avoiding the known population of Astragulus distortus during project activities at the Meredosia Energy Complex is recommended.  If the population will be impacted during construction and operation activities, it is recommended that the project work with IDNR to move the plants prior to construction and/or collect seed for future plantings.   Map # 7  Distribution of Bent-Leave Milk Vetch, Meredosia Energy Center 2012 7.0 Discussions Regal fritillary habitat did not seem to depend on violet population patch size, but there is a relationship between violet density and the presence of the butterfly.  Violet populations with densities of 40 violets per square meter or more were found to be possible regal habitat.  Variegated fritillary butterflies were observed utilizing most violet populations and the Great spangled fritillary butterflies were observed from both study sites.  Both of these species host on any violet species, and in Morgan County they appear to be utilizing the annual Johnny jump-up violet.    7.1 Recommendations The FutureGen II project may impact potential regal fritillary habitat.  The following recommendations are made to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to the regal fritillary that might result from project activities: 1. When possible, avoid documented regal fritillary habitat destruction during design and layout of the project elements (e.g., laydown yard, access road) 2. If documented areas of potential regal fritillary habitat will be impacted with this project,  adjacent areas, with mature grass stands and a developed thatch layer, should be over seeded with Johnny jump-up seed to mitigate project impacts.  Based on the findings of this study, a seed rate of 40 seeds per square meter is adequate.  Restoration/mitigation ratios will be determined in the Conservation Plan for this project.  This will be written with input from Illinois Department of Natural Resources.    3. All contractors and employees working on the project should be trained to recognize the Regal Fritillary; to understand its significance to the project and the public; and be instructed how to respond to an observation or encounter with this species.  4. All sightings of possible or actual regal fritillaries during project activities should be reported to IDNR. 5. In areas where the regal fritillary is present, during the construction phase project, vehicles should reduce speed to minimize the risks of taking butterflies through collision, or find alternate routes posing less risk. 7.2 Acknowledgments I wish to thanks, Jeff Walk, The Nature Conservancy, for assisting with sampling protocols and statistics reviews and Ted Prescott, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for assistance with GPS and GIS issues with this study.  I would also want to thank, Mitch White and the other staff of Ameren Company for access to the site and for keeping an eye on me.   8.0 Literature Cited Ehrlich, P.R. and P. H. Raven. 1964.  Butterflies and plants: A Case Study in Co evolution.  Evolution 18:586-608 Ebinger, J. E. 1998.  Possible Survey Methods for Woodland Studies in Illinois.  Unpublished Report for IDNR, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston IL. IDNR. 2005.  Illinois Wildlife Action Plan.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources. Springfield, IL.  Google Earth. 2012.  Timeline aerial photos of Meredosia Energy Center.  WWW.Googleearth.com Herkert, J.R., Editor. 1992.  Endangered and Threatened Species of Illinois: Status and Distribution, Vol. 2 – Animals.  Illinois Endangered Species Board.  Springfield, Il 142pp. Kopper, B.J., S. Shu, R. E. Charlton, and S.B. Ramaswamy.  2001.  Evidence for Reproductive Diapause in the Fritillary Speyeria idalia (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae).  Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 94(3): 427-432. LaGesse, V., W.E. McClain, C.A. Falco and J.R. Wiker. 2004. Little Bluestem and Violet Populations at Sand Ridge State Forest, Mason County, Illinois: Implications for Rare Butterfly Survival. Final Report. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Springfield, IL. Unpublished report.  LaGesse, V., W.E. McClain, C.A. Falco and J.R. Wiker. 2006.Census Route Study of Regal Fritillary (Speyeria idalia) at Sand Ridge State Forest, Mason County Illinois. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Springfield, IL. Unpublished report.  Mattoon, S., R. Davis and O. Spencer.  1971.  Rearing techniques for species of Speyeria (Nymphalidae).  Journal of the Lepidopterist’s Society 25 (4) 247-256. Nagle, H.G., T. Nightengale and N. Dankert.  1991.  Regal Fritillary Population Estimation and Natural History on Rowe Sanctuary, Nebraska.  Prairie Naturalist.  23(3); 145-152 NatureServe.  2004. Speyeria idalia – Comprehensive Report. NatureServe Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 3.1. NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: June 23, 2004). Nyboer, R.W. and J.E. Ebinger, Editors 2004.  Endangered and Threatened Species of Illinois: Status and Distribution, Volume 3:  2004 Changes to the Illinois List of Endangered and Threatened Plant Species.  Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board.  Springfield, Illinois.  34 pp. Schwegman, J.E., G.B. Fell, M. Hutchison, W. M. Shepherd, and J. White. 1973.  Comprehensive plan for the Illinois Nature Preserves System.  Part 2.  The natural divisions of Illinois.  Illinois Nature Preserves Commission.  Rockford, Illinois.  32 p. + map. Scudder, S.H. 1889. The Butterflies of the Eastern United States and Canada. Scudder, Cambridge, Mass. Sedman, Y, and D. Hess. 1985. The Butterflies of West Central Illinois. Western Illinois University. Series in the Biological Sciences No. 11. 120 p. Selby, G. (2007, February 9).  Regal Fritillary (Speyeria idalia Drury):  a technical conservation assessment. Online USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Available:  http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/projects/scp/assessments/regalfritillary.pdf (28 August 2012; Wagner, D.L.,  M. Wallace, J. Boettner, and J. Elkinton. 1971.  Status update and life history studies on the regal butterfly (Lepidoptera:  Nymphalidae).  Pp. 261-275.  In the ecology and conservation of grasslands and healthlands in northeast North America.  P. D. Vickery, P. Dunwiddie, and C. Griffin (eds.).  Massachusetts Audubon, Lincoln MA WDNR.  2000.  Protocol for Incidental Take Authorization Regal Fritillary (Speyeria idalia).  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.  www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/er/take/pdfs/regalprot.pdf Zercher, D. 2002. Ft. Indiantown Gap National Guard Training Center. Final Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan. Fort Indiantown Gap, Annville, PA.  The Pennsylvania Department of Military and Veterans Affairs. The Nature Conservancy. Appendix A – Maps Photo #1  Meredosia Energy Center 2011 Google Earth 2012 Photo #2 Meredosia Energy Center 2009 Google Earth 2012 Photo #3  Meredosia Energy Center 2007 Google Earth 2012 Photo #4  Meredosia Energy Center 2006 Google Earth 2012 Photo #5  Meredosia Energy Center 2005 Google Earth 2012 Page A-4 Page A-5 Page A-8 Map # 6 Page A-9 Appendix B – Butterflies Observed During Regal Study 2012 Scientific Name Common Name Family Papilionidae Pterourus troilus Spicebush Swallowtail Battus philenor Pipe-Vine Swallowtail Pterourus glaucus Tiger Swallowtail Papilio polyxenes Black Swallowtail Family Pierdae Ponita protodice Checkered White Artogeia rapae Cabbage White Colias philodice Clouded Sulfur Colias eurytheme Orange Sulfur Phoebis sennae Cloudless Sulfur Pyrisitia lisa Little Sulfur Nathalis iole Dainty Sulphur Euchloe olympia Olympia Marble Family Lycanidae Strymon melinus Gray Hairstreak Everes comyntas Eastern-Tailed Blue Celastrina ladon Spring Azure Family Nymphalidae Euptoieta claudia Variegated Fritillary Speryeria idalia Regal Fritillary Speyeria cybele Great Spangled Fritillary Phyciodes tharos Pearl Crescent Vanessa cardui American Painted Lady Vanessa virginiensis Painted Lady Vanessa atalanta Red Admiral Junonia coenia Buckeye Basilarchia arthemis Red Spotted Purple Nymphalis antiopa Mourning Cloak Family Aparturidae Astrocampa celtis Hackberry Family Satyridae Megisto cymela Little Wood Satyr Family Danaidae Danaus plexippus Monarch Family Hesperiidae Epargyreus clarus Silver Spotted Skipper Erynnis juvenalis Juvenal’s Duskywing Erynnis horatius Horace’s Duskywing Pyrgus communis Checkered Skipper Pholisora catullus Common Sootywing Appendix C – Violet Data  C.1  Large Plot – MEC  Table C.1-1.   Population 1.24 – Large  Species VIOLETS WOODY CACTUS FORBS GRASS THATCH BARE GR. Totals  # Plots 19 1 5 20 20 20 15 100  Total Plots 20 20 20 20 20 20 20  % Freq. 95.05.0 25.0 100.0100.0100.075.0 500.0 Rel. Freq.  19.01.0 5.0  20.0 20.0 20.015.0  100.0  Cover  19.80.0 0.3  47.8 20.7 28.61.6  Rel Cover  16.70.0 0.2  40.2 17.4 24.11.3 100.0 IV  35.7 1.0 5.2  60.2  37.4  44.1 16.3  200.0  Table C.1-2.  Population 1.23 – Large Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  20  20  100.0  22.5  24.1  18.7  41.1  WOODY  0  20  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  1  20  5.0  1.1  0.0  0.0  1.1  FORB  20  20  100.0  22.5  42.7  33.1  55.6  GRASS  20  20  100.0  22.5  24.8  19.2  41.6  THACTH  20  20  100.0  22.5  37.1  28.7  51.2  BARE GR.  8  20  40.0  9.0  0.5  0.3  9.3  Totals  89  445.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.1-3.  Population 1.27 – Large Table C.1-4.  Population 1.34 – Large Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  20  20  100.0  16.9  7.9  7.3  24.2  WOODY  0  20  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  19  20  95.0  16.1  7.4  6.9  23.0  FORB  20  20  100.0  16.9  39.3  36.4  53.4  GRASS  20  20  100.0  16.9  44.4  41.2  58.2  THATCH  20  20  100.0  16.9  4.2  3.9  20.8  BARE GR.  19  20  95.0  16.1  4.7  4.3  20.4  Totals  118  590.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  12  20  60.0  12.6  3.0  2.3  14.9  WOODY  0  20  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  18  20  90.0  18.9  3.2  2.4  21.4  FORB  19  20  95.0  20.0  16.1  12.3  32.3  GRASS  20  20  100.0  21.1  87.0  66.3  87.3  THATCH  20  20  100.0  21.1  21.8  16.6  37.6  BARE GR.  6  20  30.0  6.3  0.3  0.2  6.5  Totals  95  475.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.1-5.  Population 1.66 – Large Total Rel. Species # Plots Plots % Freq. Rel. Freq. Cover Cover IV VIOLET 15 20 75.0 18.5 19.4 14.0 32.6 WOODY 0 20 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 CACTUS 4 20 20.0 4.9 0.4 0.3 5.2 FORB 19 20 95.0 23.5 44.4 32.1 55.5 GRASS 19 20 95.0 23.5 55.2 39.9 63.4 THATCH 19 20 95.0 23.5 13.1 9.4 32.9 BARE GR. 5 20 25.0 6.2 6.0 4.3 10.5 Totals 81 405.0 100.0 100.0 200.0 C.2 Medium Plot – MEC Table C.2-1.  Plot 1.01 – Medium Total Rel. Species # Plots Plots % Freq. Rel. Freq. Cover Cover IV VIOLET 8 10 80.0 17.8 2.6 2.6 20.3 WOODY 0 10 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 CACTUS 2 10 20.0 4.4 0.6 0.6 5.0 FORB 10 10 100.0 22.2 42.9 42.4 64.6 GRASS 9 10 90.0 20.0 45.5 45.0 65.0 THATCH 10 10 100.0 22.2 8.5 8.4 30.6 BARE GR. 6 10 60.0 13.3 1.1 1.0 14.4 Totals 45 450.0 100.0 100.0 200.0 Table C.2-2.  Plot 1.07 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  21.7  25.7  22.0  43.8  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  10  10  100.0  21.7  59.5  51.1  72.8  GRASS  10  10  100.0  21.7  20.4  17.5  39.2  THATCH  10  10  100.0  21.7  10.2  8.8  30.5  BARE GR  6  10  60.0  13.0  0.8  0.7  13.7  Totals  46  460.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-3.  Plot 1.08 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  7  10  70.0  15.6  4.3  3.9  19.5  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  4  10  40.0  8.9  2.2  2.0  10.9  FORB  10  10  100.0  22.2  39.6  36.4  58.7  GRASS  10  10  100.0  22.2  43.4  39.9  62.2  THATCH  10  10  100.0  22.2  18.3  16.9  39.1  BARE GR  4  10  40.0  8.9  1.0  0.9  9.8  Totals  45  450.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-4.  Plot 1.09 – Medium Table C.2-5.  Plot 1.17 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  9  10  90.0  17.6  2.7  2.3  20.0  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  8  10  80.0  15.7  7.9  6.9  22.6  FORB  10  10  100.0  19.6  35.9  31.7  51.3  GRASS  10  10  100.0  19.6  52.3  46.2  65.8  THATCH  10  10  100.0  19.6  12.6  11.1  30.7  BARE GR  4  10  40.0  7.8  1.9  1.7  9.5  Totals  51  510.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  21.3  27.8  21.6  42.9  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  2  10  20.0  4.3  1.8  1.4  5.7  FORB  10  10  100.0  21.3  75.8  58.9  80.1  GRASS  10  10  100.0  21.3  9.1  7.0  28.3  THATCH  10  10  100.0  21.3  13.8  10.7  32.0  BARE GR  5  10  50.0  10.6  0.5  0.4  11.0  Totals  47  470.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-6.  Plot 1.22 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  9  10  90.0  17.3  1.5  1.1  18.4  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  4  10  40.0  7.7  1.2  0.9  8.6  FORB  10  10  100.0  19.2  71.0  55.8  75.1  GRASS  10  10  100.0  19.2  44.8  35.2  54.4  THATCH  10  10  100.0  19.2  6.6  5.2  24.4  BARE GR  9  10  90.0  17.3  2.2  1.7  19.0  Totals  52  520.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-7.  Plot 1.25 – Medium Table C.2-8.  Plot 1.59 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  9  10  90.0  17.3  8.1  6.9  24.3  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  7  10  70.0  13.5  6.5  5.6  19.1  FORB  10  10  100.0  19.2  17.0  14.6  33.9  GRASS  10  10  100.0  19.2  71.0  61.3  80.5  THATCH  10  10  100.0  19.2  11.4  9.8  29.1  BARE GR  6  10  60.0  11.5  2.0  1.7  13.2  Totals  52  520.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  9  10  90.0  17.0  2.2  2.5  19.5  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  9  10  90.0  17.0  3.9  4.5  21.4  FORB  10  10  100.0  18.9  37.8  43.6  62.5  GRASS  10  10  100.0  18.9  33.4  38.6  57.4  THATCH  10  10  100.0  18.9  9.2  10.6  29.4  BARE GR  5  10  50.0  9.4  0.3  0.3  9.7  Totals  53  530.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-9.  Plot 1.54 – Medium Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  19.2  1.5  2.4  21.6  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  2  10  20.0  3.8  0.6  1.0  4.8  FORB  10  10  100.0  19.2  33.0  53.0  72.2  GRASS  10  10  100.0  19.2  7.6  12.1  31.4  THATCH  10  10  100.0  19.2  7.8  12.5  31.8  BARE GR  10  10  100.0  19.2  11.8  19.0  38.2  Totals  52  520.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.2-10.  Plot 1.51 – Medium Table C.3-2.  Plot 1.36 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  19.2  3.9  3.9  23.1  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  10  10  100.0  19.2  1.5  1.5  20.7  FORB  10  10  100.0  19.2  24.0  24.1  43.3  GRASS  10  10  100.0  19.2  57.5  57.7  77.0  THATCH  10  10  100.0  19.2  12.6  12.7  31.9  BARE GR  2  10  20.0  3.8  0.1  0.1  3.9  Totals  52  520.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  C.3 Small Plot – MEC  Table C.3-1.   Plot 1.32 – Small  Species VIOLET WOODY CACTUSFORB GRASS THATCH BARE GR Totals  # Plots 5 0  4 5 5 5 3 27  Total Plots 5 5 5 5 5 5 5  % Freq. 100.0 0.0 80.0 100.0100.0100.060.0 540.0 Rel. Freq. 18.5 0.0 14.8  18.5 18.5 18.511.1  100.0  Cover 0.5 0.0 3.8  19.5 85.0 26.10.3  Rel. Cover 0.4 0.0 2.8  14.4 62.9 19.30.2 100.0 IV 18.9 0.0 17.6  32.9  81.4  37.8 11.3  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  4  5  80.0  16.7  0.4  0.3  17.0  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  3  5  60.0  12.5  0.3  0.2  12.7  FORB  5  5  100.0  20.8  80.5  61.1  81.9  GRASS  5  5  100.0  20.8  45.0  34.1  55.0  THATCH  5  5  100.0  20.8  5.4  4.1  24.9  BARE GR  2  5  40.0  8.3  0.2  0.2  8.5  Totals  24  480.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.3-3.  Plot 1.37 – Small Table C.3-4.  Plot 1.42 – Small Total  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  22.7  12.3  7.9  30.6  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  22.7  43.0  27.7  50.4  GRASS  5  5  100.0  22.7  85.0  54.7  77.4  THATCH  5  5  100.0  22.7  15.0  9.6  32.4  BARE GR  2  5  40.0  9.1  0.2  0.1  9.2  Totals  22  440.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  22.7  4.9  4.0  26.7  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  22.7  52.0  42.1  64.8  GRASS  5  5  100.0  22.7  55.7  45.1  67.8  THATCH  5  5  100.0  22.7  10.2  8.3  31.0  BARE GR  2  5  40.0  9.1  0.7  0.6  9.7  Totals  22  440.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.3-5.  Plot 1.43 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  4  5  80.0  16.7  1.4  1.4  18.1  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  20.8  19.5  19.9  40.7  GRASS  5  5  100.0  20.8  62.5  63.8  84.6  THATCH  5  5  100.0  20.8  12.6  12.9  33.7  BARE GR  5  5  100.0  20.8  2.0  2.0  22.9  Totals  24  480.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.3-6.  Plot 1.46 – Small Table C.3-7.  Plot 1.49 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  4  5  80.0  12.9  0.9  0.7  13.6  WOODY  4  5  80.0  12.9  0.4  0.3  13.2  CACTUS  5  5  100.0  16.1  10.2  7.6  23.7  FORB  5  5  100.0  16.1  28.5  21.3  37.4  GRASS  5  5  100.0  16.1  80.5  60.1  76.2  THATCH  5  5  100.0  16.1  10.2  7.6  23.7  BARE GR  3  5  60.0  9.7  3.2  2.4  12.1  Totals  31  620.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  21.7  9.7  8.4  30.1  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  1  5  20.0  4.3  0.1  0.1  4.4  FORB  5  5  100.0  21.7  52.5  45.4  67.1  GRASS  5  5  100.0  21.7  40.6  35.1  56.8  THATCH  5  5  100.0  21.7  12.1  10.5  32.2  BARE GR  2  5  40.0  8.7  0.7  0.6  9.3  Totals  23  460.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.3-8.  Plot 1.56 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  21.7  2.0  2.3  24.1  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  1  5  20.0  4.3  0.6  0.7  5.0  FORB  2  5  40.0  8.7  28.5  33.2  41.9  GRASS  5  5  100.0  21.7  43.5  50.7  72.4  THATCH  5  5  100.0  21.7  7.8  9.1  30.8  BARE GR  5  5  100.0  21.7  3.4  4.0  25.7  Totals  23  460.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.3-9.  Plot 1.57 – Small Table C.3-10.  Plot 1.58 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  19.2  3.4  3.6  22.9  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  2  5  40.0  7.7  0.7  0.7  8.4  FORB  5  5  100.0  19.2  48.0  51.2  70.4  GRASS  5  5  100.0  19.2  33.5  35.7  54.9  THATCH  5  5  100.0  19.2  7.8  8.3  27.5  BARE GR  4  5  80.0  15.4  0.4  0.4  15.8  Totals  26  520.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  4  5  80.0  13.8  1.4  1.7  15.5  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  5  5  100.0  17.2  1.5  1.8  19.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  17.2  62.5  74.5  91.7  GRASS  5  5  100.0  17.2  15.0  17.9  35.1  THATCH  5  5  100.0  17.2  3.0  3.6  20.8  BARE GR  5  5  100.0  17.2  0.5  0.6  17.8  Totals  29  580.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  C.4 Medium Plot – Pipeline  Table C.4-1.   Pipeline Plot 3.02 – Medium  Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  18.9  27.1  22.8  41.7  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  9  10  90.0  17.0  1.2  1.0  18.0  FORB  10  10  100.0  18.9  75.8  63.9  82.8  GRASS  10  10  100.0  18.9  2.7  2.3  21.1  THATCH  10  10  100.0  18.9  11.4  9.6  28.5  BARE GR.  4  10  40.0  7.5  0.5  0.4  7.9  Totals  53  530.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.4-2.  Pipeline Plot 3.04 – Medium Table C.4-3.  Pipeline Plot 2.32 – Medium Species  # Plots  Total Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Rel. Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  17.5  17.0  13.3  30.9  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  10  10  100.0  17.5  0.8  0.6  18.1  FORB  10  10  100.0  17.5  85.0  66.9  84.4  GRASS  10  10  100.0  17.5  13.8  10.9  28.4  THATCH  10  10  100.0  17.5  10.2  8.0  25.6  BARE GR.  7  10  70.0  12.3  0.4  0.3  12.6  Totals  57  570.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  25.0  36.6  18.9  43.9  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  10  10  100.0  25.0  60.6  31.3  56.3  GRASS  10  10  100.0  25.0  81.6  42.1  67.1  THATCH  10  10  100.0  25.0  15.0  7.7  32.7  BARE GR.  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  40  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.4-4.  Pipeline Plot 2.06 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  10  10  100.0  25.0  3.9  3.2  28.2  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  10  10  100.0  25.0  3.9  3.2  28.2  GRASS  10  10  100.0  25.0  98.5  81.2  106.2  THATCH  10  10  100.0  25.0  15.0  12.4  37.4  BARE GR.  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  40  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.4-5.  Pipeline Plot 205 – Medium Table C.4-6.  Pipeline Plot 2.13 – Medium Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  9  10  90.0  23.7  4.7  3.8  27.5  WOODY  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  9  10  90.0  23.7  4.7  3.8  27.5  GRASS  10  10  100.0  26.3  98.5  80.2  106.5  THATCH  10  10  100.0  26.3  15.0  12.2  38.5  BARE GR.  0  10  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  38  380.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Species VIOLET WOODY CACTUS FORB GRASS THATCH BARE GR. Totals  # Plots 10 0 0 10 10 10 0 40  Total Plots 10 10 10 10 10 10 10  % Freq. 100.00.0 0.0 100.0100.0100.00.0 400.0  Rel. Freq.  25.00.0 0.0  25.0 25.0 25.00.0 100.0  Cover  19.4 0.0 0.0  19.4  85.0  15.0 0.0  Rel. Cover 14.0 0.0 0.0 14.0 61.3 10.8 0.0 100.0  IV 39.0 0.0 0.0 39.0 86.3 35.8 0.0 200.0  C.5  Small Plot – Pipeline  Table C.5-1.   Pipeline Plot 3.06 – Small  Species VIOLET WOODY CACTUSFORB GRASS THATCH BARE GR Totals  # Plots 5 0  3 5 5 5 2 25  Total Plots 5 5 5 5 5 5 5  % Freq. 100.00.0 60.0 100.0100.0100.040.0 500.0  Rel. Freq.  20.00.0 12.0  20.0 20.0 20.08.0 100.0  Cover  34.0 0.0 0.8  85.0  12.6  15.0 0.2  Rel. Cover 23.0 0.0 0.5 57.6 8.5 10.2 0.1 100.0  IV 43.0 0.0 12.5 77.6 28.5 30.2 8.1 200.0  Table C.5-2.  Pipeline Plot 2.27 – Small Table C.5-3.  Pipeline Plot 2.33 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  25.0  26.1  15.8  40.8  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  25.0  57.5  34.8  59.8  GRASS  5  5  100.0  25.0  66.5  40.3  65.3  THATCH  5  5  100.0  25.0  15.0  9.1  34.1  BARE GR  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  20  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  25.0  2.5  1.3  26.3  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  25.0  33.0  17.6  42.6  GRASS  5  5  100.0  25.0  80.5  42.9  67.9  THATCH  5  5  100.0  25.0  71.5  38.1  63.1  BARE GR  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  20  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.5-4.  Pipeline Plot 2.01 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  20.0  2.5  2.4  22.4  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  20.0  15.0  14.2  34.2  GRASS  5  5  100.0  20.0  85.0  80.2  100.2  THATCH  5  5  100.0  20.0  3.0  2.8  22.8  BARE GR  5  5  100.0  20.0  0.5  0.5  20.5  Totals  25  500.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.5-5.  Pipeline Plot 2.15 – Small Table C.5-6.  Pipeline Plot 2.08 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  20.8  4.4  3.4  24.2  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  20.8  67.0  51.8  72.7  GRASS  5  5  100.0  20.8  42.5  32.9  53.7  THATCH  5  5  100.0  20.8  15.0  11.6  32.4  BARE GR  4  5  80.0  16.7  0.4  0.3  17.0  Totals  24  480.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  25.0  4.4  4.1  29.1  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  25.0  7.8  7.2  32.2  GRASS  5  5  100.0  25.0  80.5  74.7  99.7  THATCH  5  5  100.0  25.0  15.0  13.9  38.9  BARE GR  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  20  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.5-7.  Pipeline Plot 2.10 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  25.0  0.5  0.4  25.4  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  25.0  3.0  2.4  27.4  GRASS  5  5  100.0  25.0  85.0  67.5  92.5  THATCH  5  5  100.0  25.0  37.5  29.8  54.8  BARE GR  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  20  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.5-8.  Pipeline Plot 2.10 – Small Total  Rel.  Species  # Plots  Plots  % Freq.  Rel. Freq.  Cover  Cover  IV  VIOLET  5  5  100.0  25.0  1.5  1.3  26.3  WOODY  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  CACTUS  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  FORB  5  5  100.0  25.0  4.9  4.1  29.1  GRASS  5  5  100.0  25.0  98.5  82.2  107.2  THATCH  5  5  100.0  25.0  15.0  12.5  37.5  BARE GR  0  5  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0  Totals  20  400.0  100.0  100.0  200.0  Table C.5-9.  Violets Speimen #  Height MM  # Stems  # Flowers  1  250  2  8  2  234  1  5  3  203  1  5  4  195  1  4  175  1  9  6  165  2  7  7  195  3  13  8  165  2  9  9  170  2  10  200  2  7  11  230  9  30  12  195  3  15  13  200  5  24  14  220  3  18  225  1  6  16  170  3  9  17  250  5  28  18  190  4  8  19  230  7  35  190  8  30  21  195  1  6  22  195  1  6  23  260  1  15  24  220  5  27  235  3  17  26  235  5  20  27  195  4  18  28  220  5  18  29  225  5  20  215  5  22  31  190  2  10  32  220  6  24  Average  208  3.4  15.1  Ranges  170 to 260  1 to 9  4 to 35  APPENDIX E3 PROTECTED SPECIES SURVEY FOR PROPOSED FUTUREGEN SOIL-GAS MONITORING AND METEOROLOGICAL TOWER INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Specialized Ecological Services 105 East Oak Street, Greenville, Illinois 62246 888-511-7735, 618-741-0426 (cell), bob@specialized-ecological.com November 28, 2011 Matthew Mangan Fish and Wildlife Biologist Ecological Services Marion Illinois Sub-Office US Fish & Wildlife Service 8588 Route 148 Marion, Illinois 62959 Re: Protected Species Survey FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Incorporated Soil-Gas Monitoring and Meteorological Tower Sites Morgan County, Illinois Dear Mr. Mangan, Enclosed is a copy of our report documenting the results of our survey for state and federal threatened and endangered species at the above referenced project in Morgan County, Illinois, for FutureGen Industrial Alliance of Washington, D.C. As indicated in our report, no threatened and endangered species were identified in the project area and no impacts to threatened and endangered species are anticipated. I am also including the results of our survey for jurisdictional wetlands at the project site. As reported, no jurisdictional wetlands were identified and no impacts to jurisdictional wetlands are anticipated. Please mail comments to: FutureGen Alliance, Inc.  U.S. Department of Energy National Technology Laboratory  1101 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  3610 Collins Ferry Road  Sixth Floor  P.O. Box 880  Washington, D.C. 20004  Morgantown, WV 26507  Contact Person: Mr. Ken Humphreys, CEO  Contact Person: Mr. Cliff Whyte, NEPA Compliance Officer  Phone Number: (202) 280-6019  Phone Number: (304) 285-2098  Please include myself and Amanda Stegen, Research Scientist, Battelle on any correspondence. Amanda Stegen Battelle 902 Battelle Blvd P.O. Box 999 MSIN K3-66 Richland, Washington 99352 amanda.stegen@pnl.gov 509-372-4511 Sincerely, Cc: Mr. Chris Burger, Patrick Engineering Ms. Amanda Stegen, Battelle INTRODUCTION THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT OF 1973 (AS AMENDED), 16 USC 1531-1544..............................................1 ENDANGERED SPECIES PROTECTION ACT OF 1972, 520 ILCS 10/11............................................................1 STUDYAREA METEOROLOGICAL TOWER.....................................................................................................................3 SOIL-GAS MONITORING NETWORK..........................................................................................................3 PURPOSE&PROCEDURE PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................6 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................6 RESULTS PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................7 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................8 DECURRENT FALSE ASTER (BOLTONIA DECURRENS).........................................................................................8 INDIANA BAT (MYOTIS SODALIS).............................................................................................................8 EASTERN PRAIRIE FRINGED ORCHID (PLATANTHAERA LEUCOPHAEA) ....................................................................9 LITERATURECITED ATTACHMENTA: RESEARCHERQUALIFICATIONS A ATTACHMENTB: DOCUMENTATION&CORRESPONDENCE B INTRODUCTION Thisreportdocumentsaninvestigationofstateandfederalthreatenedandendangeredspeciesin the vicinity of proposed construction of FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. facilities near Jacksonville, Illinois. The current proposed action involvestheinstallation ofameteorological tower and soil-gas collection network in support of the FutureGen 2.0 Morgan County carbon sequestration site. The network will provide samples of soil gas for evaluating baseline CO2 concentrations and, once site operations begin, ameans of assessing possible increases in CO2 concentrationorco-injectedtracercompounds. Thenetworkincludesonemeteorologicaltower and seven soil-gas monitoring chambers. The EndangeredSpecies Act of 1973(as amended),16USC1531-1544 The Endangered Species Act (16 USC 1531-1544) provides for the conservation of threatened and endangeredplants and animals and thehabitats in which they are found. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) maintains a list of endangered and threatened species. Species includebirds, insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, mammals, crustaceans, flowers,grasses,andtrees. Thelawprohibits anyaction, administrative or real, that results in a “taking” of listed species or an adverse impact to their habitat. Likewise, import, export, interstate, and foreign commerce of listed species are all prohibited. EndangeredSpeciesProtection Act of 1972,520ILCS 10/11 TheIllinoisEndangeredSpeciesProtectionAct(520ILCS10/11)isadministeredbythe Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Endangered Species Protection Board. ProceduresforcoordinationandconsultationwiththeBoardaredescribedintheIllinois AdministrativeCode,ConsultationProceduresforAssessingImpactsof Agency Actions onEndangeredandThreatenedSpecies. Speciesareprotectediftheymeetatleastone of four definitions: ● Federally Endangered Species: Any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. ● Federally Threatened Species: Any species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range. ● State Endangered Species: Any species that is in danger of extinction as a breeding species in Illinois. ● State ThreatenedSpecies: Anybreeding species that is likely to become astate endangered species within the foreseeable future in Illinois. This Act requires agencies of state and local governments to evaluate, through a consultationprocesswithIDNR,whetheractionsauthorized,funded,orimplementedby them are likely to jeopardize the continued existence of Illinois-listed threatened or endangeredspeciesor arelikelytoresultinthedestructionoradversemodificationof the designated essentialhabitat ofsuch species. When an agencyhas so consulted, andits action isdeterminednottoadverselyimpactanyIllinois listed speciesorcriticalhabitat ofsuchspecies,theagencyshallbedeemedtohavecomplied withitsobligations under the Act. STUDYAREA Meteorological Tower The meteorological tower will be installed on a small strip of pasture located approximately 230 feet west of the soil-gas monitoring station, SG-1 (Illustration 1). Planned coordinates are 90.060917W and 39.813090N. Soil disturbance for the meteorological tower includes one concrete footing, approximately2feetwide,2feetlong,and3feetdeep. Also,apadoflandscapepavers (approximately 4feet wide by4feet long) willbe used to minimize vegetative growth around the tower and solar panel. Soil-Gas Monitoring Network The soil-gas monitoring network will consist of six spatially distributed monitoring locations(SG-1throughSG-6,Illustration2),andoneadditionallocationatthesiteofan abandonedoilandgaswell(SG-OGW-1,Illustration2). Asecondabandonedwell,SGOGW-2,willbeaccessedforaone-timesoilgasmeasurementbutnopermanentsoilgas collector will be installed. The soilgasmonitoringpoints SG-1 throughSG-6are located adjacent to countyroads on what is thought to be the public right–of-way between the road surface and private property. However, selected locations may actually extend onto private property. All locations are sited on high ground where saturation of the soil is least likely to occur. Monitoring point SG-OGW-1 is located in the middle of a fenced pasture. Thesoildisturbancecaused by installation ofthesoil-gasmonitoringcollectorateach sitewillbe approximately2 feetwide,2 feetlong,and 3 feetdeep. Illustration 1:Proposed meteorologicaltowerlocation. Illustration 2:Proposed locations ofsoil-gas monitoringpoints. FutureGen – Meteorological Tower & Soil_Gas Monitoring 5 Protected Species Survey PURPOSE&PROCEDURE A survey for protected species and their critical habitat was conducted using best professional practice. BoththeUSFishandWildlifeServiceandIllinois DepartmentofNaturalResources, DivisionofEcosystemsandEnvironmentwerecontactedforalistofpotentialprotectedspecies. Based on this list, the flora and fauna of the proposed impact area were surveyed. PreliminaryData Collection &Review Prior to conducting theprotected species survey, the Illinois NaturalHeritageDatabase was reviewed using the EcoCAT website (IDNR 2011a) and an inquiry to the IDNR Division of Ecosystems and Environment. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife's “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species (USFWS 2011)” was also reviewed. FieldSurvey Pedestrian surveys for jurisdictional wetlands and protected species were conducted on the subject property on November 1, 2011. Surveys were performed by Specialized EcologicalServices’ConsultingEcologist,RobertRinella. Vegetationidentificationwas performed by Specialized Ecological Services' Senior Botanist, James Lang. Qualifications are provided in Attachment A. RESULTS PreliminaryData Collection &Review The Illinois Department of Natural Resources website lists 14 state and/or federally protected species as potentially occurring in Morgan County (Table 1) (IDNR 2011b). Consultation with the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool, “EcoCAT”, found no record of State-listed threatened or endangered species in the vicinity of the project location. Genus species Agalinis skinneriana Bartramia longicauda Boltonia decurrens1 Buchnera americana Fundulus dispar Fusconala ebena Hesperia ottoe Lanius ludovicianus Melanthium virginicum Polygala incarnata Pseudacris illinoensis Schoenoplectus hallii Speyeria idalia Tropidoclonion lineatum Common name pale false foxglove upland sandpiper decurrent false aster blue hearts starhead topminnow ebonyshell ottoe skipper loggerhead shrike branchflower pink milkwort Illinois chorus frog Hall's bulrush regal fritillary lined snake State Status threatened endangered threatened threatened threatened threatened endangered endangered threatened endangered threatened threatened threatened threatened Table 1: Threatened and endangered species potentially occurring in Morgan County(asofSeptember 13,2011). The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species (USFWS 2011)” lists the Threatened decurrent false aster (Boltonia decurrens) with a range that includes Morgan County. USFWS (2011) also lists the Endangered Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis) with “potential habitatstatewide”butnoknownoccurrenceinMorganCounty. Finally,USFWS(2011) lists the Threatened eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthaera leucophaea) with an historic range that includes Morgan County. Lah (2003) notes that the orchid once occurred in 33 counties of northern Illinois but is now only found in 9. There are no known occurrences in Morgan County (IDNR 2011c). 1Boltonia decurrens is also Federally threatened. Of the protected species known to inhabit Morgan County, noneare known by state or federal authorities to inhabit the subject area. None of these species were observed during the site visits.  Because no impacts are expected, no mitigation is required. FieldSurvey No state or federally protected species were observed during field investigation. The meteorological tower site supports cool-season grasses and common weeds. Various grasses(Festuca arundinaceae, Phalaris arundinacea, Setaria spp.)andbroadleafweeds (e.g. Plantago rugelii, Taraxacum officinale, and Trifolium spp.) were the dominant herbaceous species.  No woody species were observed.  Soil-Gas monitoring sites, SG-1-SG-6 as well as SG-OGW-1 supported cool-season grasses and common weeds. Various grasses (Festuca arundinaceae, Setaria spp.) and broadleaf weeds(e.g. Plantago rugelii, Taraxacum officinale, and Trifolium spp.) were the dominant herbaceous species.  No woody species were observed.  At the soil-gas monitoring site, SG-OGW-2,only remnants ofagricultural species were observed. In season, it would be planted in agricultural row crops. During field observations,therewerenolivecultivatedspeciespresent. Evidenceof Glycine max and Zea mays from previous plantings was observed. Decurrent False Aster (Boltonia decurrens) The decurrent false aster is a federally threatened species found on moist, sandy floodplainsandprairiewetlandsalongtheIllinoisRiver.Itreliesonperiodicfloodingto scourawayotherplants thatcompete forthesame habitat. Itrequiresdisturbed alluvial soils. Fieldsurveyrevealednosuitablehabitatforthedecurrentfalseasterwithintheproposed project area. Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined the project will have no effect on the decurrent false aster. Indiana Bat (Myotis sodalis) The federally endangered Indiana bat may be found throughout most of the eastern United States. Almost half of all Indiana bats hibernate in caves in southern Indiana. Other states within the current range of the Indiana bat include Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey,NewYork,NorthCarolina,Ohio,Oklahoma,Pennsylvania,Tennessee,Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia. Indiana bats weigh approximately one-quarter of an ounce with a wingspan of 9 to 11 inches. Their fur is dark-brown to black. They hibernate during winter in caves or, occasionally, in abandoned mines. During summer they roost under thepeelingbarkof dead and dying trees. The migratory bat forms nursery colonies under the loose bark and/or in cavities of trees during the summer months (between April 1 and September 30). Thesenurseriesarefrequentlywithinstreamcorridorswithwell-developedriparian woods. Field surveyrevealed nosuitable habitat fortheIndiana bat within theproposedproject area. Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined theproject willhave noeffect on the Indiana bat. Eastern Prairie FringedOrchid (Platanthaera leucophaea) Thefederally threatened eastern prairie fringed orchid requires sun and agrassyhabitat with little or no woody vegetation. The orchid can be found in mesic to wet prairies. Mostpopulationsoccurinsilt-loamsoilsderivedfromloessor glacialtill(Bowles1999). Reproduction from seed is accomplished only with pollination by hawkmoths (Bowles 1999). Seedling establishment is also associated with the development of mycorrhizae with soil-inhabiting fungi (Bowles 1999). The eastern prairie fringed orchid flowers from lateJune to early July. Flowering may last 7 to 10 days. Seed capsulesmature over the growing season and are dispersed by the wind from late August through September. Originallythespecieswaspresentin33Illinoiscountiesinthenortherntwothirdsofthe state. Today, 20 populations may occur in six Illinois counties “concentrated in the Chicago region, and single populations occur in cemetery prairies in eastern and west-central Illinois counties (Bowles 1999 citing Bowles et al 1992). The decline of this species is due to loss of habitat, mainly conversion of natural habitats to cropland and pasture and the drainage and development of wetlands. Other reasons for the current declineincludesuccession towoody vegetation,competitionfromnon-nativespeciesand over-collection. The eastern prairie fringed orchid was not observed during threatened and endangered speciesfieldsurveysinNovember2011(norwasitobservedinpreviousvisitstothesite in April of 2011). These surveys revealed no suitable habitat for the eastern prairie fringed orchid within the areas affected by proposed project actions. The Hoagland pasture, proposed as a site for the meteorological tower, may contain habitat suitable forthe eastern prairie fringed orchid. Soils atthis siteinclude silt-loam and silty clay loam soils formed in loess. (NRCS 2011).  The primary soil type of the area is Tama silt loam, 5to 10percent slopes, eroded(NCSS2011). The native vegetation community of this soil is tall grass prairie (NRCS 2011).  The Hoagland Property has been converted to pasture. Conversion of habitat to agriculture and pasture is one of the main causes of species decline. During field investigation, cool-season grasses were thedominant vegetation type. Regular mowing duringthegrowingseasonisrequiredtomaintainthisvegetationcommunity. Interview with thepropertyowner,ButchHoagland(Hoagland2011)revealed that thepropertyis mowed twice per year andbaledfor cattle fodder. Bowles (1999,citingSheviak1990) notes that mowing during the growing season may result in “failure to form the next season's flower bud, inducing dormancy or even death the following season.” Although suitable soils for the eastern prairie fringed orchid may occur on the project site, the habitat associated with these soils has been converted to cool-season pasture grasses. Maintenance activities associated with this vegetation communitypreclude the presenceoftheeasternprairiefringedorchid. Therearenorecordedoccurrencesofthis species nthevicinityof theproject and recent field surveys indicate it is notpresent in the project area (IDNR 2011b,c). Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined the project will have no effect on the eastern prairie fringed orchid. LITERATURECITED 16 USC 1531-1544.  1973.  “Endangered Species Act of 1973”.  Public Law 93-205. 520ILCS10/11. 1972. “IllinoisEndangeredSpeciesProtection Act.” Illinois Public Act 772186. Bowles, M., R. Flakne, and R. Dombeck. 1992. “Status and population fluctuations of the eastern prairie fringed orchid [Platanthera leucophaea (Nutt.) Lindl.] in Illinois.” Erigenia (Illinois Native Plant Society Bulletin) 12:26-40. Bowles, M. 1999. “Eastern prairie fringed orchid Platanthera leucophaea (Nuttall) Lindley Recovery Plan.”  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3.  58 pp. Hoagland, Butch. 2011. Personal communication between Butch Hoagland (property owner) and David Wortman (Patrick Engineering) on May 11, 2011. IllinoisDepartmentofNaturalResources(IDNR). 2011a. “EcologicalComplianceAssessment Tool (EcoCAT) Public Website.” Accessed 11/15/2011 at http://dnrecocat.state.il.us/ecopublic (last updated November 15, 2011). Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). 2011b. “Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board Website.” Accessed November 15, 2011 at http://www.dnr.state.il.us/espb/index.htm Illinois Department ofNaturalResources (IDNR). 2011c. “Illinois NaturalHeritageDatabase SpatialData.” IllinoisNaturalHeritageDatabaseProgram. EmailfromTaraKieninger (IDNR) to Amanda Stegen (Battelle). Lah, Kris. 2003. “Recovering a Prairie Orchid”. Endangered Species Bulletin, Volume 28, Number 4.  pp 14-15. National Cooperative Soil Service (NCSS). 2011. “NCSS Web Soil Survey.” Accessed November 15, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (last updated April 12, 2011). Sheviak, C.J. 1990. Biological considerations in the management of temperate terrestrial orchids. In: R.S. Mitchell, C.J. Sheviak, and D.J. Leopold, editors. Ecosystem management: Rare species and significant habitats. Proceedings of the 15th annual Natural Areas Conference.  New York State Museum Bulletin No. 471.  P 194-196. United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. 2011. “Official Soil Series Descriptions (OSD) with series extent mapping capabilities” website. Accessed November 15, 2011 at http://soils.usda.gov/technical/classification/osd/index.html (last updated August 19, 2011). United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2011. “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species” website. Accessed November 15, 2011 at http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/lists/illinois-spp.html (last updated July 18, 2011). ATTACHMENT A: RESEARCHER QUALIFICATIONS Bob Rinella, Environmental Professional and Wetland Ecologist, Specialized Ecological Services. Three years with Southern Illinois University Cooperative Wildlife Research Laboratory, fifteen years withSpecializedEcologicalServices. Eighteen (18)years experience with environmental research including wetlands, plant biology, wildlife biology, and environmental planning. Master of Science in Environmental Studies at Southern Illinois University,  Bachelor of Science in Biology at Jacksonville University. James Lang, PhD., Senior Botanist, Specialized Ecological Services. Twenty five (25) years with Greenville College, thirteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Over thirty five (35)yearsexperiencewithplantbiologyandendangeredspeciesresearch. DoctorateinBotany atIowaUniversity, Masterof Sciencein Botany and Bachelorof Artsin ScienceatUniversity of Arkansas. Eric Ahern, Environmental Technician, Specialized Ecological Services. Two years with Zahniser Institute for Environmental Studies, nine years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eleven (11) years experience in environmental research including lacustrine water quality studies, wetland restoration, and GIS/GPS mapping. Master of Science in Education at University of Phoenix  and Bachelor of Arts in Biology at Greenville College. ATTACHMENT B: DOCUMENTATION &CORRESPONDENCE Applicant: Contact: Address:  FutureGen Alliance Ronald Swager 300 W. Edwards Suite 200 Springfield, IL 62704  IDNR Project #: Date:  1205363 11/15/2011  Project: Address:  FutureGen 2 - Met Tower & Soil-Gas Monitoring 2907 Beilschmidt Rd, Alexander  Description:    Installation of a meteorological tower and several soil-gas monitoring stations.  Natural Resource Review Results  The Illinois Natural Heritage Database contains no record of State-listed threatened or endangered species, Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites, dedicated Illinois Nature Preserves, or registered Land and Water Reserves in the vicinity of the project location.  Location The applicant is responsible for the accuracy of the location submitted for the project. County: Morgan Township, Range, Section: 16N, 9W, 25 16N, 9W, 26 16N, 9W, 35 IL Department of Natural Resources Contact Local or State Government Jurisdiction Rick Pietruszka Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 217-785-5500 Division of Ecosystems & Environment Disclaimer The Illinois Natural Heritage Database cannot provide a conclusive statement on the presence, absence, or condition of natural resources in Illinois. This review reflects the information existing in the Database at the time of this inquiry, and should not be regarded as a final statement on the site being considered, nor should it be a substitute for detailed site surveys or field surveys required for environmental assessments. If additional protected resources are encountered during the project’s implementation, compliance with applicable statutes and regulations is required. Page 1 of 2 IDNR Project Number: 1205363 Terms of Use By using this website, you acknowledge that you have read and agree to these terms. These terms may be revised by IDNR as necessary. If you continue to use the EcoCAT application after we post changes to these terms, it will mean that you accept such changes. If at any time you do not accept the Terms of Use, you may not continue to use the website. 1. The IDNR EcoCAT website was developed so that units of local government, state agencies and the public could request information or begin natural resource consultations on-line for the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act, and Illinois Interagency Wetland Policy Act. EcoCAT uses databases, Geographic Information System mapping, and a set of programmed decision rules to determine if proposed actions are in the vicinity of protected natural resources. By indicating your agreement to the Terms of Use for this application, you warrant that you will not use this web site for any other purpose. 2. Unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information on this website are strictly prohibited and may be punishable under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and/or the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act. 3. IDNR reserves the right to enhance, modify, alter, or suspend the website at any time without notice, or to terminate or restrict access. Security EcoCAT operates on a state of Illinois computer system. We may use software to monitor traffic and to identify unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information, to cause harm or otherwise to damage this site. Unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information on this server is strictly prohibited by law. Unauthorized use, tampering with or modification of this system, including supporting hardware or software, may subject the violator to criminal and civil penalties. In the event of unauthorized intrusion, all relevant information regarding possible violation of law may be provided to law enforcement officials. Privacy EcoCAT generates a public record subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act. Otherwise, IDNR uses the information submitted to EcoCAT solely for internal tracking purposes. Page 2 of 2 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX E4 PROTECTED SPECIES SURVEY FOR PROPOSED FUTUREGEN DEVELOPMENT (STRATIGRAPHIC WELL) INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Protected Species Survey Proposed FutureGen Development Morgan County, Illinois Date: May 25, 2011 Prepared for FutureGen Alliance under contract with: Patrick Engineering 300 West Edwards Street, Suite 200 Springfield, Illinois 62704 (630)795-7200 Prepared by: Specialized Ecological Services P.O. Box 136 105 East Oak Street Greenville, IL 62246 INTRODUCTION THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT OF 1973 (AS AMENDED), 16 USC 1531-1544..............................................1 ENDANGERED SPECIES PROTECTION ACT OF 1972, 520 ILCS 10/11............................................................1 STUDY AREA BEILSCHMIDT CHARACTERIZATION PAD.......................................................................................................2 HOAGLAND CHARACTERIZATION PAD.......................................................................................................2 BEILSCHMIDT ROAD IMPROVEMENTS..........................................................................................................2 FARM ROAD IMPROVEMENT AND EXTENSION................................................................................................3 PURPOSE &PROCEDURE PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................5 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................5 RESULTS PRELIMINARY DATA COLLECTION & REVIEW................................................................................................6 FIELD SURVEY....................................................................................................................................7 DECURRENT FALSE ASTER (BOLTONIA DECURRENS).........................................................................................7 INDIANA BAT (MYOTIS SODALIS).............................................................................................................7 EASTERN PRAIRIE FRINGED ORCHID (PLATANTHAERA LEUCOPHAEA) ....................................................................8 LITERATURE CITED ATTACHMENT A: RESEARCHER QUALIFICATIONS A ATTACHMENTB: DOCUMENTATION&CORRESPONDENCE B INTRODUCTION This report documents an investigation of state and federal threatened and endangered species in the vicinity of proposed construction of FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. facilities near Jacksonville, Illinois. Our investigation includes two possible characterization pad areas (the Beilschmidt Property and the Hoagland Property), several truck pull-offs and road modifications on Beilschmidt Road, and widening and extending an existing farm access road. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (as amended), 16 USC 1531-1544 The Endangered Species Act (16 USC 1531-1544) provides for the conservation of threatened and endangered plants and animals and the habitats in which they are found. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) maintains the list of endangered and threatened species. Species include birds, insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, mammals, crustaceans, flowers, grasses, and trees. The law prohibits any action, administrative or real, that results in a “taking” of a listed species or an adverse impact to their habitat. Likewise, import, export, interstate, and foreign commerce of listed species are all prohibited. Endangered Species Protection Act of 1972, 520 ILCS 10/11 The Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/11) is administered by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Endangered Species Protection Board. Procedures for coordination and consultation with the Board are described in the Illinois Administrative Code, Consultation Procedures for Assessing Impacts of Agency Actions on Endangered and Threatened Species. Species are protected if they meet at least one of four definitions: ● Federally Endangered Species: Any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. ● Federally Threatened Species: Any species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range. ● State Endangered Species: Any species that is in danger of extinction as a breeding species in Illinois. ● State Threatened Species: Any breeding species that is likely to become a state endangered species within the foreseeable future in Illinois. This Act requires agencies of state and local governments to evaluate, through a consultation process with IDNR, whether actions authorized, funded, or implemented by them are likely to jeopardize the continued existence of Illinois-listed threatened or endangered species or are likely to result in the destruction or adverse modification of the designated essential habitat of such species. When an agency has so consulted, and its action is determined not to adversely impact any Illinois listed species or critical habitat of such species, the agency shall be deemed to have complied with its obligations under the Act. STUDY AREA Beilschmidt Characterization Pad The Beilschmidt Characterization Pad is located approximately 6 miles north of Alexander, Illinois. This property occupies a 700 ft X 700 ft portion of the northeastern quarter of the southeastern quarter of Section 25, Township 16 North, Range 9 West, 3rd Prime Meridian, in Morgan County. The area of the site is approximately 11.25 acres. Topography within the site ranged between 540 and 570 feet msl. The property contains agricultural fields. Hoagland Characterization Pad The Hoagland Characterization Pad is also located approximately 6 miles north of Alexander, Illinois. This property occupies a 500 ft X 1340 ft portion of the eastern half of the northwestern quarter of Section 25, Township 16 North, Range 9 West, 3rd Prime Meridian, in Morgan County. The area of the site is approximately 15.38 acres. Topography within the site ranged between 540 and 570 feet msl. The property contains agricultural fields and grassed pasture. Beilschmidt RoadImprovements Improvements to Beilschmidt Road include 5 truck pull-off areas and modifications to three curves. These improvements are necessary to allow large trucks to safely access Characterization Pads during construction. The first truck pull-off is located at the intersection of County Highway 123 and Beilschmidt Road, on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. Another pull-off is located approximately 1750 feet west of County Highway 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. A third pull-off is located approximately 3540 feet west of County Highway 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. A fourth pull-off is located approximately 1 mile west of County Road 123 on the south side of Beilschmidt Road. The fifth truck pull-off is located adjacent to the Hoagland Characterization Pad on the east side of Beilschmidt Road. Each of these pull-off sites measures approximately 30 ft by 150 ft. Between County Highway 123 and the existing farm access road (described below), Beilschmidt Road makes three 90o curves. Modifications to the road alignment would affect areas on the inside of these curves. The first corner area of impact includes a triangular area 150 feet wide by 150 feet long south and east of Beilschmidt road approximately 4500 feet west of County Highway 123. Approximately 500 feet south from the first curve, a second area of impact includes a triangular area 150 feet wide by 150 feet long on the north and west sides of Beilschmidt Road. Approximately 1350 feet further west, an area of impact approximately 150 feet wide by 150 feet long is located on the south and east sides of Beilschmidt Road. Farm RoadImprovement and Extension The existing farm access road begins near the northwest corner of the Beilschmidt farm. This unnamed road extends south from its intersection with Beilschmidt Road for approximately 2580 feet along the wester border of the Beilschmidt farm.  The road continues east, bisecting the Martin Property, approximately 2170 feet.  An extension of this road northward approximately 870 feet, roughly parallel to the eastern border of the Beilschmidt farm, would allow access to the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad. PURPOSE &PROCEDURE A survey for protected species and their critical habitat was conducted using best professional practice. Both the US Fish and Wildlife Service and Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Division of Ecosystems and Environment were contacted for a list of potential protected species. Based on this list, the flora and fauna of the proposed impact area were surveyed. Preliminary Data Collection &Review Prior to conducting the protected species survey, the Illinois Natural Heritage Database was reviewed using the EcoCAT website (IDNR 2011a) and an inquiry to the IDNR Division of Ecosystems and Environment. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife's “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species (USFWS 2011)” was also reviewed. Field Survey Pedestrian surveys for jurisdictional wetlands and protected species were conducted on the subject property on April 27, 2011. Surveys were performed by Specialized Ecological Services’ Consulting Ecologist, Robert Rinella. Vegetation identification was performed by Specialized Ecological Services' Senior Botanist, James Lang. Qualifications are provided in Attachment A. RESULTS Preliminary Data Collection &Review The Illinois Department of Natural Resources website lists 14 state and/or federally protected species as potentially occurring in Morgan County (Table 1) (IDNR 2011b). Consultation with the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool, “EcoCAT”, found no record of State-listed threatened or endangered species in the vicinity of the project location. Genus species Agalinis skinneriana Bartramia longicauda Boltonia decurrens1 Buchnera americana Fundulus dispar Fusconala ebena Hespeia ottoe Lanius ludovicianus Melanthium virginicum Polygala incarnata Pseudacris illinoensis Schoenoplectus hallii Speyeria idalia Tropidoclonion lineatum Common name State Status pale false foxglove threatened upland sandpiper endangered decurrent false aster threatened blue hearts threatened starhead topminnow threatened ebonyshell  threatened  ottoe skipper  endangered  loggerhead shrike  endangered  branchflower  threatened  pink milkwort  endangered  Illinois chorus frog  threatened  Hall's bulrush  threatened  regal fritillary  threatened  lined snake  threatened  Table 1: Threatened and endangered species potentially occurring in Morgan County(asof April 12, 2011). The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species (USFWS 2011)” lists the Threatened decurrent false aster (Boltonia decurrens) with a range that includes Morgan County. USFWS (2011) also lists the Endangered Indiana bat (Myotis sodalis) with “potential habitat statewide” but no known occurrence in Morgan County. Finally, USFWS (2011) lists the Threatened eastern prairie fringed orchid (Platanthaera leucophaea) with an historic range that includes Morgan County. Lah (2003) notes that the orchid once occurred in 33 counties of northern Illinois but is now only found in 9. There are no known occurrences in Morgan County (IDNR 2011c). 1Boltonia decurrens is also Federally threatened. Of the protected species known to inhabit Morgan County, none are known by state or federal authorities to inhabit the subject area. None of these species were observed during the site visits.  Because no impacts are expected, no mitigation is required. Field Survey No state or federally protected species were observed during field investigation. The Beilschmidt Characterization Pad supports a single vegetation community, agricultural row crops. Common species observed include Barbarea vulgaris, Capsella bursapastoris, Conium maculatum, Erigeron canadensis, Lamium amplexicaule, Rananculus abortivus, and Stellaria media. The Hoagland Characterization Pad and project areas associated with improvements to Beilschmidt Road support cool-season grasses and common weeds. Various grasses (Festuca arundinaceae, Phalaris arundinacea, Setaria spp.) and broadleaf weeds (Barbarea vulgaris, Lamium amplexicaule, Rumex chrispus, Taraxacum officinale, and Thalaspia arvense) were the dominant herbaceous species. No woody species were observed. The project areas associated with the improvement and extension of the existing farm access road contain primarily cool-season grasses and common weeds, but also areas of agricultural row crop. Decurrent False Aster (Boltonia decurrens) The decurrent false aster is a federally threatened species found on moist, sandy floodplains and prairie wetlands along the Illinois River. It relies on periodic flooding to scour away other plants that compete for the same habitat. It requires disturbed alluvial soils. Field survey revealed no suitable habitat for the decurrent false aster within the proposed project area. Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined the project will have no effect on the decurrent false aster. Indiana Bat (Myotis sodalis) The federally endangered Indiana bat may be found throughout most of the eastern United States. Almost half of all Indiana bats hibernate in caves in southern Indiana. Other states within the current range of the Indiana bat include Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia. Indiana bats weigh approximately one-quarter of an ounce with a wingspan of 9 to 11 inches. Their fur is dark-brown to black. They hibernate during winter in caves or, occasionally, in abandoned mines. During summer they roost under the peeling bark of dead and dying trees. The migratory bat forms nursery colonies under the loose bark and/or in cavities of trees during the summer months (between April 1 and September 30). These nurseries are frequently within stream corridors with well-developed riparian woods. Field survey revealed no suitable habitat for the Indiana bat within the proposed project area. Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined the project will have no effect on the Indiana bat. Eastern Prairie Fringed Orchid (Platanthaera leucophaea) The federally threatened eastern prairie fringed orchid requires sun and a grassy habitat with little or no woody vegetation. The orchid can be found in mesic to wet prairies. Most populations occur in silt-loam soils derived from loess or glacial till (Bowles 1999). Reproduction from seed is accomplished only with pollination by hawkmoths (Bowles 1999). Seedling establishment is also associated with the development of mycorrhizae with soil-inhabiting fungi (Bowles 1999). The eastern prairie fringed orchid flowers from late June to early July. Flowering may last 7 to 10 days. Seed capsules mature over the growing season and are dispersed by the wind from late August through September. Originally the species was present in 33 Illinois counties in the northern two thirds of the state. Today, 20 populations may occur in six Illinois counties “concentrated in the Chicago region, and single populations occur in cemetery prairies in eastern and west-central Illinois counties (Bowles 1999 citing Bowles et al 1992). The decline of this species is due to loss of habitat, mainly conversion of natural habitats to cropland and pasture and the drainage and development of wetlands. Other reasons for the current decline include succession to woody vegetation, competition from non-native species and over-collection. The eastern prairie fringed orchid was not observed during threatened and endangered species field surveys in April 2011. These surveys revealed no suitable habitat for the eastern prairie fringed orchid at the Beilschmidt Characterization Pad, Beilschmidt Road improvement areas, or farm access road improvement/extension areas. The Hoagland Characterization Pad may contain habitat suitable for the eastern prairie fringed orchid. Soils at this site include silt-loam and silty clay loam soils formed in loess. (NRCS 2011). The primary soil type of the area is Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded (NCSS 2011). The native vegetation community of this soil is tall grass prairie (NRCS 2011).  The Hoagland Property has been converted to pasture. Conversion of habitat to agriculture and pasture is one of the main causes of species decline. During field investigation, cool-season grasses were the dominant vegetation type. Regular mowing during the growing season is required to maintain this vegetation community. Interview with the property owner, Butch Hoagland (Hoagland 2011) revealed that the property is mowed twice per year and baled for cattle fodder. Bowles (1999, citing Sheviak 1990) notes that mowing during the growing season may result in “failure to form the next season's flower bud, inducing dormancy or even death the following season.” Although suitable soils for the eastern prairie fringed orchid may occur on the project site, the habitat associated with these soils has been converted to cool-season pasture grasses. Maintenance activities associated with this vegetation community preclude the presence of the eastern prairie fringed orchid. There are no recorded occurrences of this species n the vicinity of the project and recent field surveys indicate it is not present in the project area (IDNR 2011b,c). Therefore, FutureGen Alliance has determined the project will have no effect on the eastern prairie fringed orchid. LITERATURE CITED 16 USC 1531-1544.  1973.  “Endangered Species Act of 1973”.  Public Law 93-205. 520 ILCS 10/11. 1972. “Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act.” Illinois Public Act 772186. Bowles, M., R. Flakne, and R. Dombeck. 1992. “Status and population fluctuations of the eastern prairie fringed orchid [Platanthera leucophaea (Nutt.) Lindl.] in Illinois.” Erigenia (Illinois Native Plant Society Bulletin) 12:26-40. Bowles, M. 1999. “Eastern prairie fringed orchid Platanthera leucophaea (Nuttall) Lindley Recovery Plan.”  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3.  58 pp. Hoagland, Butch. 2011. Personal communication between Butch Hoagland (property owner) and David Wortman (Patrick Engineering) on May 11, 2011. Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). 2011a. “Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool (EcoCAT) Public Website.” Accessed 4/28/2011 at http://dnrecocat.state.il.us/ecopublic (last updated April 28, 2011). Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). 2011b. “Illinois Endangered Species Protection Board Website.” Accessed May 16, 2011 at http://www.dnr.state.il.us/espb/index.htm Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). 2011c. “Illinois Natural Heritage Database Spatial Data.” Illinois Natural Heritage Database Program. Email from Tara Kieninger (IDNR) to Amanda Stegen (Battelle). Lah, Kris. 2003. “Recovering a Prairie Orchid”. Endangered Species Bulletin, Volume 28, Number 4.  pp 14-15. National Cooperative Soil Service (NCSS). 2011. “NCSS Web Soil Survey.” Accessed May 1, 2011 at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (last updated November 11, 2009). Sheviak, C.J. 1990. Biological considerations in the management of temperate terrestrial orchids. In: R.S. Mitchell, C.J. Sheviak, and D.J. Leopold, editors. Ecosystem management: Rare species and significant habitats. Proceedings of the 15th annual Natural Areas Conference.  New York State Museum Bulletin No. 471.  P 194-196. United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. 2011. “Official Soil Series Descriptions (OSD) with series extent mapping capabilities” website. Accessed 5/5/2011 at http://soils.usda.gov/technical/classification/osd/index.html (last updated January 24, 2011). United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2011. “County Distribution of Federally Threatened, Endangered, Proposed and Candidate Species” website. Accessed 5/1/2011 and 5/5/2011 at http://www.fws.gov/midwest/endangered/lists/illinois-spp.html (last updates May 5, 2011). ATTACHMENT A: RESEARCHER QUALIFICATIONS Bob Rinella, Environmental Professional and Wetland Ecologist, Specialized Ecological Services. Three years with Southern Illinois University Cooperative Wildlife Research Laboratory, fifteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eighteen (18) years experience with environmental research including wetlands, plant biology, wildlife biology, and environmental planning. Master of Science in Environmental Studies at Southern Illinois University,  Bachelor of Science in Biology at Jacksonville University. James Lang, PhD., Senior Botanist, Specialized Ecological Services. Twenty five (25) years with Greenville College, thirteen years with Specialized Ecological Services. Over thirty five (35) years experience with plant biology and endangered species research. Doctorate in Botany at Iowa University, Master of Science in Botany and Bachelor of Arts in Science at University of Arkansas. Eric Ahern, Environmental Technician, Specialized Ecological Services. Two years with Zahniser Institute for Environmental Studies, nine years with Specialized Ecological Services. Eleven (11) years experience in environmental research including lacustrine water quality studies, wetland restoration, and GIS/GPS mapping. Master of Science in Education at University of Phoenix  and Bachelor of Arts in Biology at Greenville College. ATTACHMENT B: DOCUMENTATION &CORRESPONDENCE Applicant:  FutureGen Alliance  IDNR Project #:  1112068  Contact:  Ronald Swager  Date:  04/28/2011  Address:  300 W. Edwards  Suite 200  Springfield, IL 62704  Project:  FutureGen 2  Address:  2907 Beilschmidt Rd, Alexander  Description:    Construction of Characterization and Injection wells for the purpose of sequestering CO2  Natural Resource Review Results  Consultation for Endangered Species Protection and Natural Areas Preservation (Part 1075) The Illinois Natural Heritage Database contains no record of State-listed threatened or endangered species, Illinois Natural Area Inventory sites, dedicated Illinois Nature Preserves, or registered Land and Water Reserves in the vicinity of the project location.  Consultation is terminated.  This consultation is valid for two years unless new information becomes available that was not previously considered; the proposed action is modified; or additional species, essential habitat, or Natural Areas are identified in the vicinity. If the project has not been implemented within two years of the date of this letter, or any of the above listed conditions develop, a new consultation is necessary.  Termination does not imply IDNR's authorization or endorsement. Page 1 of 3 IDNR Project Number: 1112068 Location The applicant is responsible for the accuracy of the location submitted for the project. County: Morgan Township, Range, Section: 16N, 8W, 19 16N, 8W, 30 16N, 9W, 24 16N, 9W, 25 IL Department of Natural Resources Contact Local or State Government Jurisdiction Tracy Evans IL Army National Guard Ronald Swager 217-785-5500 Patrick Engineering Division of Ecosystems & Environment 300 W. Edwards St. Springfield, Illinois 62704-1907 Disclaimer The Illinois Natural Heritage Database cannot provide a conclusive statement on the presence, absence, or condition of natural resources in Illinois. This review reflects the information existing in the Database at the time of this inquiry, and should not be regarded as a final statement on the site being considered, nor should it be a substitute for detailed site surveys or field surveys required for environmental assessments. If additional protected resources are encountered during the project’s implementation, compliance with applicable statutes and regulations is required. Page 2 of 3 IDNR Project Number: 1112068 Terms of Use By using this website, you acknowledge that you have read and agree to these terms. These terms may be revised by IDNR as necessary. If you continue to use the EcoCAT application after we post changes to these terms, it will mean that you accept such changes. If at any time you do not accept the Terms of Use, you may not continue to use the website. 1. The IDNR EcoCAT website was developed so that units of local government, state agencies and the public could request information or begin natural resource consultations on-line for the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act, and Illinois Interagency Wetland Policy Act. EcoCAT uses databases, Geographic Information System mapping, and a set of programmed decision rules to determine if proposed actions are in the vicinity of protected natural resources. By indicating your agreement to the Terms of Use for this application, you warrant that you will not use this web site for any other purpose. 2. Unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information on this website are strictly prohibited and may be punishable under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and/or the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act. 3. IDNR reserves the right to enhance, modify, alter, or suspend the website at any time without notice, or to terminate or restrict access. Security EcoCAT operates on a state of Illinois computer system. We may use software to monitor traffic and to identify unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information, to cause harm or otherwise to damage this site. Unauthorized attempts to upload, download, or change information on this server is strictly prohibited by law. Unauthorized use, tampering with or modification of this system, including supporting hardware or software, may subject the violator to criminal and civil penalties. In the event of unauthorized intrusion, all relevant information regarding possible violation of law may be provided to law enforcement officials. Privacy EcoCAT generates a public record subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act. Otherwise, IDNR uses the information submitted to EcoCAT solely for internal tracking purposes. Page 3 of 3 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX F Cultural Surveys F1 – Draft Programmatic Agreement F2 – Phase I – Site Characterization Locale Survey F3 – Phase I – Meredosia Energy Center Survey F4 – Phase I – Bluff Area Pipeline Right-of-Way Survey F5 – Phase I – Soil Gas Monitoring Locations Survey for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX F1 DRAFT PROGRAMMATIC AGREEMENT INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK PROGRAMMATIC AGREEMENT AMONG  THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION, THE ILLINOIS HISTORIC PRESERVATION AGENCY, THE FUTUREGEN ALLIANCE, AND THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY REGARDING THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND OPERATION OF  THE FUTUREGEN 2.0 PROJECT, AN OXY-COMBUSTION POWER GENERATION FACILITY, PIPELINE, AND CO2 STORAGE RESERVOIR PROJECT IN MORGAN COUNTY, ILLINOIS WHEREAS, the FutureGen Alliance (Alliance) proposes to construct and operate the FutureGen 2.0 Project (Project), including the modification of an existing Meredosia  Power Generation Station near Meredosia, Illinois; construction of approximately 30 miles of a carbon dioxide (CO2) transport pipeline; and the development of surface and subsurface facilities for the injection of CO2 in an underground storage field. The Project will include associated above and below ground facilities such as pump stations, transmission facilities, access roads, and injection and monitoring wells) and ancillary facilities (such as utilities, office and visitor space, temporary workplace areas, and contractor lay down yards); and WHEREAS, the Alliance has entered into a Cooperative Agreement with the United States  Department of Energy (DOE) in order to secure cost-shared funding for the construction of the Project; WHEREAS, DOE recognizes its role as the “Agency Official” responsible for ensuring that, in the provision of financial assistance for the Project, DOE complies with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) (16 U.S.C. 470f, as amended), and its implementing regulations, “Protection of Historic Properties,” (36 CFR § 800.14(b));  and  WHEREAS, DOE has determined that the activities associated with the construction and operation of the Project may have an adverse effect on properties that are listed in or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and has consulted with the Illinois State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) and Native American Tribes pursuant to 36 CFR § 800; and  WHEREAS, DOE intends to use the provisions of this Programmatic Agreement (PA) to address applicable requirements of Sections 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), as amended (16 U.S.C. 470f and 470h-2(f)); and WHEREAS, the Alliance acknowledges (as the Project’s managing and operating contractors and recipients of Federal funding) their responsibility for preparing the necessary information and analysis for National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) compliance, pursuant to 36 CFR § 800.2(a)(3); and  WHEREAS, the Alliance, which proposes to construct and operate the FutureGen 2.0 Project, has participated in consultations, has been invited by DOE under 36 CFR § 800.2(c)(4) and 800.6(c)(2) to sign this agreement as an invited signatories, and intends to sign said agreement; and  WHEREAS, the definitions listed in 36 CFR § 800 are applicable throughout this Programmatic  Agreement; and  NOW, THEREFORE, the signatories to this Programmatic Agreement agree that the Undertaking shall be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations which the signatories agree will ensure all necessary compliance with the relevant provisions of the NHPA. Stipulations  I.  Professional Qualifications Standards All actions prescribed by this Agreement that involve the identification, evaluation, analysis, recording, treatment, monitoring, or disposition of historic properties, or that involve the reporting or documentation of such actions in the form of reports, forms, or other records, shall be carried out by or under the direct supervision of a person or persons who meets, at a minimum, the qualifications for history, archaeology, or architectural history specified in the Secretary of Interior's "Professional Qualifications Standards" (36 CFR § 800.2(a)(1)) and  (48 FR 44739-190), as appropriate.  II. Identification and Evaluation of Potential Historic Properties A. Identification of Historic Properties 1) The Alliance will take all measures necessary to discover, preserve, and avoid significant historic properties listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).  Under consultation with the SHPO, the Alliance will describe and define the Area of Potential Effect (hereafter referred to as the APE) in accordance with the definition contained in 36 CFR § 800.16(d).  The APE may be modified upon consultation with the SHPO to facilitate avoidance and will be documented through the implementation of historic property surveys and testing, documentary research, recordation, and other investigation data.  The APE may be amended without amending the Programmatic Agreement.  The APE may be amended by agreement of the signatories and shall be memorialized in writing. 2) The Alliance will ensure that all reconnaissance surveys and subsurface testing are conducted in a manner consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Identification and Evaluation (48 FR 44720-23) and take into account the National Park Service publication “The Archaeological Survey: Method and Uses” (1978) and any extant or most recent version of appropriate SHPO guidelines for historic properties reconnaissance survey/reports, related guidance, etc.   B. Evaluation of Historic Properties 1) In consultation with the SHPO, the Alliance will evaluate the eligibility of significant historic properties by applying the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) criteria (36 CFR § 60.4). 2) For those properties that the SHPO agrees are not eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, no further historic properties investigations will be required, and Project activities may proceed in those areas. 3) If the survey results in the identification of properties that the SHPO agrees are eligible for inclusion on the NRHP, the Alliance shall treat such properties in accordance with Part III below. 4) If the Alliance  and the SHPO do not agree on NRHP eligibility, or if the ACHP or the National Park Service so request, DOE will request a formal determination of eligibility from the Keeper of the NRHP, National Park Service, whose determination shall be final. 5) Relative to the treatment of historic properties and the identification of traditional cultural properties, DOE and/or the SHPO will provide the appropriate Tribe(s) and the Tribal Historic Preservation Officer(s) (THPO) information related to the treatment measures proposed by the Alliance. III. Treatment of Historic Properties Those individual historic properties that DOE and the SHPO agree are eligible for nomination to, or that the Keeper has determined are eligible for inclusion on the NRHP, will be treated in the following manner: 1) If DOE, in consultation with the SHPO, determines that no other actions are feasible to avoid and minimize effect to archaeological properties, then the Alliance will develop a treatment plan, which may include various levels of data recovery, recordation, documentation, and active protection measures.  Alliance will implement the treatment plan in consultation with DOE and the SHPO. 2) If data recovery is the agreed-upon treatment, the data recovery plan will address substantive research questions developed in consultation with the SHPO.  The treatment plan shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archaeological Documentation (48 FR 44734-37) and take into account the ACHP’s publication Treatment of Archaeological Properties (1980) and pertinent SHPO guidance.  It will specify, at a minimum, the following: a. The property, properties, or portions of properties where the treatment plan is to be carried out; b. The research questions to be addressed, with an explanation of research relevance and importance; c. The methods to be used, with an explanation of methodological relevance to the research questions; d. Proposed methods of dissemination results of the work to the interested public; and e. Proposed schedule for the submission of the results to the SHPO. 3) The Alliance will submit the treatment plan to DOE and/or the SHPO for 30 days’ review and comment.  The Alliance will take into account DOE and/or SHPO comment(s) and will ensure that the data recovery plan is implemented. 4) The Alliance will ensure that the treatment plan is carried out by or under the direct supervision of an archaeologist(s), architectural historian(s), and/or other appropriate cultural resource specialist that meets, at a minimum, the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards (48 FR 44738-9). 5) The Alliance will ensure that adequate provisions, including personnel, equipment, and laboratory space is available for the analysis and temporary curation of materials, artifacts, and biological specimens recovered from historic properties. 6) The Alliance will develop and implement an adequate program in consultation with the SHPO to secure and protect historic properties from vandalism during the process of data recovery. IV. Treatment of Human Remains, Funerary Objects, Sacred Objects, or Objects of Cultural Patrimony A. When human remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, or objects of cultural patrimony are encountered or collected, the Alliance will comply with all provisions outlined in applicable Federal or state law, regulations, guidance, provisions, etc., and any decisions regarding the treatment of human remains will be made recognizing the rights of lineal descendants, Tribes and other recognized Native American groups in consultation with the SHPO, THPO, and /or other appropriate legal authority regarding the evaluation, assessment, documentation, and disposition of remains or objects. B. If burials are discovered during the investigations covered by this PA, the Alliance shall ensure that required notifications of the discovery will be made to the county coroner and the SHPO as stipulated in the Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act (20 ILCS 3440, 17 IAC 4170).  Then, following authorization under the Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act (20 ILCS 3440, 17 IAC 4170) and its rules, human burials, human remains, and any associated burial artifacts will be removed following procedures for recordation and reporting that are similar to those established under the Human Skeletal Remains Protection Act (20 ILCS 3440, 17 IAC 4170).  No excavation of human remains will be performed except under the direction of a “Certified Skeletal Analyst” (17 IAC 4170.300(f)). V. Unexpected Discoveries The Alliance will notify DOE and the SHPO as soon as practicable if it appears that the Project will affect a previously unidentified property that may be eligible for the NRHP or affect a known historic property in an unanticipated manner.  1) The Alliance will stop construction activities in the vicinity of the discovery and will take all reasonable measures to avoid or minimize harm to the property until consultation with the SHPO.  (In the case of human remains, The Alliance will notify the appropriate agencies as detailed in Part IV, subpart B of this PA.)  2) DOE will notify the SHPO at the earliest possible time and consult with the SHPO to develop actions that will take into account the effects of the Project.  DOE will notify the SHPO of any time constraints, and DOE and the SHPO will mutually agree upon time frames for this consultation.  3) The Alliance may participate in this consultation. 4) DOE will provide the SHPO with written recommendations that take the effect of the Project into account.  5) If the SHPO does not object to DOE’s recommendations within the agreed upon time frame, DOE will require the Alliance to modify the activities as necessary to implement the recommendations.  VI. Dispute Resolution A. Should the SHPO, the ACHP, the Alliance or any other consulting party object within time frames provided by this PA to any plans, specifications, or actions provided for review pursuant to this Agreement, DOE will consult further with the objecting party to seek resolution.   B. Should DOE object within time frames provided by this PA to any plans, specifications, or actions provided for review pursuant to this Agreement, DOE will consult further with the other parties to seek resolution. If DOE determines within 14 days of receipt that the SHPO, the ACHP, or the Alliance objection cannot be resolved, DOE will forward to the ACHP all documentation relevant to the dispute including DOE’s proposed resolution to the objection. C. Any recommendation or comment provided by the ACHP will pertain only to the subject of the dispute. The responsibility of the signatories to carry out all actions under this PA that are not subject to the dispute will remain unchanged. The signatories will continue to implement other terms of the PA that are not subject to dispute. VII.  Duration, Amendments, and Termination A. Unless terminated pursuant to Subpart C below, this PA shall remain in effect from the date of execution until DOE, in consultation with all other signatories, determines that the terms of this PA have been fulfilled in a satisfactory manner.  Upon a determination by DOE that the terms of this PA have been satisfactorily fulfilled, this PA will terminate and have no further force or effect.  DOE will provide all other signatories with written notice of its determination and of termination of this PA.  Unless amended otherwise, this will expire on December 31, 2020. B. If any signatory to the PA determines that the stipulations of the PA cannot be fulfilled, the signatories may consult to seek amendment of the PA.  Amendments to this PA will be specific to the applicable and legitimate circumstances unless otherwise agreed to by the signatories. C. DOE, the SHPO, the ACHP, or the Alliance may terminate this PA by providing 30 days written notice to the other parties, provided that the parties will consult during the period prior to termination to seek agreement on amendments or other actions that would avoid termination. Termination of this PA will require compliance with 36 CFR § 800. This PA may be terminated without further consultation by the execution of a subsequent PA that explicitly terminates or supersedes its terms, or by DOE’s implementation of Program Alternatives, pursuant to 36 CFR §800.14. VIII. Execution of this Programmatic Agreement This PA may be executed in counterparts, with a separate page for each signatory, and DOE will ensure that each party is provided with a fully executed copy.  This PA will become effective on the date of the last signature to this PA.  The execution and implementation of this Programmatic Agreement evidences that DOE has afforded the SHPO and the ACHP reasonable opportunity to comment on its administration of all aforementioned activities associated with the FutureGen 2.0 Project and, in addition, further evidences that DOE has satisfied its responsibilities with regard to complying with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) (16 U.S.C. 470f, as amended), its implementing regulations, “Protection of Historic Properties,” (36 CFR § 800.14(b)) and the American Indian Religious Freedom Act (AIRFA) (42 U.S.C. 1996 and 1996a) for all undertakings associated with the FutureGen Project. APPENDIX F2 PHASE I – SITE CHARACTERIZATION LOCALE SURVEY INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Archaeological SurveyShort Report IllinoisHistoricPreservationAgency OldStateCapitol Building Springfield,Illinois62701(217)7854997 REVIEWER Date: Accepted Rejected IHPAUSEONLY(FormASSR0886) PHASE I CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY FUTUREGEN INDUSTRIAL ALLIANCE, INC. SITE CHARACTERIZATIONLOCALE MORGAN COUNTY, ILLINOIS Prepared For FutureGenIndustrialAlliance,Inc. 1101PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW SixthFloor Washington,D.C.20004 April 2011 P.O.Box5603●Springfield,Illinois627055603●Phone217.544.4881/Fax217.544.4988 ArchaeologicalSurveyShortReport IllinoisHistoricPreservationAgency OldStateCapitolBuilding Springfield,Illinois62701(217)7854997 REVIEWER Date: Accepted Rejected IHPAUSEONLY(FormASSR0886) IHPA Log #: UNASSIGNED LOCATIONALINFORMATION AND SURVEYCONDITIONS County: Morgan Quadrangle: Prentice,IL7.5minuteUSGS Project Type/Title: FutureGenIndustrialAllianceSiteCharacterizationLocale,MorganCounty,IL Funding and/or Permitting Federal/State Agencies: U.S.DepartmentofEnergy Township: 16 North Range: 8West Section(s): 30 Township: 16 North Range: 9West Section(s): 25 Project Description: A phase I cultural resource investigation of the location for drilling and access routesforcharacterizationactivitiesrelatedtotheFutureGen projectinMorganCounty,Illinois Topography: Uplands Soils: Specificsoilsinthe projectareainclude:36BTamasiltloam,2to5percentslopes;36C2Tama siltloam,5to10percentslopes,eroded;43AIpavasiltloam,0to2percentslopes;68–Sable silty clay loam; 259D2 Assumption silt loam, 10 to 15 percent slopes, eroded; and 567C2 Elkhartsiltloam,5to10 percentslopes,eroded (Figure2). Drainage: IndianCreek Land Use/Ground Cover (Include % Visibility): The Area of Potential Effect (APE) consisted of approximately15.3acresofagriculturalfieldswith80to95percentofthegroundsurfacevisible tosurveyors. Survey Limitations: Surveylimitationswereminimal. ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL INFORMATION Historical Plats/Atlases/Sources: The following historical sources were examined: 1823 United States General Land Office Plat (T16N,R89W), 1872Atlas Map of Morgan County, Illinois (Andreas, Lyter & Co.), 1894 Plat Book of Morgan County, Illinois (American Atlas Co.), and the 1983 Prentice, IL 7.5’ Topographic Map (UnitedStatesGeologicalSurvey). The 1823 General Land Office (GLO) plat shows no improvements or that the property was “applied for”. When aparcel is indicated as “Applied for,” the property was either occupied or intended to be occupied at the time of the survey. Typically, the occupant or “squatter” expressed, tothe GLOsurveyor, his interestin purchasingthepropertyonce itbecame available fromthefederalgovernment. Usuallyitisunknownifthepropertywasactuallyimprovedwitha permanent building (such as ahouse or cabin) at the time the survey was conducted. The GLO platsthatincludetheAPEdonotindicateanyculturallandmarks(suchastrails,fords,orroads), structuresorfarmfieldswithinthe projectboundaries. Thissourcedoesindicatethatthemajority ofthe parcelwassituatedwithin prairie(Figure3). The Illinois Public Domain Land Tract Database indicates the land parcels associated with the project areas were purchased by five individuals (William O’Rear, Isaac Robinson, Peter Robinson, Thomas F. Stout, andJacob Yaple) between 1827 and 1833. All land was purchased fromthefederalgovernmentattherateof$1.25 peracre(Figure4). The 1872 historical atlas indicates the parcels associated with the project areas as owned by William O’Rear, Joel Corrington, and Lucretia Green (Figure 5). This source does not indicate anystructureswithintheAPE. The1894historicalatlasindicatestheparcelsassociatedwiththeprojectareasasownedbyL.M. Thomas, Henry W. Beilschmidt, and Lucretia Green (Figure 6). While this source indicates a structure intersecting the project area on the Beilschmidt property, this is most likely due to mapping inconsistencies. No evidence of a structure or associated materials was recovered duringthisinvestigation. Previous Surveys/ Reported Sites: AreviewofIHPArecordsindicatesthatno previoussurveysorsites have beenreportedwithintheAPE. Regional Archaeologists Contacted: Databases maintained by the Illinois State Museum, the Illinois Departmentof NaturalResources,andtheIllinoisHistoricPreservationAgencywerereviewed. Investigation Techniques: Pedestrian reconnaissance at 5meter intervals was conducted within the projectarea. Field Time Expended: 10manhours Sites/Find Spots Located: NONE Cultural Material: NONE (Curated at): N/A Collection Techniques: N/A Area Surveyed(Acres &Square Meters): Approximately15.3acres(61935.36m2). RESULTS OF INVESTIAGATIONS ANDRECOMMENDATIONS (CHECK ONE) Phase I Archaeological Reconnaissance Has Located No Archaeological Material; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase IArchaeological Reconnaissance Has LocatedArchaeological Materials: Site(s)Does (Do)Not Meet requirements for the National Register Eligibility; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase IArchaeological Reconnaissance Has LocatedArchaeological Materials; Site(s)MayMeet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Phase IITestingisRecommended. • Phase II Archaeological Investigations Has Indicated that Site(s) Does (Do) Not Meet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase II Archaeological Investigations Has Indicated that Site(s) Meet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Formal Report is Pending and a Determination of Eligibility is Recommended. Comments: An intensive cultural resource survey of the area proposed to be impacted by site characterizationactivitiesassociatedtheFutureGenprojectinMorganCounty,Illinoiswasconductedon April 25, 2011. The project area is composed of approximately 15.3acres in agricultural use where 8095 percentofthegroundsurfacewasvisibletofieldinvestigators. The current investigation included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, a computer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, a review of the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and a review of the Illinois Register of Historic Sites (IRHS) maintained by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. Examination of archival and historical sources and resource databases did not identify that known prehistoric or historicsites,areas,orartifactsmaybepresentwithintheboundariesoftheAPEorwithintheimmediate vicinityoftheAPE. Archaeological and cultural resource field examination of the APE included the use of pedestrian reconnaissance at 5meter intervals to located evidence of unknown or unreported archaeological, historical or cultural sites, area, and artifacts. Under excellent field conditions and ground surface exposure, field surveyors failed to find evidence of archaeological or historical resources, sites, or structures within the boundaries where characterization activities will be conducted. Due to the APE’s locationwithintheinterioruplandsofMorganCounty,itisunlikelythatalluvialorcolluvialdepositional conditionshaveresultedinthedeepburialofculturaldepositsorremains. Asaresult,geomorphological investigative techniques to locate and assess deeply buried archaeological and historical resources or artifactsweredeemedunnecessary. Management Summary and Conclusions AculturalresourceinventoryoftheareaproposedforcharacterizationactivitiesrelatedtotheFutureGen Industrial Alliance facility in Morgan County, Illinois included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, a computer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, and a review of the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), a review of the Illinois Register of Historic Sites (IRHS) maintained by the Illinois Historic PreservationAgency,andfieldinvestigationsutilizinga pedestrianreconnaissanceat5meterintervals. Based ontheresults of field investigations andon information collected duringarchival andbackground research, the APE does not contain evidence for the presence of archaeological, historical, or cultural resources,sites,areas,orartifacts. Aspresentlyconceptualized,activitiesrelatedto thecharacterization of the Morgan County, IL FutureGen facility will not impact cultural resources. Further, additional culturalresourceinvestigationsareneitherwarrantednorrecommend. StateHistoricPreservationOfficer concurrenceandapprovalisrequested. Archaeological Contractor Information ArchaeologicalContractor: PrairieArchaeology&Research. Address/Phone: P.O.Box5603,Springfield,IL627055603 (217) 5444881 Surveyors(s): JosephCraigandJasonRein Survey Date(s): April25,2011 Date: April26,2011 SubmittedBy (Signature and Title): Attachment Check List: (#1 through#4 are MANDATORY) • 1. RelevantPortionofUSGS7.5’TopographicQuadrangleMap(s)showingProjectLocationand RecordedSites; • 2. ProjectMap(s)depictingSurveyLimitsand,whenApplicable,ApproximateSurveyLimits,and ConcentrationsofCulturalMaterials; • 3. SiteForm(s);TwoCopiesofEachForm; • 4. AllRelevantProjectCorrespondence; • 5. AdditionalInformationSheetsAs Necessary Address of Owner/Agent/Agency To Whom SHPOComment Should BeMailed FutureGenIndustrialAlliance,Inc. Contact Person: Mr.KenHumphreys,CEO 1101PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW Phone Number: (202)2806019 SixthFloor Fax Number: n/a Washington,D.C.20004 U.S.DepartmentofEnergy Contact Person: Mr.CliffWhyte, NEPAComplianceOfficer NationalTechnologyLaboratory Phone Number: (304)2852098 3610CollinsFerryRoad Fax Number: n/a P.O.Box880 Morgantown,WV265070880 Review Comments: REFERENCES Andreas,Lyter&Co. 1872 AtlasMapofMorganCounty,Illinois.Davenport. AmericanAtlasCo. 1894 PlatBookofMorganCounty,Illinois.Chicago. UnitedStatesDepartmentofAgriculture 2011 http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov UnitedStatesGeneralLandOffice 1823 GeneralLandSurveyPlats,T16N,R89W. PlatsonfileattheIllinoisState Library,Springfield,Illinois. UnitedStatesGeologicalSurvey 1983 Prentice,IL7.5MinuteTopographicMap FIGURES Figure 1. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1983Prentice, IL7.5’ USGS Topographic Map). Figure 2. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov). Figure 3. Location of the project area, Township16North, Ranges 8-9West (1823United States General Land Office Survey) Figure 4. Initialland purchases within the project area. Figure 5. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1872Atlas Map ofMorgan County, Illinois). Figure 6. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1894Plat Book ofMorgan County, Illinois). INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX F3 PHASE I – MEREDOSIA ENERGY CENTER SURVEY INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !""!#$!%&'()*'+$"$,!)'"&%!-+&(+)$(.!#,&/$(0 !"#$%&' 012345 ()%*+,-.*' #1267825&)2199&(4:;214< =*?)@)%' # /)*01+,#.2*3' =>=?@A?BB (%-%*+()%*+,"8' CBD 4#-13-$50*+6789:;' 0828<19:4 <-%*+=*>"31*1' E=?=F=BFE= SIRAS+<I(!=^LB^J,+6%"+`#-3%*3+`#-3%*3+`#-3%*3+@*>%)"$; A0)5$' %+ Xa]@' #+#+%+ %+%+#G (*>%)"$' E? B"C$@D)E' ?@ # =-$5*' ?D G A0)5$' %G Xa]@' #G#G%G (*>%)"$' EE B"C$@D)E' ?@ # =-$5*' ?D G A0)5$' Xa]@' (*>%)"$' = B"C$@D)E' = =-$5*' = A0)5$' Xa]@' (*>%)"$' = B"C$@D)E' = =-$5*' = FBG+!""31)$-%*@+62&+^(G;' FBG+H"$*' ?H FBG+,"3%D' CC??==B FBG+I-@%' B=>HD? JC$*3@D)E' I2:J468 I,N^=J,GI,B B"E"53-ED&' /;11<K;4:5 I0*?-%)"$+6)$+.*%*3@;' ?D? ,*-3*@%+K-%*3+(#EE0&' !;;:51:9 <3-)$-5*' "1L82&!;;:51:9 (")0+A@@">)-%)"$' $4MJ:;;8A"4N156A';J:5 <*@>3)E%)"$' -78&9:68&:9&;1O468<&58P6&61&678&!;;:51:9&(:J82Q&RS96&91S67&1T&0828<19:4F (F=NIb L3"M*>%+,-.*' !"&?=C&U2:<38 ()%*+A3*-+6@`#-3*+.*%*3@;' D=ZHE R3"#$1+!"?*3+6S)@%+#E+%"+T;' /12896 U2S97 ,2499 N)@)2)0)%&+6O;' = (#3?*&+G*%D"1@+6S)@%+#E+%"+U;' %71J8;&-896 (%-$1)$5+(%3#>%#3*@' V ()%*+B&E*+6S)@%+#E+%"+U;' )1NN82O:4; (^BI+!J,<^B^J, IP%*$%+"Q+<-.-5*' 01<82468 G-)$+!-#@*+"Q+<-.-5*' .8J8;1KN856 GABI=^AS+Jc(I=NI< ,#.2*3+"Q+L3*D)@%"3)>+A3%)Q->%@+6>"#$%+"3+*@%).-%*;' = ,#.2*3+"Q+V)@%"3)>+A3%)Q->%@+6>"#$%+"3+*@%).-%*;' @= L3*D)@%"3)>+<)-5$"@%)>+A3%)Q->%@' # V)@%"3)>+<)-5$"@%)>+A3%)Q->%@' V L3*D)@%"3)>+(#3Q->*+/*-%#3*@' # V)@%"3)>+(#3Q->*+/*-%#3*@' # <*@>3)E%)"$' 3;499Q&N864;Q&<8O12468<&O824N:O9Q&N:;:642W&XS6615 BIGLJ=AS+A//^S^AB^J,+6>D*>W+-00+%D-%+-EE0&; 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K196A?Z=HF (#3?*&"3' +<L42<9A(:53 ^$@%)%#%)"$' !%' (#3?*&+<-%*' @[D=[E=?= !#3-%)"$+/->)0)%&' \!\ ()%*+=*E"3%+2&' ]F&+<L42<9A(:53 ^$@%)%#%)"$' !%' <-%*' B[@[E=?= ^VLA+S"5+,"8' ^VLA+/)3@%+(#38+<">8+,"8' !".E0)-$>*+(%-%#@' ,=VL+S)@%)$5' #              INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX F4 PHASE I – BLUFF AREA PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY SEGMENT SURVEY INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK APPENDIX F5 PHASE I – SOIL GAS MONITORING LOCATIONS SURVEY INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Archaeological SurveyShort Report IllinoisHistoricPreservationAgency OldStateCapitol Building Springfield,Illinois62701(217)7854997 REVIEWER Date: Accepted Rejected IHPAUSEONLY(FormASSR0886) PHASE I CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY FUTUREGEN INDUSTRIAL ALLIANCE,INC. SOIL GAS MONITORING LOCATIONS MORGAN COUNTY,ILLINOIS Prepared For FutureGenIndustrialAlliance,Inc. 1101PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW SixthFloor WashingtonD.C.20004 November 2011 P.O.Box5603●Springfield,Illinois627055603●Phone217.544.4881/Fax217.544.4988 www.prairiearchaeology.com ArchaeologicalSurveyShortReport IllinoisHistoricPreservationAgency OldStateCapitolBuilding Springfield,Illinois62701(217)7854997 REVIEWER Date: Accepted Rejected IHPAUSEONLY(FormASSR0886) IHPA Log #: UNASSIGNED LOCATIONALINFORMATION AND SURVEYCONDITIONS County: Morgan Quadrangle: Prentice,IL7.5minuteUSGS Project Type/Title: FutureGenIndustrialAlliance—SoilGasMonitoringLocations,MorganCounty,IL Funding and/or Permitting Federal/State Agencies: U.S.DepartmentofEnergy Township: 16 North Range: 9West Section(s): 25,26 Project Description: A phase I cultural resource investigation of the location for soil gas monitoring locationsrelatedtotheFutureGen projectinMorganCounty,Illinois Topography: Uplands Soils: Specific soils in the project area include: 36C2 Tama silt loam, 5 to 10 percent slopes, eroded; 43AIpavasiltloam,0to2 percentslopes;and279BRozettasiltloam,2to5 percentslopes. Drainage: IndianCreek Land Use/Ground Cover (Include % Visibility): The Area of Potential Effect (APE) consisted of approximately5acres of agriculturalfields and1acre offallowfields. Groundsurface visibility within the agricultural fields ranged from 20 to 50 percent in harvested beans to 100 percent in plowedfields(Figure6). Survey Limitations: Surveylimitationswereminimal. ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL INFORMATION Historical Plats/Atlases/Sources: The following historical sources were examined: 1823 United States General Land Office Plat (T16N, R9W), 1872 Atlas Map of Morgan County, Illinois (Andreas, Lyter & Co.), 1894 Plat Book of Morgan County, Illinois (American Atlas Co.), and the 1983 Prentice, IL 7.5’ Topographic Map (UnitedStatesGeologicalSurvey). The1823GeneralLandOffice(GLO)platshowstheprojectvicinitytobesituatedmostlywithin timber. This source does not indicate any cultural landmarks (such as trails, fords, or roads) withinthe projectboundaries(Figure2). The Illinois Public Domain Land Tract Database indicates the land parcels associated with the project areas were purchased by four individuals (William O’Rear, Jacob Adams, and William Brown)between1826and1836. Alllandwaspurchasedfromthefederalgovernmentattherate of$1.25 peracre(Figure3). The 1872 historical atlas indicates the parcels associated with the project areas as owned by William O’Rear, N. D., Maria Adams, and G. D. Strawn (Figure 4). This source does not indicateanystructureswithintheAPE. The 1894 historical atlas indicates the parcels associated with the project areas as owned by the WilliamO’Rear Estate, John Virgin, L.M.Thomas, James H. Martin,and D. G. Strawn(Figure 5). While this source indicates a structure adjacent to monitor location SG2 on the O’Rear property, this is most likely due to mapping inconsistencies. No evidence of a structure or associatedmaterialswasrecoveredduringthisinvestigation. Previous Surveys/ Reported Sites: AreviewofIHPArecordsindicatesthatno previoussurveysorsites have beenreportedwithintheAPE. Regional Archaeologists Contacted: Databases maintained by the Illinois State Museum, the Illinois Departmentof NaturalResources,andtheIllinoisHistoricPreservationAgencywerereviewed. Investigation Techniques: Pedestrian reconnaissance at 5meter intervals was conducted within the agricultural fields. Shovelprobe reconnaissance at 15meter intervals was conducted within fallowareas(Figure7). Field Time Expended: 1manhour Sites/Find Spots Located: None Cultural Material: None (Curated at): N/A Collection Techniques: N/A Area Surveyed(Acres &Square Meters): Approximately6acres(24,281m2). RESULTS OF INVESTIAGATIONS ANDRECOMMENDATIONS (CHECK ONE) Phase I Archaeological Reconnaissance Has Located No Archaeological Material; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase IArchaeological Reconnaissance Has LocatedArchaeological Materials: Site(s)Does (Do)Not Meet requirements for the National Register Eligibility; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase IArchaeological Reconnaissance Has LocatedArchaeological Materials; Site(s)MayMeet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Phase IITestingisRecommended. • Phase II Archaeological Investigations Has Indicated that Site(s) Does (Do) Not Meet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Project Clearance is Recommended. • Phase II Archaeological Investigations Has Indicated that Site(s) Meet Requirements for National Register Eligibility; Formal Report is Pending and a Determination of Eligibility is Recommended. Comments: An intensive cultural resource survey of the area proposed to be impacted by soil gas monitoring activities associated the FutureGen project in Morgan County, Illinois was conducted on November2,2011. Theprojectareaiscomposedofapproximately5acresinagriculturalusewhere2050 percent of the ground surface was visible to field investigators and 1acre of fallow fields with 0 percentgroundsurfacevisibility. The current investigation included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, a computer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, a review of the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and a review of the Illinois Register of Historic Sites (IRHS) maintained by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. Examination of archival and historical sources and resource databases did not identify that known prehistoric or historicsites,areas,orartifactsmaybepresentwithintheboundariesoftheAPEorwithintheimmediate vicinityoftheAPE. Archaeological and cultural resource field examination of the APE included the use of pedestrian reconnaissance at 5meter intervals and shovelprobe investigations at 15meter intervals to locate evidence of unknown or unreported archaeological, historical or cultural sites, area, and artifacts. Field surveyors failed to find evidence of archaeological or historical resources, sites, or structures within the boundarieswheresoilgasmonitoringactivitieswill be conducted. Duetothe APE’slocationwithinthe interior uplands of Morgan County, it is unlikely that alluvial or colluvial depositional conditions have resulted in the deep burial of cultural deposits or remains. As aresult, geomorphological investigative techniques to locate and assess deeply buried archaeological and historical resources or artifacts were deemedunnecessary. Management Summary and Conclusions A cultural resource inventory of the area proposed for soil gas monitoring activities related to the FutureGen Industrial Alliance facility in Morgan County, Illinois included an examination of historical maps and atlases pertinent to the subject property, acomputer database search of the archaeological site files maintained by the Illinois State Museum, and areview of the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), a review of the Illinois Register of Historic Sites (IRHS) maintained by the Illinois Historic PreservationAgency,andfieldinvestigationsutilizinga pedestrianreconnaissanceat5meterintervals. Based ontheresults of field investigations andon information collected duringarchival andbackground research, the APE does not contain evidence for the presence of archaeological, historical, or cultural resources, sites, areas, or artifacts. As presently conceptualized, activities related to the soil gas monitoring of the Morgan County, IL FutureGen facility will not impact cultural resources. Further, additional cultural resource investigations are neither warranted nor recommend. State Historic PreservationOfficerconcurrenceandapprovalisrequested. Archaeological Contractor Information ArchaeologicalContractor: PrairieArchaeology&Research. Address/Phone: P.O.Box5603,Springfield,IL627055603 (217) 5444881 Surveyors(s): JosephCraigandJasonRein Survey Date(s): November2,2011 RecordedSites; • 2. ProjectMap(s)depictingSurveyLimitsand,whenApplicable,ApproximateSurveyLimits,and ConcentrationsofCulturalMaterials; • 3. SiteForm(s);TwoCopiesofEachForm; • 4. AllRelevantProjectCorrespondence; • 5. AdditionalInformationSheetsAs Necessary Address of Owner/Agent/Agency To Whom SHPOComment Should BeMailed FutureGenIndustrialAlliance,Inc.  Contact Person: Mr.KenHumphreys,CEO  1101PennsylvaniaAvenue, NW  Phone Number: (202)2806019  SixthFloor  Fax Number: n/a  Washington,D.C.20004  U.S.DepartmentofEnergy  Contact Person: Mr.CliffWhyte, NEPAComplianceOfficer  NationalTechnologyLaboratory  Phone Number: (304)2852098  3610CollinsFerryRoad  Fax Number: n/a  P.O.Box880  Morgantown,WV265070880  Review Comments:  REFERENCES Andreas,Lyter&Co. 1872 AtlasMapofMorganCounty,Illinois.Davenport. AmericanAtlasCo. 1894 PlatBookofMorganCounty,Illinois.Chicago. UnitedStatesDepartmentofAgriculture 2011 http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov UnitedStatesGeneralLandOffice 1823 GeneralLandSurveyPlats,T16N,R9W. PlatsonfileattheIllinoisState Library,Springfield,Illinois. UnitedStatesGeologicalSurvey 1983 Prentice,IL7.5MinuteTopographicMap FIGURES Figure 1. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1983Prentice, IL7.5’ USGS Topographic Map). Figure 2. Location of the project area, Township16North, Ranges 9West (1823United States General Land Office Survey) Figure 3. Initialland purchases within the project area. Figure 4. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1872Atlas Map ofMorgan County, Illinois). Figure 5. Location of the project area, Morgan County, Illinois (1894Plat Book ofMorgan County, Illinois). Figure 6. Ground surface visibility at each monitoringlocation at the time of survey. Figure 7. Location of shovel test probes within the vicinity of soilgas monitoring station SG-OGW-1 APPENDIX G Geological Report Technical Report: CO2 Plume Delineation for the Morgan County CO2 Storage Site for the Draft Environmental Impact Statement FutureGen 2.0 Project Meredosia, Illinois (Morgan County) DOE/EIS-0460D April 2013 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Technical Report: CO2 Plume Delineation for the Morgan County CO2 Storage Site February 2013 1.0 Introduction and Background After a siting process, the FutureGen Industrial Alliance, Inc. (Alliance) identified a site in Morgan County, Illinois as its preferred location for a permanent, safe, underground carbon dioxide (CO2) storage site. The Morgan County CO2 storage site is a component of the FutureGen 2.0 Project, a large-scale oxy-combustion repowering project that will use carbon capture and storage technology.  The FutureGen 2.0 Project is a public-private partnership, with costs shared by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), the Alliance, and other project partners. The Alliance plans to acquire a portion of the existing Meredosia Energy Center in Meredosia, Illinois, and repower one of its units with oxy-combustion and carbon capture technology.  An oxy-combustion system burns coal with a mixture of oxygen and CO2, instead of air, to produce a concentrated CO2 stream that can be captured for geologic storage.  The oxy-combustion boiler, air separation unit, and CO2 purification and compression unit will allow the plant to capture at least 90 percent of its CO2 emissions and reduce other emissions to near zero. The captured CO2 will be transported from the power plant through an underground pipeline to injection wells drilled into the Mount Simon Sandstone—sandstone that underlies central Illinois—so that the CO2 can be sequestered within that geologic formation.  The Alliance plans to inject approximately 1.1 million metric tons (MMT) of CO2 annually into the Mount Simon Sandstone where it will be permanently stored. Visitor, research, and training facilities located near the CO2 storage site will provide public education and outreach, as well as training and research opportunities associated with CO2 capture and storage. Working with Battelle and its Pacific Northwest Division, the Alliance has identified the approximate area in which the injection wells will be located, and, based on published and site-specific data, has estimated the size of the expected underground area in which the injected CO2 will be permanently stored. The Alliance has used this information to (1) obtain the necessary property rights from local landowners, (2) provide information for DOE’s National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process, and (3) prepare Underground Injection Control (UIC) permit applications to be submitted to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act. For DOE’s NEPA process, the Alliance identified the area within which the CO2 plume will be located as the “NEPA study area.” The NEPA study area is approximately 5,300 acres, as shown in Figure 1. Figure1.  NEPA Study Area for the Morgan County CO2 Storage Site Because the exact location of the injection wells has not been determined, the exact location of the expected underground CO2 plume has not been determined.  However, based on computational modeling, the Alliance has identified the expected size of that plume after 20 years of injection at an annual rate of approximately 1.1 MMT (a total of 22 MMT). The expected 4,000-to 5,000-acre CO2 plume will be contained within the 5,300acre NEPA study area. The Alliance evaluated several injection well A vertical well is drilled from the ground surface to a specified configurations using both vertical and horizontal completion depth in a straight line.  wells at one or two injection sites within the NEPA study area. The Alliance’s original configurationwas A horizontal well is drilled from the for two vertical injection wells to be located on ground surface to a specified depth separate injection well pads located 0.5 to 1 mile and then curved to proceed in a horizontal direction. apart. After consideration of site-specific data from the stratigraphic well, the Alliance is now proposing to construct and operate up to four horizontal injection wells for the annual injection of 1.1 MMT of CO2 over a 20-year period (a total of 22 MMT). The Alliance will propose this configuration in the UIC permit applications it files with EPA.1 All four horizontal wells will originate from a common drilling pad and will operate independently of each other (i.e., separate wellheads). The injection well pad will also accommodate one or two monitoring wells. The well pad will be a rectangle measuring approximately 640 feet by 500 feet, or approximately 7 acres (by comparison, the well pad for the Alliance stratigraphic well is approximately 350 feet by 350 feet, or approximately 3 acres). Surface facilities in close proximity to the injection well pad will consist of a Site Control Building and a Well Annulus Maintenance and Monitoring System Building. Surface facilities associated with the injection wells will require less than 25 acres for planned structures and access to monitoring points. Each horizontal well will include a vertical section that extends through the Potosi Formation to an approximate depth of 3,150 feet and a 1,500- to 2,000-foot-long horizontal section in the Upper Mount Simon Formation at an approximate depth of 4,030 feet below 1 It is possible, however, that the Alliance could propose a fewer number of horizontal wells at a later time. Any proposed injection well configuration will result in a CO2 plume of between 4,000 and 5,000 acres that will be located within the NEPA study area. ground surface (bgs).2 Each horizontal well will be oriented along a different azimuth that is approximately 90 degrees from the two nearest (adjacent) wells to facilitate efficient distribution of the CO2 and pore space use. Figure 2 shows an injection well schematic with a cased-hole completion scenario. Figure 3 shows a conceptual arrangement of the four horizontal injection wells. Table 1 shows the length of each lateral leg and the mass rate of CO2 injection for each well. Table 1. Length and Mass Rate of CO2 Injection for Each of the Injection Wells Length of Lateral Leg  Mass Rate of CO2 Injection  Well  (feet)  (MMT/year)  Injection well #1  2,000  0.3143  Injection well #2  1,500  0.2357  Injection well #3  2,000  0.3143  Injection well #4  1,500  0.2357  2 This is the cased-well completion scenario, in which the long-string casing will be perforated across an approximately 1,500-to 2,000-foot long section of the Mount Simon Sandstone. A second possible scenario is an open-hole completion in which the 7-inch production casing will be set (i.e., terminated) on a formation packer shoe in the upper Elmhurst (approximate measured depth 3,950 feet bgs; approximate total vertical depth of 3,850 feet bgs) and the remainder of the penetrated Elmhurst and Mount Simon Formation would remain uncased. Figure2. Injection Well Schematic – Cased-Hole Completion (geology and depths shown in this diagram are based on site-specific characterization data obtained from the FutureGen 2.0 stratigraphic well) CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Figure3.  Conceptual Arrangement of Four Horizontal Injection Well Configuration As currently planned, the injection wells will include the following casing strings:  a 24-in.diameter conductor string set at a depth of approximately 140 feet bgs; a 16-inch-diameter surface string set at a depth of approximately 570 feet bgs; a 10-3/4-inch-diameter intermediate string set at a depth of approximately 3,150 feet bgs; and a 7-inch-diameter long string set at an approximate (measured) depth of 6,504 feet bgs (approximate true vertical depth of 4,030 feet bgs) for a cased-hole completion scenario. The injection tubing will have an outer diameter of 3.5 inches and an inner diameter of 2.992 inches.3 Prior to construction of the injection wells and injection of CO2, the Alliance will obtain a Class VI (CO2 injection) UIC permit for each injection well as is required by EPA’s Geologic Sequestration regulations (40 CFR §§ 146.81 –146.95). The information in this technical report is consistent with the information that will be provided to EPA as part of the Alliance’s UICpermit applications. It should be noted that the well configuration proposed in the Alliance’s UIC permit applications could change. For example, the Alliance may propose a fewer number of horizontal wells. However, any injection well configuration proposed by the Alliance in its UIC permit applications will result in an underground CO2 plume of between 4.000 and 5,000 acres and it will be located within the NEPA study area. The remainder of this technical report describes how regional and site-specific geologic and hydrologic information was used in a computational model to delineate the CO2 plume. It provides an overview of the geologic setting and describes the computational model, including a description of the simulator and the physical processes modeled, along with a description of the conceptual model and numerical implementation. 2.0 Overview of the Geologic Setting The Alliance proposes to inject CO2 Injection Zone into the Mount Simon Sandstone.  The The injection zone is defined in EPA’s Class VI UIC Mount Simon Sandstone is the regulations as “a geologic formation, group of thickest and most widespread formations, or part of a formation that is of sufficient potential CO2 injection formation in areal extent, thickness, porosity, and permeability to receive carbon dioxide through a well or wells Illinois (Leetaru and McBride 2009). associated with a geologic sequestration project.” The Mount Simon Sandstone has a 40 CFR § 146.81(d). For the FutureGen 2.0 proven injection-zone capacity, based Project, the injection zone is the Mount Simon on a number of natural-gas storage Sandstone Formation and the lower Eau Claire facilities across the Illinois Basin Formation (Elmhurst Sandstone member). However, the injection interval where the Alliance (Buschbach and Bond 1974; Morse intends to inject CO2 is the Mount Simon and Leetaru 2005) and data from the Sandstone Formation. Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) carbon 3 For an open-hole completion, the openborehole will be between6.5 and 9.5 inches indiameter. The difference depends on whether the borehole is drilled to total depthbefore installing/cementingthe 7-inchproductioncasing (9.5 inches) or ifthe 7-inch productioncasingis installed/cemented before drillingthe open borehole section (6.5 inches). storage site in Macon County, Illinois (Leetaru et al. 2009). The Mount Simon Sandstone in the Illinois Basin represents a regional target for safe injection of anthropogenic CO2 (Leetaru et al. 2005).  The Illinois Basin covers an area of about 110,000 mi2 over Illinois and parts of Indiana and Kentucky.  The Illinois Basin contains approximately 120,000 mi3 of Cambrian to Pennsylvanian marine and terrestrial sedimentary rocks with a maximum thickness of about 15,000 feet (Buschbach and Kolata 1991; Goetz et al. 1992; McBride and Kolata 1999). More than 900 wells, mostly pre-1980, have been drilled into the Mount Simon Sandstone in the Illinois Basin (ISGS 2011); about 50 of these wells in Illinois extend to the Precambrian basement underlying the Mount Simon.  Most of the wells drilled into the Mount Simon Sandstone prior to 1980 lack well-log suites suitable for quantitative analysis of porosity and permeability.  In north-central Illinois where the Mount Simon Sandstone is used for natural-gas storage, some detailed analyses of porosity, permeability, and lithofacies connectivity are available, although most gas-storage wells only penetrate the upper part of the Mount Simon (Morse and Leetaru 2005). Confining Zone The confining zone is defined in EPA’s Class VI UIC regulations as “a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation stratigraphically overlying the injection zone(s) that acts as a barrier to fluid movement.” 40 CFR § 146.81(d). For the FutureGen 2.0 Project, the confining zone is the Proviso and Lombard members of the Eau Claire Formation. The Franconia and Davis-Ironton Formations are a secondary confining zones. A confining zone is also referred to as a “caprock” or “seal.” The confining zone for the proposed injection zones consists of the Lombard and Proviso members of the Eau Claire Formation that overlies the Mount Simon and Elmhurst sandstones.  The Eau Claire is the most important regional confining zone in Illinois (Leetaru et al. 2005, 2009).  The Davis member of the Franconia Formation forms a secondary confining zone above the Eau Claire Formation. Impermeable Precambrian-aged basement rocks underlie the Mount Simon Sandstone and form a no-flow boundary. The Eau Claire Formation is a widespread, heterolithic carbonate and fine siliciclastic unit present across west-central Illinois and parts of seven adjoining states (Sminchak 2011).  The low-permeability Lombard and Proviso members of the Eau Claire form an effective confining layer at 38 natural-gas storage reservoirs in Illinois (Buschbach and Bond 1974; Morse and Leetaru 2005).  The confining members of Eau Claire overlie the Elmhurst Sandstone member. Regionally, the Lombard member of the Eau Claire Formation consists of glauconitic and sandy dolomite interbedded with mudstones and shale; the shale content increases to the south and sand content increases to the west and north (Willman et al. 1975).  The Lombard member is overlain by the Proviso member, which is characterized by limestone, dolomite, sandy siltstone, and shale beds.  The Lombard and Proviso members are continuous and extend across several buried Precambrian highs in the region. In addition to the Eau Claire Formation, the widespread, low-permeability Franconia Dolomite Formation (Kolata and Nimz 2010), is a secondary confining zone for the containment of CO2 within the region. The regional geology of Illinois is well known from wells and borings drilled in conjunction with hydrocarbon exploration, aquifer development and use, and coal and commercial mineral exploration.  Related data are largely publicly available through the Illinois State Geological Survey (ISGS)4 and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS).5  In addition, DOE has sponsored a number of studies by the Midwest Geologic Sequestration Consortium6 to evaluate subsurface strata in Illinois and adjacent states as possible targets for the containment of anthropogenic CO2. In addition, to support the evaluation of the Morgan County site as a potential carbon storage site, the Alliance drilled and extensively characterized a deep stratigraphic well approximately 1 mile east of the planned injection site. The stratigraphic well reached a total depth of 4,826 feet bgs within the Precambrian basement. The well penetrated 479 feet of the Eau Claire Formation and 512 feet of the Mount Simon Sandstone. The stratigraphic well was extensively characterized, sampled, and geophysically logged during drilling.  These resulting data, together with the regional data, form the basis for understanding the geologic setting at the proposed site. A total of 177 feet of whole core were collected from the lower Eau Claire-upper Mount Simon Sandstone and 34 feet were collected from lower Mount Simon Sandstone-Precambrian basement interval.  In addition to whole drill core, a total of 130 side-wall core plugs were obtained from the combined interval of the Eau Claire Formation, Mount Simon Sandstone, and the Precambrian basement. Figure 4 shows the stratigraphic column at the Alliance’s stratigraphic well on the Morgan County CO2 storage site. 4 http://www.isgs.uiuc.edu/ 5 http://www.usgs.gov/ 6 http://sequestration.org/ Depth Measurements Well depths, or points along a well, are provided in depths “below ground surface” (abbreviated bgs) or in depths “below kelly bushing” (abbreviated bkb or KB).  A kelly bushing is a component of a drilling rig that is located above the ground surface on the drill rig used to drill the well. For the Alliance’s stratigraphic well, the kelly bushing was 14 feet above the ground surface. Thus, for the stratigraphic well, the difference between a depth measured in bkb and a depth measured in bgs is 14 feet. If no specific designation is provided, the measurement is assumed to be bkb. Figure4.  Stratigraphic Column at the Morgan County CO2 Storage Site Based on publicly available regional data and site-specific data obtained by the Alliance from its stratigraphic well drilled near the proposed injection site, the Mount Simon Sandstone at the site is sufficiently deep and has sufficient thickness, porosity, and permeability to store up to 33 MMT of CO2.  In addition, the Eau Claire Formation caprock at the site is of sufficient thickness, lateral continuity, and has low enough permeabilities to serve as the primary confining zone or caprock. The site affords additional containment with several secondary confining zones, including the Franconian Formation.  The basement rock was encountered at 4,430 feet and is a rhyolite, which will act as an impermeable lower boundary for the injection zones within the Mount Simon Sandstone. 3.0 Computational Modeling Computational modeling comprises two elements:  a computer code, or simulator, that implements the mathematics of scientific understanding, and implementation of the simulator as an analytical tool.  These elements result in the ability to predict the quantity and distribution of CO2 injected into saline reservoirs for permanent storage.  This requires solving the mathematical equations that describe the migration and partition behavior of CO2 as it is injected into geologic media for which the pore space is initially filled with an aqueous saline solution (brine). The equations that describe these flow and transport processes are too complex to solve directly.  Therefore, the governing flow and transport equations are solved indirectly where space and time are divided into discrete elements. Space discretization involves dividing the storage reservoir into grid blocks and time discretization involves moving through time using finite steps.  The discretization process transforms the governing flow and transport equations into forms that are solvable on high-speed computers. Both of the elements of the computational model that were used to determine the CO2 plume for the Morgan County CO2 storage site are described in the sections that follow. 4.0 Description of Simulator Numerical simulation of CO2 injection into deep geologic reservoirs requires the modeling of complex, coupled hydrologic, chemical, and thermal processes, including multi-fluid flow and transport, partitioning of CO2 into the aqueous phase, and chemical interactions with aqueous fluids and rock minerals. The simulations conducted for this investigation were executed using the STOMP-CO2 simulator (White et al. 2012; White and Oostrom 2006; White and Oostrom 2000).  STOMP-CO2 was verified against other codes used for simulation of geologic disposal of CO2 as part of the GeoSeq code intercomparison study (Pruess et al. 2002). Partial differential conservation equations for fluid mass, energy, and salt mass compose the fundamental equations for STOMP-CO2.  Coefficients within the fundamental equations are related to the primary variables through a set of constitutive relationships.  The salt transport equations are solved simultaneously with the component mass and energy conservation equations. The solute and reactive species transport equations are solved sequentially after the coupled flow and transport equations.  The fundamental coupled flow equations are solved using an integral volume finite-difference approach with the nonlinearities in the discretized equations resolved through Newton-Raphson iteration. The dominant nonlinear functions within the STOMP-CO2 simulator are the relative permeability-saturation-capillary pressure (k-s-p) relationships. The STOMP-CO2 simulator allows the user to specify these relationships through a large variety of popular and classic functions. Two-phase (gas-aqueous) k-s-p relationships can be specified with hysteretic or nonhysteretic functions or nonhysteretic tabular data. Entrapment of CO2 with imbibing water conditions can be modeled with the hysteretic two-phase k-s-p functions. Two-phase k-s-p relationships span both saturated and unsaturated conditions.  The aqueous phase is assumed to never completely disappear through extensions to the s-p function below the residual saturation and a vapor-pressure lowering scheme. CO2 has the function of a gas in these two-phase k-s-p relationships. For the range of temperature and pressure conditions present in deep saline reservoirs, four phases are possible:  1) water-rich liquid (aqueous), 2) CO2-rich vapor (gas), 3) CO2rich liquid (liquid-CO2) and 4) crystalline salt (precipitated salt).  The equations of state express 1) the existence of phases given the temperature, pressure, and water, CO2, and salt concentration; 2) the partitioning of components among existing phases; and 3) the density of the existing phases. Thermodynamic properties for CO2 are computed via interpolation from a property data table stored in an external file.  The property table was developed from the equation of state for CO2 published by Span and Wagner (1996).  Phase equilibria calculations in STOMP-CO2 use the formulations of Spycher et al. (2003) for temperatures below 100°C and Spycher and Pruess (2010) for temperatures above 100°C, with corrections for dissolved salt provided in Spycher and Pruess (2010).  The Spycher formulations are based on the Redlich-Kwong equation of state with parameters fitted from published experimental data for CO2-H2O systems.  Additional details regarding the equations of state used in STOMP-CO2 can be found in the guide by White et al. (2012). A well model is defined as a type of source term that extends over multiple grid cells, where the well diameter is smaller than the grid cell. A fully coupled well model in STOMP-CO2 was used to simulate the injection of CO2 under a specified mass injection rate, subject to a pressure limit.  When the mass injection rate can be met without exceeding the specified pressure limit, then the well is considered to be flow controlled.  Conversely, when the mass injection rate cannot be met without exceeding the specified pressure limit, then the well is considered to be pressure controlled and the mass injection rate is determined based on the injection pressure.  The well model assumes a constant pressure gradient within the well and calculates the injection pressure at each cell in the well. The CO2 injection rate is proportional to the pressure gradient between the well and surrounding formation in each grid cell.  By fully integrating the well equations into the reservoir field equations, the numerical convergence of the nonlinear conservation and constitutive equations is greatly enhanced. 5.0 Physical Processes Modeled Physical processes modeled in the reservoir simulations included non-isothermal multi-fluid flow and transport for a number of components (e.g., water, salt, and CO2) and phases (e.g., aqueous and gas).  The preliminary reservoir model assumes isothermal conditions, which are appropriate if the temperature of the injected CO2 is similar to the formation temperature.  Reservoir salinity is considered in the simulations because salt precipitation can occur near the injection well in higher permeability layers as the rock dries out during CO2 injection.  This can completely plug pore throats, making the layer impermeable, thereby reducing reservoir injectivity and affecting the distribution of CO2 in the reservoir. Injected CO2 partitions in the reservoir between the free (or mobile) gas, entrapped gas, and aqueous phases. Sequestering CO2 in deep saline reservoirs occurs through four mechanisms:  1) structural trapping, 2) aqueous dissolution, 3) hydraulic trapping, and 4) mineralization.  Structural trapping is the long-term retention of the buoyant CO2 phase in the pore space of the reservoir rock held beneath one or more impermeable caprocks. Aqueous dissolution occurs when CO2 dissolves in the brine resulting in an aqueous-phase density greater than the ambient conditions. Hydraulic trapping is the pinch-off trapping of the CO2 phase in pores as the brine re-enters pore spaces previously occupied by the CO2 phase.  Generally, hydraulic trapping only occurs upon the cessation of CO2 injection. Mineralization is the chemical reaction that transforms formation minerals to carbonate minerals.  In the Mount Simon Sandstone, the most likely precipitation reaction is the formation of iron carbonate precipitates.  A likely reaction between CO2 and shale is the dewatering of clays.  Laboratory investigations are currently quantifying the importance of these reactions at the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  Therefore, the simulations described here did not include mineralization reactions. However, the STOMP-CO2 simulator does account for precipitation of salt during CO2 injection. The CO2 stream provided by the plant to the storage site is 97 percent dry basis CO2. Because the amount of impurities is small, for the purposes of modeling the CO2 injection and redistribution for this project, it was assumed that the injectate was pure CO2. 6.0 Geologic Model A stratigraphic conceptual model of the geologic layers from the Precambrian basement to ground surface was constructed using the EarthVision® software package (Figure 5). The geologic setting and site-specific characterization data were the basis for the Morgan County CO2 storage site model. Borehole data from the Alliance’s stratigraphic well and data from regional boreholes and published regional contour maps were used as input data.  However, units below the Shakopee Dolomite and above the Eau Claire Formation were assumed to have a constant thickness based on the stratigraphy observed at the stratigraphic well. Figure5.  EarthVision® Solid Earth Model for the Proposed Morgan County CO2 Storage Site.  View to the southwest.  For clarity, only the main formations have been labeled. An expanded 100-mile x 100-mile geologic model was constructed to represent units below the Potosi including the Franconia, Ironton, Eau Claire (Proviso, Lombard and Elmhurst), Mount Simon, and Precambrian formations.  These surfaces were gridded in EarthVision® based on borehole data and regional contour maps and make up the stratigraphic layers of the computational model. 6.1 Hydrogeologic Layers The geologic model hydrogeologic layers were defined for each stratigraphic layer based on zones of similar hydrologic properties.  The hydrologic properties (permeability, porosity) were deduced from geophysical well logs and side-wall cores.  The lithology, deduced from wireline logs and core data, was also used to subdivide each stratigraphic layer of the model.  Based on these data, the Mount Simon Sandstone was subdivided into 17 layers, and the Elmhurst Sandstone (member of the Eau Claire Formation) was subdivided into 7 layers as shown in Figure 6. These units form the injection zone.  The Lombard and Proviso members of the Eau Claire Formation were subdivided respectively into 14 and 5 layers.  The Ironton Sandstone was divided into four layers, the Davis Dolomite into three layers, and the Franconia Formation into one layer. One can also note that some layers (“split” label in Figure 6) have similar properties but have been subdivided to maintain a reasonable thickness of layers within the injection zone as represented in the computational model. Figure6.  Division of Stratigraphic Layers to Create ComputationalModel Layers The thickness of the layers varies from 4 to 172 feet, with an average of 26 feet.  The assignment of hydrologic properties to these layers is described in the next sections. 6.2 Hydrologic and Porous Media Properties Continuous wireline log results are commonly calibrated using discrete laboratory core measurements to provide a more continuous record for the particular characterization parameter (e.g., permeability, porosity).  From these calibrated wireline-survey measurements, statistical or average values for the hydrologic parameter can be assigned to layers used in numerical models for the purpose of predicting fluid movement within targeted reservoirs. A number of characterization data sources and methods were used to assign hydrologic properties to the various model layers.  Available data sources for the Morgan County site include results from continuous wireline surveys (compensated magnetic resonance [CMR], ELAN), standard and side-wall cores (SWCs), and hydrologic tests (Modular Formation Dynamics Tester [MDT] and packer tests). Because of differences in lithology and in the borehole construction, the method used to assign properties varied for different vertical zones of the conceptual model. Horizontal Permeability Intrinsic permeability is the property of the rock/formation that relates to its ability to transmit fluid, and is independent of the in situ fluid properties.  For modeling of sedimentary rock formations, two permeabilities are commonly used: permeability in the horizontal direction, kh (permeability parallel to sedimentary layering [also Kh]) and permeability in the vertical direction, kv (permeability perpendicular to layering [also Kv]). The subsequent discussion pertains to assigned horizontal permeability values for the various borehole sections. Intrinsic permeability data sources for the FutureGen 2.0 stratigraphic well include computed geophysical wireline surveys (CMR and ELAN logs), and where available, laboratory measurements of rotary SWCs, core plugs from the whole core intervals and hydrologic tests (including wireline [MDT]), and packer tests. Intrinsic Permeability in the Injection Zone (Mount Simon and Elmhurst Sandstone) For model layers within the injection zone (i.e., Elmhurst Sandstone and Mount Simon Sandstone; 3,852 to 4,432 feet) a correlation/calibration approach was applied. Wireline log CMR-and ELAN-computed permeability model responses were first correlated with and then calibrated to rotary side-wall and core plug permeability results.  The correlation process was facilitated using natural gamma ray responses and clay or shale abundance to establish correlation data sets.  This calibration provided a continuous permeability estimate over the entire injection reservoir section (curve permKCal). Intrinsic Permeability in the Confining Zones (Franconia to Lombard Formations) The sources of data are similar to those for the injection zone reservoir. For each model layer the core data were reviewed, and a simple average of the available horizontal Klinkenburg permeabilities was then calculated for each layer.  Core samples that were noted by Core Lab as having potential cracks and/or were very small were eliminated if the results appeared to be unreasonable based on the sampled lithology.  If no core samples were available and the arithmetic mean of the PermKCal was below 0.01 mD, a default value of 0.01 mD was applied (Lombard9 is the only layer with a 0.01-mD default value). Because the sandstone intervals of the Ironton-Galesville Sandstone have higher permeabilities that are similar in magnitude to the modeled reservoir layers, the Ironton-Galesville Sandstone model layer permeabilities were derived from the arithmetic mean of the PermKCal permeability curve. Figure 7 shows the depth profile of the horizontal permeability assigned to each layer of the model (actual values assigned are listed in Table 7). Figure7.  Horizontal Permeability Versus Depth in Each Model Layer Vertical Permeability Sedimentation can create an intrinsic permeability anisotropy, caused by sediment layering and preferential directions of connected-pore channels. Kv/Kh ratios were successfully determined for 20 vertical/horizontal siliciclastic core plug pairs cut from intervals of whole core from the stratigraphic well. Horizontal permeability data in the stratigraphic well far outnumber vertical permeability data, because vertical permeability could not be determined from rotary SWCs. Effective vertical permeability in siliciclastic rocks is primarily a function of the presence of mudstone or shale (Ringrose et al. 2005).  The siliciclastic lithologies (sandstones, siltstones, mudstones and shales) are heterolithic in the cored interval of the lower Lombard, and in rotary SWCs from the upper Lombard and non-carbonate Proviso.  Core plug samples of heterolithic siliciclastics are poorly representative of larger vertical intervals (Meyer and Krause 2006). Because the vertical permeability anisotropy of the model layers is not likely to be represented by the sparse data from the stratigraphic well, the following lithology-specific permeability anisotropy averages from literature studies representing larger sample sizes are used for the model layers (Table 2). The literature-based permeability anisotropy values listed in Table 3 were used to assign Kv/Kh to each layer of the model. Figure8 shows the depth profile of the anisotropy assigned to each layer of the model. Actual values assigned for each layer are listed in Table 7. Table 2.  Lithology-Specific Permeability AnisotropyAverages from Literature Facies or Lithology Kv/Kh Reference 1. Heterolithic, laminated shale/mudstone/siltstone/sandstone 0.1 Meyer and Krause (2006) 2. Herringbone cross-stratified sandstone. Strat dips to 18 degrees 0.4 Meyer and Krause (2006) 3. Paleo weathered sandstone (coastal flat) 0.4 Meyer and Krause (2006) 4.Accretionarychannel bar sandstones withminorshale 0.5 Ringrose et al. (2005); laminations Meyer and Krause (2006) 6.Alluvial fan,alluvial braidedstreamplaintoshallowmarine .3 Kerr et al.(1999) sandstones, lowclaycontent 7.Alluvial fan,alluvial plainsandstones, sheet floods,paleosols, 0.1 HornungandAigner(1999) higher claycontent 8. Dolomite mudstone 0.007 Saller et al. (2004) Table 3.  Summary of the Scaling Factors Applied for the Modeling Model Layer  Kv/Kh  Franconia Carbonate  0.007  Davis-Ironton  0.1  Ironton-Galesville  0.4  Proviso (layers 4 and 5)  0.1  Proviso (layers 1 to 3)  0.007  Lombard  0.1  Elmhurst  0.4  Mount Simon (layers 12, 13, 14, 15, 17)  0.4  Mount Simon (layer 16)  0.1  Mount Simon (layer 11, injection interval)  0.5  Mount Simon (layers 6, 7, 8, 9, 10)  0.3  Mount Simon (layers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5)  0.1  Figure8. Vertical PermeabilityVersus Depth in Each Model Layer Porosity Total (or absolute) porosity is the ratio of void space to the volume of whole rock.  Effective porosity is the ratio of interconnected void space to the volume of the whole rock. As a first step in assigning porosity values for the FutureGen 2.0 numerical model layers, Schlumberger ELAN porosity log results were compared with laboratory measurements of porosity as determined from SWC and core plugs for specific sampling depth within the Mount Simon. Figure9 shows the depth profile of the assigned model layer porosities based on the average of the calibrated ELAN values.  The actual values assigned for each layer are listed in Table 7. Figure9.  Porosity Versus Depth in Each Model Layer Rock (Bulk) Density and Grain Density Grain density data were calculated from laboratory measurements of SWCs. The data were then averaged (arithmetic mean) for each main stratigraphic layer in the model.  Only the Proviso member (Eau Claire Formation) has been divided in two sublayers to be consistent with the lithology changes. Figure10 shows the calculated grain density with depth.  The actual values assigned to each layer of the model are listed in Table 7. Grain density is the input parameter specified in the simulation input file, and STOMP-CO2 calculates the bulk density from the grain density and porosity for each model layer. Figure10.  Grain Density Versus Depth in Each Model Layer Capillary Pressure and Saturation Functions Capillary pressure is the pressure difference across the interface of two immiscible fluids (e.g., CO2 and water).  The entry capillary pressure is the minimum pressure required for an immiscible non-wetting fluid (i.e., CO2) to overcome capillary and interfacial forces and enter pore space containing the wetting fluid (i.e., saline formation water). Capillary pressure data determined from site-specific cores were not available at the time the model was constructed.  However, tabulated capillary pressure data were available for several Mount Simon gas storage fields in the Illinois Basin.  The data for the Manlove Hazen well were the most complete. Therefore, these aqueous saturation and capillary pressure values were plotted and a user-defined curve fitting was performed to generate Brooks-Corey parameters for four different permeabilities (Figure 11).  These parameters were then assigned to layers based on a permeability range as shown in Table 4. Figure11. Aqueous Saturation Versus Capillary PressureBased on Mercury Injection Data from the Hazen No. 5 Wellatthe Manlove Gas Field in Champagne County, Illinois Table 4.  PermeabilityRangesUsed to Assign Brooks-CoreyParameters to Model Layers Permeability  Residual Aqueous  (mD)  Psi ()  Lambda ()  Saturation  < 41.16  4.116  0.83113  0.059705  41.16 to 231  1.573  0.62146  0.081005  231 to 912.47  1.450  1.1663  0.070762  > 912.47  1.008  1.3532  0.044002  Gas Entry Pressure No site-specific data were available for gas entry pressure; therefore, this parameter was estimated using the Davies- (1991) developed empirical relationships between air entry pressure, Pe, and intrinsic permeability, k, for different types of rock: Pe = a kb , where Pe takes the units of MPa and k the units of m2, a and b are constants and are summarized below for shale, sandstone, and carbonate (Davies 1991; Table 5). Table 5.  Values for Constants a and b for Different Lithologies Shale  Sandstone  Carbonate  a  7.60E-07  2.50E-07  8.70E-07  b  -0.344  -0.369  -0.336  The dolomite found at the Morgan County site is categorized as a carbonate.  The Pe for the air-water system is further converted to that for the CO2-brine system by multiplying the interfacial tension ratio of a CO2-brine system cb to an air-water system aw.  An approximate value of 30 mN/m was used for cb and 72 mN/m for aw. Formation Compressibility Limited information about formation (pore) compressibility estimates is available.  The best estimate for the Mount Simon Sandstone (Table 6) is that back-calculated by Birkholzer et al. (2008) from a pumping test at the Hudson Field natural-gas storage site, found 80 miles northeast of the Morgan County CO2 storage site.  The back-calculated pore-compressibility estimate for the Mount Simon of 3.71E−10 Pa−1 was used as a spatially constant value for their basin-scale simulations.  In other simulations, Birkholzer et al. (2008) assumed a pore compressibility value of 4.5E−10 Pa−1 for aquifers and 9.0E−10 Pa−1 for aquitards.  Zhou et al. (2010) in a later publication used a pore compressibility value of 7.42E−10 Pa−1 for both the Eau Claire Formation and Precambrian granite, which were also used for these initial simulations (Table 6). Because the site-specific data are limited to a single reservoir sample, only these two published values have been used for the model. The first value (3.71E-10 Pa-1) has been used for sands that are compressible because of the presence of porosity.  The second value (7.42E-10 Pa-1) is assigned for all other rocks that are less compressible (dolomite, limestone, shale, and rhyolite).  Table 7 lists the hydrologic parameters assigned to each model layer. Table 6.  Formation Compressibility Values Selected from Available Sources Hydrogeologic Unit Formation(Pore)Compressibility,Pa-1 Franconia 7.42E-10Pa-1 Davis-Ironton 3.71E-10Pa-1 Ironton-Galesville 3.71E-10Pa-1 EauClaire Formation(LombardandProviso) 7.42E-10Pa-1 EauClaire Formation(Elmhurst) 3.71E-10Pa-1 Mount SimonSandstone 3.71E-10Pa-1 Table 7.  Summary of the Hydrologic Properties Assigned to Each Model Layer 26 Table 7.  (contd) Model Layer  Top Depth (ft bkb)  Top Elevation (ft)  Bottom Elevation (ft)  Thickness (ft)  Porosity  Horizontal Permeability (mD)  Vertical Permeability (mD)  Grain Density (g/cm3)  Compressibility (1/Pa)  Injection Zone  Elmhurst7  3852.00  -3219  -3229  10  0.1595  2.04E+01  8.17E+00  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst6  3862.00  -3229  -3239  10  0.1981  1.84E+02  7.38E+01  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst5  3872.00  -3239  -3249  10  0.0822  1.87E+00  1.87E-01  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst4  3882.00  -3249  -3263  14  0.1105  4.97E+00  1.99E+00  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst3  3896.00  -3263  -3267  4  0.0768  7.52E-01  7.52E-02  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst2  3900.00  -3267  -3277  10  0.1291  1.63E+01  6.53E+00  2.64  3.71E-10  Elmhurst1  3910.00  -3277  -3289  12  0.0830  2.90E-01  2.90E-02  2.64  3.71E-10  MtSimon17  3922.00  -3289  -3315  26  0.1297  7.26E+00  2.91E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon16  3948.00  -3315  -3322  7  0.1084  3.78E-01  3.78E-02  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon15  3955.00  -3322  -3335  13  0.1276  5.08E+00  2.03E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon14  3968.00  -3335  -3355  20  0.1082  1.33E+00  5.33E-01  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon13  3988.00  -3355  -3383  28  0.1278  5.33E+00  2.13E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon12  4016.00  -3383  -3404  21  0.1473  1.59E+01  6.34E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon11 (injection  4037.00  -3404  -3427  23  0.2042  3.10E+02  1.55E+02  2.65  3.71E-10  Interval)  MtSimon10  4060.00  -3427  -3449  22  0.1434  1.39E+01  4.18E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon9  4082.00  -3449  -3471  22  0.1434  1.39E+01  4.18E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon8  4104.00  -3471  -3495  24  0.1503  2.10E+01  6.29E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon7  4128.00  -3495  -3518  23  0.1311  6.51E+00  1.95E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon6  4151.00  -3518  -3549  31  0.1052  2.26E+00  6.78E-01  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon5  4182.00  -3549  -3588  39  0.1105  4.83E-02  4.83E-03  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon4  4221.00  -3588  -3627  39  0.1105  4.83E-02  4.83E-03  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon3  4260.00  -3627  -3657  30  0.1727  1.25E+01  1.25E+00  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon2  4290.00  -3657  -3717  60  0.1157  2.87E+00  2.87E-01  2.65  3.71E-10  MtSimon1  4350.00  -3717  -3799  82  0.1157  2.87E+00  2.87E-01  2.65  3.71E-10  27 Reservoir Properties Fluid Pressure An initial fluid sampling event from the Mount Simon Formation was conducted December 14, 2011, in the stratigraphic well during the course of conducting open-hole logging. Sampling was attempted at 22 discrete depths using the MDT tool in the Quicksilver Probe configuration and from one location using the conventional (dual-packer) configuration. Pressure data were obtained at 7 of the 23 attempted sampling points, including one duplicated measurement at a depth of 4,048 feet bkb (Table 8). Table 8. Pressure Data Obtained from the Mount Simon Formation Using the MDTTool.  (Red line delimits the samples within the injection zone.) Sample Number Sample Depth (ftbkb) Absolute Pressure (psia) 7 4130 1828 8 4131 1827.7 9 4110.5 1818.3 11 4048 1790.2 17 4048(duplicated) 1790.3 21 4248.5 1889.2 22 4246 1908.8 23 4263 1896.5(a) (a) Sample affectedbydrillingfluids (not representative) Temperature The best fluid temperature depth profile was performed on February 9, 2012, as part of the static borehole flow meter/fluid temperature survey that was conducted prior to the constant-rate injection flow meter surveys.  Two confirmatory discrete probe depth measurements that were taken prior to the active injection phase (using colder brine) corroborate the survey results.  The two discrete pressure probe temperature measurements have been plotted on the temperature/depth profile plot (Figure 12). CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Figure12.  Static Fluid Temperature Profile Performed on February 9, 2012 in the Stratigraphic Well The discrete static measurement for the depth of 3,712 feet is a pressure probe temperature gauge that has been installed below the tubing packer used to facilitate running of the dynamic flow meter survey.  It is in the well casing so there is very little to no vertical movement of fluid and we have static measurements at this depth for more than 12 hours before starting any testing within the borehole.  The value for this depth (3,712 feet) was 95.9°F.  This value plots exactly on the static, continuous fluid temperature survey results for this depth. The second discrete static probe temperature measurement is from the MDT probe for the successful sampling interval of 4,048 feet. This sample is perhaps less “static” in that fluid was produced through the tool for a period of time as part of the sampling process; however, it does provide a consistent value with the continuous fluid temperature survey.  So the bottom line is that the static fluid temperature of February 9, 2012, looks to be a valid representation of well fluid column conditions. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Based on that conclusion, a linear-regression temperature/depth relationship was developed for use by modeling.  The regression data set analyzed was for temperature data over the depth interval of 1,300 to 4,547 feet.  Based on this regression a projected temperature for the reference datum at the top of the Mount Simon (3,918 feet bkb) of 96.60°F is indicated.  A slope (gradient) of 6.72-3°F/foot and intercept of 70.27°F is also calculated from the regression analysis. Brine Density Although this parameter is determined by the simulator using pressure, temperature, and salinity, based on the upper and lower Mount Simon reservoirs tests, the calculated in situ reservoir fluid density is 1.0315 g/cm3. Salinity During the process of drilling the well, fluid samples were obtained from discrete-depth intervals in the St. Peter Formation and the Mount Simon Formation using wirelinedeployed sampling tools (MDTs) on December 14, 2011.  After the well had been drilled, additional fluid samples were obtained from the open borehole section of the Mount Simon Formation by extensive pumping using a submersible pump. The assigned salinity value for the Mount Simon (upper zone) 47,500 ppm is as indicated by both the MDT sample (depth 4,048 feet) and the multiple samples collected during extensive composite pumping of the open borehole section. 6.4 Chemical Properties EPA (2011a) identified a number of chemical properties as relevant parameters for multiphase flow modeling.  These include the aqueous diffusion coefficient, aqueous solubility, and solubility in CO2.  The properties change significantly relative to temperature, pressure, salinity, and other variables, and are predicted by equations of state used by the model to calculate properties at conditions encountered in the simulation as they change with location and time. 7.0 Numerical Model Implementation As described above, the model domain for the Morgan County CO2 storage site consists of the injection zone (Mount Simon and Elmhurst), the primary confining zone (Lombard and Proviso), the Ironton-Galesville, and the secondary confining zone (Davis-Ironton and the Franconia).  Preliminary simulations were conducted to determine the extent of the model domain so that lateral boundaries were distant enough from the injection location so as not to influence the model results.  The three-dimensional, boundary-fitted numerical model grid was designed to have constant grid spacing with higher resolution in the area CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) influenced by the CO2 injection (3-mile by 3-mile area), with increasingly larger grid spacing moving out in all lateral directions toward the domain boundary. Figure13 shows the numerical model grid for the entire 100-mile by 100-mile domain and also for the 3-mile by 3-mile area with higher grid resolution and uniform grid spacing of 200 feet by 200 feet.  The model grid contains 125 nodes in the x-direction, 125 nodes in the y-direction, and 51 nodes in the z-direction for a total number of nodes equal to 796,875.  The expanded geologic model was queried at the node locations of the numerical model to determine the elevation of each surface for the stratigraphic units at the numerical model grid cell centers (nodes) and cell edges.  Then each of those layers was subdivided into the model layers by scaling the thickness to preserve the total thickness of each stratigraphic unit. Once the vertical layering was defined, material properties were mapped to each node in the model. Figure 14 shows the distribution of horizontal and vertical permeability as it was assigned to the numerical model grid. (a) (b) Figure13. NumericalModel Grid fora) Full Domain, and b) Finer Resolution Area Containing the Injection Wells CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) (a) (b) Figure14. PermeabilityAssigned to NumericalModel a) Horizontal Permeability; b)Vertical Permeability Initial Conditions The reservoir is assumed to be under hydrostatic conditions with no regional or local flow conditions.  Therefore the hydrologic flow system is assumed to be at steady state until the start of injection.  To achieve this with the STOMP-CO2 simulator one can either run an initial simulation (executed for a very long time period until steady-state conditions are achieved) to generate the initial distribution of pressure, temperature, and salinity conditions in the model from an initial guess, or one can specify the initial conditions at a reference depth using the hydrostatic option, allowing the simulator to calculate and assign the initial conditions to all the model nodes.  Site-specific data were available for pressure, temperature, and salinity, and therefore the hydrostatic option was used to assign initial conditions.  A temperature gradient was specified based on the geothermal gradient, but the initial salinity was considered to be constant for the entire domain.  A summary of the initial conditions is presented in Table 9. Table 9. Summary of Initial Conditions Reference  Parameter  Depth (bkb)  Value  Reservoir Pressure  4,048 ft  1,790.2 psi  Aqueous Saturation  1.0  Reservoir Temperature  3,918 ft  96.6 °F  Temperature Gradient  0.0672 °F/ft  Salinity  47,500 ppm  CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 7.2 Boundary Conditions Boundary conditions were established with the assumption that the reservoir is continuous throughout the region and that the underlying Precambrian unit is impermeable.  Therefore, the bottom boundary was set as a no-flow boundary for aqueous fluids and for CO2 gas. The lateral and top boundary conditions were set to hydrostatic pressure using the initial condition with the assumption that each of these boundaries is distant enough from the injection zone to have minimal to no effect on the CO2 plume migration and pressure distribution. 7.3 Simulation Time Period The EPA Geologic Sequestration regulations require that owners or operators must “Predict, using existing site characterization, monitoring and operational data, and computational modeling, the projected lateral and vertical migration of the CO2 plume and formation fluids in the subsurface from the commencement of injection activities until the plume movement ceases, until pressure differentials sufficient to cause the movement of injected fluids or formation fluids into an underground source of drinking water are no longer present, or until the end of a fixed time period as determined bythe Director.” 40 CFR § 146.84(c)(1). Preliminary simulations were conducted to determine the total simulation time needed to satisfy the required conditions, and those results are presented in this section. Figure15 shows the plume area over time relative to the plume extent at 30 years, with the plume area being defined as the areal extent containing 99 percent of the separate-phase (gas-phase) CO2 mass.  While the CO2 is still redistributing long after injection ceases, it can be seen that the change in the areal extent of the plume becomes insignificant after the end of the injection period.  The pressure differential, however, dissipates much more slowly. As indicated in Figure 16, the pressure dissipates more than 90 percent within the first 100 years. Hence, the final representative case simulations were executed for a period of 100 years. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Figure15. CO2 Plume Area Versus Time Relative to Plume Extent at30 Years Based on Preliminary Model Results.  Areal plume extentis defined by 99 percent of separate-phase CO2 mass. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 34 Figure16. Pressure Buildup (relative to initialformation pressure)VersusTime at the Injection Well Based on Preliminary Model Results 20-Year Injection Period Although Figures 15 and 16 are based on a 30-year injection period, the actual injection duration will be 20 years. Revised figures showing results for a 20-year injection period were not available in time for inclusion in this report. However, the available figures effectively demonstrate the expected late-time response (i.e., only small changes in plume extent over time and an exponential pressure recovery response). For revised figures showing a 20-year injection period, full plume development and onset of pressure recovery would be shifted ten years earlier. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 35 The modeling described above results in an underground CO2 plume with four “lobes.” The simulated shape and size of the CO2 plumes after 20 years of injection and 50 years after injection ceases are shown in Figure 17.  The predicted area of the 20-year CO2 plume that will result from injecting a total of 22 MMT of CO2 into four horizontal injection wells is estimated to be approximately 3,970 acres. The area of the CO2 plume 50 years after injection ceases (i.e., 70 years) is predicted to be slightly larger at approximately 3,980 acres. Figure17.  CO2 Plume Outline after 20 Years of Injection and 50 Years after Injection Ceases CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 8.0 Sensitivity Analysis Modeling underground CO2 storage involves many conceptual and quantitative uncertainties.  The major problem is the uncertainty in parameters such as permeability and porosity, and the geologic description of the injection zone and confining zone.  To fully address these uncertainties, Monte Carlo simulation was conducted.  Because the model results serve as a basis for calculating the plume delineation, the sensitivity analysis focuses on a set of parameters that strongly influence the plume calculation. The effects of scaling factors associated with porosity, permeability, and fracture gradient were evaluated.  The three scaling factors are independent variables, while the rock type and other mechanical/hydrological properties for the geological layers are dependent variables, which vary according to scaling. The sensitivity of selected output variables including the percent of CO2 mass injected, the acreage of the plume, the acreage of the projected plume, and the percent variation of plume area relative to the representative case (4 horizontal injection wells, 20 years of injection) was analyzed.  The projected acreage of the plume is calculated for cases where less than 100 percent of the CO2 mass was injected, providing a normalization of the plume area for direct comparison across cases.  Both marginal (individual) and joint (combined) effects were evaluated. Whether a response curve (2D) or response surface (3D or higher dimension) is representative or reliable depends on the efficiency of the sampling approach.  A good sampling approach should be able to explore the parameter space without clumping or gapping.  As can be seen Figure 18, the quasi Monte Carlo (QMC) approach (right), with controlled locations of the samples, has better scatters than regular Monte Carlo (left) and Latin-hypercube samples (right). CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Figure18. Scatter Plots of Monte Carlo, Latin-Hypercube, and QuasiMonte Carlo Samples.  QMC samples are well dispersed in the parameter space and therefore are exploratory and efficient without clumping points and gapping. The scaling factors used for generating these samples were based on an evaluation of the site characterization data to determine reasonable bounding values.  These scaling factors are shown in Table 10. Table 10.  Scaling Factors Evaluated for Parameter Sensitivity Analysis Parameter Minimum Representative Case Maximum Porosity .75 1.0 1.25 Permeability .75 1.0 1.25 Fracture .88 1.0 1.10 Gradient Thirty-two cases were defined from the representative case model using the QMC sampling technique to represent a statistical distribution of possible cases based on the parameters varied.  All other inputs were the same as in the representative case. Simulation results show that increasing the porosity results in a smaller predicted plume area, while decreasing the fracture gradient results in an increase in the predicted plume area. Varying the permeability has very little effect on the plume area. The reason for this is that injectivity is mainly controlled by the injection rate, and as long as the average permeability is large enough and the injection pressure permitted is large enough, the injection rate is the limiting factor in predicted plume size. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) A generalized linear model analysis was performed for the simulated CO2 plume area and the final model was obtained through AIC (Akaike information criterion) -based step-wise backward removal approach and the statistical t-values and P-values were obtained.  When a P-value is larger than the significance level (e.g., 0.05), the corresponding variable (input parameter) is relatively insignificant.  Considering only the marginal linear effects, the fracture gradient and porosity are the most significant parameters for determining plume size.  However, when the interactions are included, the combination of permeability and fracture gradient becomes significant. The injectivity varied from the representative base case by about 50 percent for cases either with low permeability, low fracture gradient, or a combination of both.  Because the injection rate was specified as a maximum rate, it was not possible to determine if, in some cases, more than 100 percent of the mass could be injected and if so, how much more.  The predicted plume area varied from the representative case by about 80 to 120 percent, which is approximately the same as the variation in permeability and porosity. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 9.0 References Birkholzer JT, J Apps, L Zhenge, Y Zhang, T Xu and C Tzang.  2008. Research Project on CO2 Geological Storage and Groundwater Resources: Large-Scale Hydrological Evaluation and Modeling of the Impact on Groundwater Systems Annual Report: October 1, 2007, to September 30, 2008.  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California. Buschbach TC and DC Bond.  1974. Underground Storage of Natural Gas in Illinois − 1973. Illinois Petroleum 101, Illinois State Geological Survey, Champaign, Illinois. Davies PB.  1991. Evaluation of the Role of Threshold Pressure in Controlling Flow of Waste-Generated Gas into Bedded Salt at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP).SAND 90-3246, Sandia National Laboratory, Albuquerque, New Mexico. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency).  2011a.  Draft Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program Class VI Well Area of Review Evaluation and Corrective Action Guidance for Owners and Operators.  EPA 816-D-10-007, EPA Office of Water, Washington, D.C. Hornung J and T Aigner. 1999.  "Reservoir and aquifer characterization of fluvial architectural elements: Stubensandstein, Upper Triassic, southwest Germany." Sedimentary Geology 129(3–4): 215-280. ISGS (Illinois State Geological Survey).  2011.  Illinois Oil and Gas Resources (ILOIL) Internet Map Service.  Last accessed on October 8, 2011 at http://moulin.isgs.uiuc.edu/ILOIL/webapp/ILOIL.html Kerr DR, L Ye, A Bahar, BM Kelkar, and S Montgomery.  1999.  “Glenn Pool Field, Oklahoma:  A Case of Improved Production from a Mature Reservoir.” American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 83(1):1-18. Kolata DR and CK Nimz.  2010. Geology of Illinois.  Illinois State Geologic Survey, Urbana, Illinois. Leetaru HE and JH McBride.  2009.  “Reservoiruncertainty, Precambrian topography, and carbon sequestration in the Mt.Simon Sandstone, Illinois Basin.” Environmental Geosciences 16(4):235-243. Leetaru HE, DG Morse, R Bauer, SM Frailey, D Keefer, DR Kolata, C Korose, E Mehnert, S Rittenhouse, J Drahovzal, S Fisher,JHMcBride.  2005.  “Saline reservoirs as a sequestration target.”  In An Assessment of Geological Carbon Sequestration Options in the Illinois Basin, CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Final Report for U.S. DOE Contract: DE-FC26-03NT41994, Principal Investigator:  Robert Finley.  Midwest Geological Sequestration Consortium, Champaign, Illinois. Leetaru HE, SM Frailey, D Morse, RJ Finley, JA Rupp, JA Drahozval, and JH McBride.  2009. “Carbon sequestration in the Mount Simon Sandstone saline reservoir.” In Grobe M, JC Pashin, and RL Dodge (eds.), Carbon dioxide sequestration in geological media—State of the science, AAPG Studies in Geology 59:261-277. McBride JH and DR Kolata.  1999.  “Upper Crust Beneath Central Illinois Basin, United States”. GSA Bulletin 111(3)375-394. Meyer R and FF Krause.  2006. "Permeability Anisotropy and Heterogeneity of a Sandstone Reservoir Analogue:  An Estuarine to Shoreface Depositional System in the Virgelle Member, Milk River Formation, Writing-On-Stone Provincial Park, Southern Alberta." Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, 54(4):301-318. Morse DG and HE Leetaru.  2005. Reservoir characterization and three-dimensional models of Mt. Simon Gas Storage Fields in the Illinois Basin.  Circular 567, Illinois State Geological Survey, Urbana, Illinois (CD-ROM). Pruess K, J Garcia, T Kovscek, C Oldenburg, J Rutqvist, C Steefel, and T Xu.  2002. Intercomparison of Numerical Simulation Codes for Geologic Disposal of CO2.  LBNL-51813, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California. Ringrose P, K Nordahl, and RJ We. 2005.  "Vertical permeability estimation in heterolithic tidal deltaic sandstones." Petroleum Geoscience 11(1):29-36. Saller AH, J Schwab, S Walden, S Robertson, R Nims, H Hagiwara, and S Mizohata.  2004. “Three-dimensional seismic imaging and reservoir modeling of an upper Paleozoic “reefal” buildup, Reinecke Field, west Texas, United States.”  Pp. 107-125 in GP Eberli, JL Masaferro, and JF Sarg (eds.), Seismic Imaging of Carbonate Reservoirs and Systems, Volume 81, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Oklahoma. Sminchak J.  2011. Conceptual Model Summary Report Simulation Framework for Regional Geologic CO2 Storage Along Arches Province of Midwestern United States, Topical Report. Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, Ohio. Span R and W Wagner. 1996.  “A New Equation of State for Carbon Dioxide Covering the Fluid Region from the Triple-Point Temperature to 1100 K at Pressures Up to 800 MPa.” J Phys Chem Ref Data 25:1509-1596. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) Spycher N and K Pruess.  2010.  “A Phase-Partitioning Model for CO2-Brine Mixtures at Elevated Temperatures and Pressures:  Application to CO2-Enhanced Geothermal Systems.” Transport in Porous Media, 82:173-196, doi:10.1007/s11242-009-9425-y. Spycher N, K Pruess, and J Ennis-King.  2003.  “CO2-H2O mixtures in geological sequestration of CO2. I. Assessment and calculation of mutual solubilities from 12 to 100°C and up to 600 bar.”Geochimica et Cosmoschimica Acta, 67(16):3015-3031, doi:10.1016/s0016-7037(03)00273-4. White MD, DH Bacon, BP McGrail, DJ Watson, SK White, and ZF Zhang. 2012. STOMP Subsurface Transport Over Multiple Phases:  STOMP-CO2 and STOMP-CO2e Guide, Version 1.0.  PNNL-21268, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington. White MD and M Oostrom.  2006. STOMP Subsurface Transport Over Multiple Phases, Version 4: User's Guide.  PNNL-15782, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington. White MD and M Oostrom.  2000. STOMP Subsurface Transport Over Multiple Phases:  Theory Guide.  PNNL-12030, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington. Willman HB, E Atherton, TC Buschbach, C Collinson, JC Frey, ME Hopkins, JA Lineback, and JA Simon.  1975. Handbook of Illinois Stratigraphy.  Bulletin 95, Illinois State Geological Survey, Urbana, Illinois. Zhou Q, JT Birkholzer, E Mehnert, Y-F Lin, and K Zhang.  2010.  “Modeling basin- and plume-scale processes of CO2 storage for full-scale deployment.” Ground Water 48(4):494–514. CO2 Plume Delineation (2-13-2013) 